TRANSCRIPT 
 FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETING  May 18, 1976  Prefatory Note  This transcript has been produced from the original raw transcript in the FOMC 
Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has lightly ed
ited the original to facilitate the reader's 
understanding. Where one or more words were 
missed or garbled in the transcription, the 
notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some
 instances, words have been added in brackets 
to complete a speaker's thought or to correct an
 obvious transcription error or misstatement. 
 Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully edited for accuracy at 
the time it was produced because it was intended only 
as an aid to the Secret
ariat in preparing the 
record of the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been reviewed by present 

or past members of the Committee. 
 
Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's understanding, 
the only deletions involve a very small amount of confidential 
information regarding foreign central banks, 
businesses, and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are indicated by gaps 
in the text. All information dele
ted in this manner is exempt fr
om disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act. 

  Staff Statements Appended to the Transcript
  Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations
Meeting of Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 18, 1976 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices 
of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 18, 1976, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT:Mr.  Mr.  Mr.  Mr.  Mr.  Mr.  Mr.  Mr.  Mr.  Mr.  Mr.Burns, Chairman Volcker, Vice Chairman Balles Black Coldwell Gardner Jackson Kimbrel Partee Wallich WinnMessrs. Baughman, Guffey, 
Mayo, and Morris, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs.  the andMacLaury and Roos, Presidents of Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis St. Louis, respectively
Mr. Broida, Secretary Mr. Altmann, Deputy 
Secretary Mr. Bernard,1/ Assistant Secretary Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) Mr. Gramley,1/ Economist (Domestic Business) Messrs. Brandt,1/ Hocter,1/ Keran,1/ Kichline, 1/ Parthemos,1/ Reynolds,1/ and Zeisel,1/ Associate Economists1/ Entered meeting at point indicated.
Mr. Holmes, 
Manager, System Open Market Account Mr. Pardee,1/ Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations Mr. Sternlight,1/ Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors Mr. Keir,1/ Adviser, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Gemmill,1/ Adviser, 
Division of International Finance Board of Governors Mrs. Farar,/ Economist, Open Market Secretariat, 
Board of Governors Mrs. Deck,1/ Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, Board of Governors Mr. Willes,1/ First Vice President 
of the 
Federal Reserve 
Bank of Philadelphia Messrs. Boehne 
1/ and Doll,1/ Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Kansas City, respectively Messrs. Balbach,1/ 
Burns,1/ and Davis,1/ Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St.  Louis, Dallas, 
and New York respectively Mrs. Nichols 1/ and Mr. Kareken,1/ Economic Advisers, Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and Minneapolis, respectively Mr. McNees,1/ Assistant Vice 
President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Mr. Hill,1/ Senior 
Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of New York         1/ Entered meeting at point indicated.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of 
May 18, 1976  
 CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Gentlemen, we™ll get our
 meeting under way.  
During the past two or three meetings, we have deliberated on the 
desirability of continuing the Memorandum of 
Discussion or discontinuing it, and also the desira
bility of changing the character of the Record 
of Policy Actions and of reducing the lag in its release.   
Now, at our [March 29] intermeeting [meeti
ng], the Committee agreed in principle with 
the following:  (1) the Memorandum of Discussion
 should be discontinued, (2) the Record of Policy Actions should be expanded to include more
 information on the factors or considerations 
underlying the Committee™s policy decision, and (3) the 
lag in the release of the Record of Policy 
Actions should be reduced by some 10 or 15 days 
from the present lag of approximately 45 days. 
This was an agreement in principle, and 
the Committee did not act formally at the 
intermeeting.  The Committee did not act formally in 
part in order to enable the staff to consult 
with the Justice Department about these actions in
 the light of the lawsuit that the Committee is 
presently involved in.  And Mr. Broida informs me that members of the Committee have been 
advised that a representative of the Justice Department has conc
urred in the reasonableness of our proposals--in other words, he sees no object
ion or difficulty from the viewpoint of the 
lawsuit.  Is that correct? 
MR. BROIDA.  That™s correct. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  To go on with the review of where we were and what has taken place since the meeting, at the April meeting the 
Committee also left open the questions of the 
specific duration of the lag in releasing the Reco
rd of Policy Actions.  Our staff, [which] has 
studied various possible schedules, has concluded, and I™m inclined
 to agree, that the best 
procedure, all things considered, would be to 
release the record for each meeting on the Friday 
following the next meeting.  In other words, we
 hold the meeting--this is the May meeting--and 
some four or five weeks from now we™d be meet
ing in June; the Record of Policy Actions for the May meeting would be released on the Friday fo
llowing our June meeting, held on a Tuesday.   
Now, to [give] you, the Committee, some insight
 into the new procedure, if we choose to 
adopt it, the Committee drafted a preliminary vers
ion of an expanded Record of Policy Actions covering the meeting.  And this was done in order to
 test the feasibility of the new procedure if we finally decide to take that road.  And I understand from Mr. Broi
da that the process of getting comments from members of the Committee went
 well, and Mr. Broida may want to say 
something about that a little later on.   
Now, we™ve privately agreed to [take] formal
 and final action today.  And if the Committee 
decides to adopt the new procedures, namely, to
 drop the Memorandum of Discussion, to have 
an expanded Record of Policy Actions, and to release it some 30 or 35 days after our meeting, I 
think it would be desirable to hold a press conference to explain these procedures at the time 
when the first policy record is released on the new schedule.  Regrettably, I will be out of the city 

on Friday, and such a press conference, if we pro
ceed in this way, would have to be delayed until 
5/18/76 - 2 - 
   next Monday.  But the plan would be to make th
e release, henceforth, on a Friday following the Tuesday meeting.   
Now two elements of the proposal of this new 
approach were left open at the time of our 
April meeting.  One was the suggestion that the 
Secretary place in the files memoranda that 
would summarize informal Committee decisions 
and understandings; and the second item that 
was left open was that the minutes of the Comm
ittee™s deliberations be expanded to include 
explanations of procedural actions.  Now we could hold a long debate on these outstanding items; I would suggest that we not do so.  I w
ould suggest that occasions may arise when such 
procedures would be appropriate, and that
 a committee or a subcommittee--special 
subcommittee--be appointed to deal
 with these unresolved techni
cal issues.  That subcommittee 
might have a great deal to do, and again that 
subcommittee might have literally nothing to do. 
Now that is a summary of where we are or 
where we might want to go, and before we 
proceed to an informal voting, we might want to 
address specific questions that members of the 
Committee may have.  The questions may be directed
 to Mr. Broida, to Mr. O™Connell, or to me.  
Are there any questions?  CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, Mr. MacLaury. 

MR. MACLAURY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I™v
e been thinking about the Sunshine in Government [bill] today, and in that context, 
my wonder is that, were the bill to pass as it 
presently is being proposed, am I correct in th
inking that we would be required to keep a verbatim transcript?  And if s
o, wouldn™t that make moot this 
question of whether we drop the Memorandum of Discussion
?  That™s my question. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I™m going to tu
rn this over to Mr. O™Connell. MR. O™CONNELL.  Mr. Chairman, in the present wording of the bill, we hope to be able, 
by liberal interpretation of that language--if it isn™t changed from present wording of both Senate and House version of the Sunshine bill, President MacLaury--to assert
 that the Sunshine legislation is not applicable to the FOMC. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Let me just interrupt.  
I think this is a statement that literally 
should be kept to ourselves.  We should not--
no member of the Committee should discuss that 
with any of his aides or anyone el
se at any time because we run th
e risk of amendment that might 
make life a good deal more difficult for us. 
MR. O™CONNELL.  Yes, sir.  At this time,
 it has not been discussed by anyone.  There had been many allusions, I think perhaps loosely 
used, Mr. MacLaury, to applicability to the 
FOMC.  Some in defense of our position, that it
 should not be covered.  We haven™t asserted applicability to the FOMC.  Our position has always been [that o
f] the Board™s trouble with this bill.  Others have converted that
 to use of the term FOMC.   
Assume for a moment, though, that it is held to
 be applicable, either by an amendment in 
the language, if that occurs, or by court decisi
on, and thus this Committee is subjected to the 
provisions of the Sunshine bill as finally passed.  If it in any form parallels its present language, 
[then] meetings the Committee would be subject 
to the transcript requi
rements of verbatim 
5/18/76 - 3 - 
   transcript.  The requirement [would be] that the 
portion that is not exempt under one of the ten exemptions now in the bill would be
 made immediately available to 
the public.  The balance, if it 
fits any of the exemptions, can be deleted a
nd withheld by the Committee, but the verbatim 
transcript would be required.  MR. BROIDA.  May I add, the Memorandum of Disc
ussion, of course, is a rather different document from a verbatim transcript.  It™s conde
nsed and written in the third person and is presumably a more efficient record of the meeti
ng.  But also, as I understand it, the parts of the verbatim transcript that are not made public need
 be held only for two years and need never be made public, whereas the Memorandum of Discu
ssion, under present practices, is made public 
after five years.  But if there is a verbatim tr
anscript under the Governme
nt in the Sunshine Act that is made public in part or in whole, I thi
nk the Committee would certain
ly not want to have a competitive report of the meeting in
 [existence] at the same time. 
MR. O™CONNELL.  May I add, Mr. Chairman, t
oo, in reference to Art™s point that a certain portion need not be published in the two year [period]:  we question the certitude with which that could be asserted.  We anticipate 
lawsuits being filed [against] many agencies 
[arguing that] a certain closed meeting was improp
erly closed and that th
e transcript should not have been withheld.  And thus, they will ask 
that the court examine and make public even 
withheld portions of the transcript.  I think this is a reasonable anticipation.   
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, 
any other question or comment? 
MR. WALLICH.  I have a question with rega
rd to the general style of the expanded Record of Policy Actions.  I don™t know whether it™s appropriate at this time to bring that up.   
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, yes, it certainly is. 

MR. WALLICH.  I think what we saw was an
 extremely well-done piece, and what I™m 
going to say is in no way critical of the fine work that™s gone into it.  It does seem to me that it 
kind of aims [at] a great deal of material that is familiar to every reader of the newspapers, who 

know GNP was such, employment was such, and 
so forth.  Now, it™s interesting to somebody 
who studies these matters carefully to know wh
at information the Committee had, [but] that 
could easily be accomplished by saying information wa
s available up to such and such a date, in 
particular. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That wouldn™t help a historian very much.  It would make his task 
much more difficult. 
MR. WALLICH.  Yes, but the general reader of th
is [unintelligible], such a reader is really 
very familiar with all the data that are in that r
ecord, besides their release with a delay of 30 days 
or whatever, so that they are not
 even a useful way for him to recapitulate this information.  The 
interesting information for the reader, I think, 
is what the projections were of the staff [unintelligible]. That™s new information.  My 
suggestion is that we emphasize the latter and 
deemphasize the former. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I follow the trend of thin
king and I don™t think I wholly agree, for 
two reasons.  One is purely formal.  We are de
scribing this document as an expanded policy 
5/18/76 - 4 - 
   record.  We™re providing more information than in 
the past.  And that is partly the justification 
for eliminating the Memorandum of Discussion. 
 Now, on the basis of this concept, the document should be longer, you see, must be long
er, and this is a formal consideration that cannot be neglected, and we need some additional pages.   
Now, as for the information that is contai
ned about the economy, 
well, I think you credit individuals who follow the Federal Reserve with more knowledge than I think many of them 
really have.  I think it is a useful summary.  Those who feel that it
 merely repeats that which they 
already know will have no difficulty skipping para
graphs or pages.  Those on the other hand, 
who may find such a recapitulation useful, or fi
nd that they derive new knowledge, will have an 
opportunity to be instructed fully.   And therefore, while I understand these criticis
ms, I think that if anything, this document 
may be criticized on the grounds, coming back to 
my first formal point, that it is not long 
enough.  Now, when this document was first shown 
to me, it was hardly longer, or just about a 
page or two longer--two pages longer than a policy record was in the past.  And I told members 
of the staff, ﬁWell, that will not do.  I™m not 
going to tell you how to add additional pages, and 
I™m certainly not going to say that we should 
do anything that remotely resembles padding, but 
produce several additional pages.ﬂ  MR. MAYO.  Mr. Chairman, I might say, too, 
that, to elaborate on your point, even the more sophisticated readers of our document, thre
e or four weeks later, may be hard put to 
remember whether our directive came out the day be
fore or the day after the appearance of new GNP figures, and this sort of thing.  The timing 
can be sensitive, and I think it does make for  
more complete background information, quite apart 
from the formal requirement here to have the 
facts as we knew them on that day and not have
 people wondering, ﬂSure, but did this new figure come out before or after that date?ﬂ   
MR. MACLAURY.  But perhaps Henry™s point 
could be put a different way that would serve both of your principles, and that is that the interpretation of the existing facts by the staff and by the members is what is new information 
to anyone outside of this group, and the question is whether that information should be
 supplemented, not to say padded.   
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think that™s a good comment, and I think our staff should strive toward somewhat fuller statements in the future
. Now, they will vary from time to time.   
MR. COLDWELL.  May I raise a question, Mr. 
Chairman?  I™m not going to reiterate all 
my reasons for objecting to this [unintelligible] last time, so I™m 
not going to reiterate.  I would--  SPEAKER(?).  Phil, we can™t hear you down here. 

MR. COLDWELL.  I would like to know whether the informal understanding memo was 
planned to be released at any time? 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Now to [unintelligible], 
on the basis of discussions that I™ve held with the staff thus far, and on the basis of the discussion that we™ve had at this table last month, I 
would say that the present answer probably is no.  Now, that may not be a good answer, and 
therefore we might well want to minimize the 
occasions where they are simply informal 5/18/76 - 5 - 
   understandings and [instead] seek a maximum of
 formal explicit understandings which would be 
included in the Record of Policy Actions.  Now, Mr. Broida, you have thought more about these 
questions than I have, and you, Mr. O™Connell, ha
ve, and would each of you try to answer Mr. 
Coldwell™s question?   
MR. BROIDA.  I would say I agree with you, Mr
. Chairman, that there™s no present plan 
to release them, but this is fully within the 
domain of the Committee, and the Committee at any 
time could decide to make any package of thes
e public.  The occasions may well arise in the 
form of requests under the Freedom of Informa
tion Act; presumably the response would be on an 
ad hoc basis. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think that 
it might be beneficial to indi
cate explicitly just what it 
is that we are talking about when we discuss informal understandings.  If
 we just talk about informal understanding in the 
abstract, we may create a cons
piratorial mood within this Committee or convey a suggestion. 
 Now, you™re the author of the concept of informal 
understandings, Mr. Broida; would you be good enough to enlighten us as to just what it is that we might have informal understandings about.  
MR. BROIDA.  There is a category of matte
rs with respect to which the Committee 
reaches conclusions that do not constitute formal 
policy actions or formal procedural action.  A 
case in point is the agreement in principle reached 
at the last meeting with
 respect to the matters 
under discussion now.  This was deliberately not a formal action, but it seemed to the staff 
worthwhile that some record be made of that
 discussion, and we would simply propose to note it in a memorandum to files.   
Now, at the March 29 meeting, a special mee
ting, there was an understanding that RPDs would be dropped from the specific
ations.  The specifications themselves, for reasons that have 
been discussed earlier, are not formal actions, an
d so a change in the variables for which the Committee makes specifications coul
d not be a formal action.  But 
in the staff™s view, [there] should be some internal record of co
nsiderations underlying that action. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Let me ask you a questi
on.  You have a technical reason here, but suppose we had decided to have a sentence in the Record of Policy Actions that we™re dropping the RPDs, suppose we had decided-- MR. BROIDA.  We do. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  We do what? 

MR. PARTEE.  Have such a sentence. 
MR. BROIDA.  In this draft R
ecord of Policy Actions for Apr
il, there is such a sentence. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Then I misse
d the point that you just made. 
MR. BROIDA.  The point is that there is 
simply a sentence stating that the Committee 
decided to drop RPDs without any record whatsoever of the discussion. 5/18/76 - 6 - 
   CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, suppose that we not only decided to do that--well, suppose that the Record of Policy Actions reported not only the decision but some of the major 
considerations that led to that decision.  Would we be violating so
me statute that should concern 
us? MR. BROIDA.  No sir. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, 
therefore, I™d say this is so
mething that [unintelligible]. 
MR. COLDWELL.  Unless you can 
[unintelligible] upward the level of the policy record. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yeah, have an extra paragraph, and another half page.   MR. COLDWELL.  How about the zone of indi
fference, is that another point which you put as an informal understanding?  
MR. BROIDA.  I would recommend that the Co
mmittee not have any record of a decision 
with respect to the policy.  I take it the zone of indifference is part of the policy decision beyond what™s in the Record of Policy Actions.  I think it might be dangerous a
nd inappropriate to have it--a secret record of a policy decision that goes beyond the public record of policy decision.  So anything having to do with the Committee™s policy 
decision, I think the full account should be in the Record of Policy Actions and no other record maintained. 
MR. COLDWELL.  I may have misse
d it, but is it in this one? CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You see, our difficulty-- 
MR. BROIDA.  There was no decision on that point. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS,  --our difficulty is that Mr. Broida and Mr. O™Connell have a very clear concept of what is a policy decision and wh
at is not a policy decision. I™ve never shared that knowledge of that understanding, you see.  Now, I™m willing to be guided by them, and 
when they explain their reasons, [then] at [that] moment I 
do understand them or have the 
illusion of understanding them, then I forget immediately. 
MR. BALLES.  I share that problem. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Let me say just one wo
rd.  I think that--responding not to the precise question, but I think to the thought that was at the basis of Mr. Coldwell™s question--what we ought to do, really, is to seek to minimize 
[in]formal understandings, and the examples that 
you™ve cited I think, are matters th
at could very well--I see no reason why, myself, [they] should 
not be included in the Record of Policy Actio
ns.  And, therefore, the problem of informal 
understandings in these instances wouldn™t arise.  Now and then, something may arise, but the 
Committee could then determine whether or not 
that specific item should be omitted from the 
policy record, and if so, whether a minute shou
ld not be retained within our files.   
5/18/76 - 7 - 
   So we handle this, I think, on an ad hoc basis, but I would like to think we™d handle it with the understanding now that we would maximize inclusion of items
 in the Record of Policy Actions and thereby largely eliminate the need
 for so-called informal understandings.  
MR. COLDWELL.  I would certainly hope we would, Mr. Chairman, because I think that 
what we are doing is actually reducing the amount of information 
to venture into the public™s 
domain.  If we do this informal-- 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, I don™t think that™s tr
ue because the items that Mr. Broida is 
referring to are items that have not gotten into 
the Memorandum of Discussi
on.  Is that correct?   MR. BROIDA.  It has not gotten into 
the Record of Policy Actions.    MR. COLDWELL.  Well, th
ey™ve been in the Memo
randum of Discussion. 
MR. O™CONNELL.  But the term ﬁopenlyﬂ is the 
further point.  In five years, they would be made available.   
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  But I think that the question that Mr. Coldwell has raised is a good one and I think the proper answer is let™s pro
ceed on the principle that
 there will rarely be 
informal understandings.  Now and then there may be and that™s something we will act on, on the 

ad hoc basis.  Mr. Balles? MR. BALLES.  Excuse the interruption, Mr. Chairman-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Not at all. 

MR. BALLES.  --but I was going to say that I shared your lack of understanding of certain issues.  In my case, I must say I fully support 
the proposal you made, but 
I just am mystified by 
why the specifications are not a part of the policy decision.  I know that was explained once--I didn™t understand it then, and I™d like to be educated.  CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Do you really want to be educated on this distinction now? MR. BALLES.  Well, I™d like an execu
tive summary education in two minutes. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right. 
MR. BALLES.  This is not an idle question.  It seems to me 
with respect to the specs, the specs are such an integral part of what we have talked about here, I am in doubt as to why it 
shouldn™t be in the Record of Policy Actions. MR. BROIDA.  They are in the Record of Po
licy Actions, President Balles. The situation 
briefly is this:  If a matter is agreed by the Co
mmittee to be a policy decision or part of a policy 
decision, certain consequences follow. In partic
ular, the information must be published in the 
Federal Register, it must be made available in 
the Record of Policy Actions. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  It must be made-- 
5/18/76 - 8 - 
   MR. BROIDA.  It must be included in the R
ecord of Policy Actions. Now, subject to the lags, and if the court rules, if the appellate court upholds the District Court 
, the facts will have to be made available on the day of the meeting.  Th
e Committee, in the past, has not been willing to 
publish the full specs on the same basis as it has 
published the directive.  For a long time, it was 
disinclined to publish the long-run or the short-run [monetary aggr
egate] targets, but then it agreed to publish the short-run but [not] the long-run.   It now has agreed to publish [in] full, but not immediately--to defer publication of the 
long-run [targets] until the Chairman testifies in 
one of the quarterly hearings.  So long as the Committee is not willing to accept the consequences
 of having the specs as part of the policy 
decision, it cannot appropriately treat them as 
part of the policy decision.  If the Committee 
[can™t] accept all of the consequences, then it can™t treat them as part of the policy decision. 
MR. BALLES.  Art, what are those consequences--immediately reached--is that the 
problem? 
MR. BROIDA.  At present, since the District 
Court order has been stayed, they would be released in the Record of Policy Actions on whatever schedule that might
 [unintelligible] is released, whatever the lag that is 
[determined for] release.  If the 
District Court is upheld, then it 
would be immediate release. 
MR. BALLES.  Okay, thank you.  I™ll try to remember that. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, any--yes, Mr. Willes? 

MR. WILLES.  Some time ago I spent many 
hours in the library at Columbia going through in detail the Memorandum of Discussion, but
 on prior [unintelligible] to this Committee.  
And contrary to my expectations, they were
 very happy hours, because I found the memorandum 
rich in detail and insight into the workings 
of monetary policy in the Federal Open Market 
Committee.  Recognizing that I™m 
just a guest here today, I have just a note on that basis--some 
sadness in seeing these particular documents-- 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I think you would find that a good many members of this 
Committee carry your sentiments.  It
™s the recent turn of events, within the Congress, within the courts, within the environment in which we dwell that has moved members of this Committee 

towards the kind of decision that we may be taki
ng today.  But it will be done with a feeling of sadness by me and by a good many members of this Committee.   
Any other question or comment?  Well, if not
, I think we are ready for a formal vote.  
There are three steps that we need to go through or [unintelligible], that is to say, if we decide to move in the directions that we have been going, I would proceed systematically.  First, we need a 
motion that the Memorandum of Discussion be
 discontinued after the memorandum of the 
March meeting.   
SPEAKER(?).  So moved. 

SPEAKER(?).  Seconded. 
5/18/76 - 9 - 
   CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Motion has been made 
and seconded.  Any further discussion of the motion?  If not we™ll 
take a formal vote now.   
MR. BROIDA. 
Chairman Burns   Yes 

Vice Chairman Volcker Yes 

Mr. Balles   Yes 

Mr. Black   Yes 

Mr. Coldwell No 

Mr. Gardner   Yes 

Mr. Jackson   Yes 

Mr. Kimbrel   Yes 

Mr. Partee   Yes 

Mr. Wallich   Yes 

Mr. Winn Yes 
Ten to one, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right.  Now, next we need a motion that the Record of Policy 
Actions for each meeting of the Committee is to be
 released to the public shortly after the next 
regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee--meaning by that, normally on the Friday 

following the Tuesday meetings. 
SPEAKER(?).  Mr. Chairman, clarification, I™
m assuming you mean Fr
iday afternoon after the markets are closed? 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Ye
s, that is correct. 
MR. PARTEE.  I have a question, too.  What w
ould be the treatment of interim votes of 
the Committee, or of interim telephone meetings of
 the Committee?  Would they be included in 
that release?   
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I would interpret it, if I may.  Let™s 
take today™s meeting.  The 
release would be three days after our June meeting, and if there 
are any decisions taken between now and the June meeting by way of telegram or
 telephone conversation or a special, physical meeting of the Committee, all that would be in
cluded in the Record of Policy Actions.  Now that™s my interpretation, is that correct? 
MR. O™CONNELL.  That™s correct, Mr. Chairma
n.  You recall that was one of the factors you mentioned in arriving at times of our [unint
elligible] interval.  You would include those.  MR. JACKSON.  If you didn™t, you might distort the informa
tion that you give to the public, which would mislead them
 rather than inform them. 
MR. WINN.  Supposing we™d had a phone mee
ting last Friday, then would that be included this Friday in your release?   CHAIRMAN BURNS.  It would. 5/18/76 - 10 - 
   VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
  Well, the information in any sense is distorted anyway.  
You would have always had another meeting before this is rel
eased.  That™s the object of delaying.   MR. PARTEE.  Suppose the subject at the Fr
iday telephone conference call had been the bankruptcy of New York--then th
e discussion on that would be reported very promptly. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Now, there is a question there in my own mind.  When members 
of this Committee have held telephone meetings
 or conversations via telegram, we announce the 
decision.  We would not have gone beyond that.  And I would assume that if members of this 
Committee chose to talk about something and no 
decision was reached, then there would be no 
clear reason for including that in
 the Record of Policy Actions.  And I would leave that to our lawyers. 
MR. BROIDA.  I might add, Mr. Chairman, that
 we do not make a policy record for every meeting, only those for which there 
are policy actions, and if, as the Chairman suggests, there is 
a discussion with no formal polic
y action that it need not be-- MR. PARTEE.  --reflected in the policy record. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  But I would say, again, that this is a procedural question that members of the Committee may choose to decide 
one way or another in the future. What I™ve 
described, and what Messrs. Broida and O™Connell have described, is the procedure that we have worked with or under up to the present time. 
 This Committee makes its own procedures--to 
change any time that we as a Committee decide to do so. 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  The 
fact that there is a meeti
ng is always reported?  And if we had a telephone meeting and we have reac
hed [no] decision in your terms, you just note 
that there™s been a meeting 
with no discussion at all? MR. BROIDA.  We have in the past included in
 the following Record of Policy Actions an indication that there had been an intermeeting [meeting] and the 
subject is--there™s a case in point in this draft of April records, there™s a 
footnote with respect to
 the March 29 meeting. MR. COLDWELL.  But by your lights, no deci
sion may actually be a decision, would be 
an action. 
MR. JACKSON.  How would you say no decision is a decision? CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I don™t think this is a ma
tter that should really trouble us because it™s only a matter that we should be
 sensitive to--we should be alert to our own thinking.  If we have a meeting and no decision is reached, and if 
we want that recorded, I see no difficulty with recording it.  Why not?  On the other hand, I mi
ght see a difficulty if we held a meeting to 
discuss a specific, sensitive issue, then we™ve reached no decision.  Then I would seriously doubt the wisdom of disclosing the sensitive issue on 
which we met and [on which we] decided to take no action.  5/18/76 - 11 - 
   MR. COLDWELL.  My point is, [when] you decide
 to take no action, that, in effect, is a decision.  Suppose we had a situation in which we were discussing New York, and they had applied to us for a loan, and we took no action, 
we neither approve nor disapprove.  Will that 
be-- CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That™s different, because
 then an action would be taken, you see.  Here is an application that we are [unintelligible
].  We would assemble for the purpose of acting 
on [unintelligible].  But I see no difficulty, really.  MR. JACKSON.  It strikes me, Mr. Chairman, 
that we could well establish the custom, to 
the extent that those meetings were held, that
 the public record would show that the Committee 
had either a [unintelligible] or other type of
 meeting for the purpose of a discussion of recent 
events which have transpired since the last meeti
ng.  I [unintelligible] just, a comment, and that 
no policy actions were taken.  And if you establish this custom, then the nature of the discussion--I™ve never seen one of these yet where we didn™t discuss more than [we planned for 
on] the day [on which] we convened.  So I think that would be an accurate statement. 
MR. PARTEE.  Well, ordinarily there would 
be some action, that 
is, in the hypothetical case. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I can™t think 
of a case where we did not have-- MR. PARTEE.  It would be a decision to constrain the [federal] funds limit, or something 
like that.  And I take it, the
n, the entry would be that the Committee had a telephone conference 
or call to discuss the emerging pr
oblems of financial markets, pa
rticularly with regard to New 
York, and had decided for the time being to cons
train the funds rate.  That is, without any discussion of the ins and outs of the thing.  It would be a simple reference to the thing.  Well, I 
don™t see that that does much damage, because
 of the public--somethi
ng the public would know, I guess, and it would even come out in three, or four
, or five days, or after the [unintelligible].   
MR. BLACK.  Point of clarification, question to Art and Tom.  Isn™t it true that, if we get the Government in the Sunshine Act, we will have
 to publish the fact that we had a meeting, and 
secondly the general nature of that meeting? 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Tom has indicated some
thing that we are to keep in our own bosoms and not communicate to anyone that the 
present best legal interpretation--of Tom and 
our other attorneys--is that this Committee will no
t be subject to Sunshine legislation.  And to 
keep this--never to discuss this in these sens
itive days.  I cannot emphasize the importance of 
that too much because it would be so easy to ame
nd the Sunshine legislation to make sure that 
we are covered.  Any other question?  Yes?   
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Just to return to the same question of the intermeeting.  
It seems to me the general choice one has is, one 
either reports the interim meetings before the 
next full meeting in the policy record--is that th
e right term?--which comes out immediately after 
the next full meeting or almo
st immediately after, or you wa
it a month and report it with the 
second meeting.  We can go one way or the other.   
5/18/76 - 12 - 
   I feel a little bit uncomfortable, 
although I think it would arise very rarely if we did have an intermeeting just before our regul
ar meeting.  What™s the point 
of delaying the report on the regular meeting--since it probably 
pretty much validated what 
you did at the intermeeting--why 
delay that a whole month?  It se
ems a little inconsistent if we f
eel that there is some point in 
delaying the report basically a month.  I suppos
e you could split the difference by saying you™re 
going to report on any intermeeting that takes pla
ce 20 days before the release, or something like 
that.  So, once it got near the next meeting [it] would be [in] the following report then-- 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  May I say a word?  We 
have had interim meetings during the past 
several years, and we have reported those within the interval of 45 days.  MR. BROIDA.  Ninety. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Oh well, yes, 90 days, and then... 
MR. BROIDA.  The lag period. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  And, I™m not 
aware of any difficulty that has arisen as a result of reporting these special meetings, a
nd all that is involved now is shortening the period from 45 to 
some 30 or 35 days.  
MR. ROOS.  Mr. Chairman, in announcing this
 change and its [unintelligible] publicly, will the rationale behind the change be explained or
 what will that rationale be--I mean in other 
words, why does the public think we are doing this? CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, that™s the purpose of--instead of having a mere press release, it seemed wise to hold a press c
onference to explain the reasons fo
r these changes, and to give newspaper men, financial writers, an oppor
tunity to ask such a question.   MR. COLDWELL.  Why are we 
reducing from 45 to 30?  
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  We want 
to provide the public with maximum information in the 
shortest possible time.  Yes, Mr. Broi
da wants to comment on Mr. Volcker™s-- MR. BROIDA.  Mr. Chairman, most of the in
termeeting consultations
 that we have had, they have generally been by telegram rather than telephone, have involved modifications of the instructions issued at the previous meeting, 
and apply to the remain
ing period until the next meeting.  If they were not reported at the same time as the decision which they modify, the 

public might well conclude that the Manager [of 
the System Open Market Account] is violating 
his instructions, whereas in fact he™s been acting under modified instructions. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, not only that but 
by that time the market will have validated 
the Committee™s special decision.  
MR. JACKSON.  This is really a [moot] di
scussion because the procedural issues are 
subject to change by the Committee at any time. 
 I think we haven™t had any occurrence [where] delay of release of information would be appropria
te, [but] all we do is change our procedures.   5/18/76 - 13 - 
   VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  
I think that™s right, it would arise very rarely. 
MR. JACKSON.  [Unintelligible] but if that [unintelligible], then we have got that alternative open to us so we 
really don™t have any problems. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That™s true
, but I want to modify a stat
ement I made previously.  I 
think that if we do have a special meeting, telephonically or 
otherwise, and if no decision, no policy decision is reached, the fact that such a meeting had occurred I 
think should be made a 
part of the record even though no action was reached.  I think it™s a better [unintelligible] and I think I spoke hastily at the outset. VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I™ll make the motion if that™s
 what you™re waiting on. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, the motion has been made.  Should the motion be 
repeated?  The motion is simply that the Reco
rd of Policy Actions for each meeting of the 
Committee be released to the publ
ic shortly after the next regularly scheduled meeting of the 
Committee.  Now the reason for saying shortly afte
r is, there may be special circumstances for 
making the release not on the Friday following th
e meeting of the Committee but a day or two 
later and it™s to take care of contingencies of that sort.  One such contingency is arising immediately.  That is, we want to make this re
lease at the time of the press conference, and the 
press conference cannot be held on Friday. 
 Well, we are ready for the vote.   
MR. BROIDA. 
Chairman Burns  Yes 

Vice Chairman Volcker Yes 

Mr. Balles   Yes 

Mr. Black   Yes 

Mr. Coldwell Abstained 

Mr. Gardner Yes 

Mr. Jackson   Yes 

Mr. Kimbrel   Yes 
Mr. Partee   Yes 
Mr. Wallich Yes 

Mr. Winn   Yes 
Ten for, and one abstention. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, now, we have a third item that we have to vote on, and 
this is an item that I™m going to 
ask Mr. Broida to explain.  I shall vote for it, then I hope I shall 
understand it. MR. BROIDA.  Mr. Chairman, in the Committ
ee™s rules regarding the availability of 
information--as noted in the memorandum 
from Mr. O™Connell and myself to the 
Committee--section 271.5(a) cites, 
as an example of the policy 
of deferred availability of information, the Committee™s release of its dir
ective and information pe
rtaining thereto 45 days after the meeting.  We recommend simply that the Committee amend the rules to delete that 

language.  As an example, it is not essential to 
an understanding or the thrust--it does not modify 
5/18/76 - 14 - 
   the thrust of the rules and it w
ould obviously be in conflict with the action the Committee has 
just taken to release the record shortly after the next meeting. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any question or discussion?  Well, we are ready for a vote.   
MR. PARTEE.  You are not substituting anything, you™re just deleting it. MR. O™CONNELL.  Just today. 

MR. BROIDA.   
Chairman Burns Yes 

Vice Chairman Volcker   Yes 

Mr. Balles   Yes 

Mr. Black   Yes 

Mr. Coldwell   Yes 

Mr. Gardner   Yes 

Mr. Jackson   Yes 

Mr. Kimbrel   Yes 

Mr. Partee   Yes 

Mr. Wallich   Yes 

Mr. Winn   Yes 
Unanimous, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I think we™ve di
sposed of the--oh, I™m terribly sorry, Mr. 
Broida is calling my attention to a 
note that he prepared in my behalf.  I™m not sure that it is necessary to take this up, but I also see no harm in doing so, and therefore I will read the note 

that Mr. Broida prepared for me. 
 The suggestion is that we arrive at an informal consensus--we 
may already be in trouble--that it would be desira
ble to expand the Record of Policy Actions to include more detailed information on members™ 
views concerning longer-run and current policy.  I think we™ve decided all that.  We ought to 
have an expanded policy record.  Do you have anything else in mind? 
MR. BROIDA.  No.  
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, let™s leave this quick
ly then.  Now there is a fifth item.  I am 
advised that it need not be covered because it already had been covered.  Let™s leave this quickly.  All right?  Are we legal? 
MR. O™CONNELL.  Yes, sir, I think you™ve, in
 substance, covered both of these points and subsequent questions.   CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Let me appoint a subcomm
ittee, but the intention would be to give this subcommittee nothing to do.  We talked about 
informal understandings to be recorded in our 
files.  I think we have reached a decision, a consensus, that we will minimize such occasions and 

try to proceed in such a fashion that there will be no need for informal understandings.  And yet 
we have to be pragmatic and recognize that su
ch a need may arise.  To help our Secretary 
discharge his duties, and to take care of troubles that may arise, 
and which I hope will not arise, 5/18/76 - 15 - 
   let me appoint a committee consisting of Mr. Gar
dner as chairman, Mr. Volcker, and Mr. Partee, 
who are to be consulted by the Secretary.   But now let me ask you, you know I™ve been aw
ay, and since getting back I™ve had to prepare a speech and cover a lot of ground, and I™m 
less well prepared for this meeting than I™d 
like to be or ought to be.  But I seem to recall 
that we felt a need for a committee, not only for 
this purpose but for a wider purpose.  The Secretary may need assistance and some guidance.  
There will be comments from committee members 
that he may find difficult to resolve.  Didn™t 
we discuss that?  Or is 
it my imagination?   
MR. BROIDA.  I don™t r
ecall the discussion. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, can we not do this, consider this a committee that the 
Secretary may find it useful to consult in connection with difficult questions that arise in the preparation of the policy record?  All right?  Well, I think we ar
e ready for our regular meeting.  
Let™s take a recess for two or three minutes.  To stretch our legs. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, we are ready to proceed with our meeting now, gentlemen.  
And may we have a motion to act on the minutes of the April meeting. 
SPEAKER(?).  So moved. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Motion to 
approve the minutes is before
 us.  I discern that there might be a second.  I hear no objection. I take it 
the minutes are approved and we are ready now, 
Mr. Holmes, for your report on foreign currency operations.  
MR. HOLMES.  [Secretary's note: This statement was not found in Committee records.] 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Holmes
.  Any questions?  Any comment on the 
foreign exchange market?   
MR. COLDWELL.  I have a question, Mr. Chairm
an.  I wonder if any progress has been 
made with the Treasury on our Swiss debt.   
MR. HOLMES.  A committee was established at 
the last meeting to 
look into this, and it has not yet had a chance to-- CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Has not yet had a chance to meet, or the committee has not yet 
met? 
MR. HOLMES.  The Committee has not yet met. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right,
 any other comment or question?  Very well, a motion to 
approve or confirm transactions
 that have been conducted by Mr. Holmes at the Foreign 
[Exchange Trading] Desk is now in order. SPEAKER(?).  So moved.   
5/18/76 - 16 - 
   CHAIRMAN BURNS. The motion has been 
made and probably seconded, hear no 
objections.  And Mr. Holmes, do yo
u have any recommendations?  
MR. HOLMES.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I noted that
 we had paid off our remaining deutsche 
mark debt, and we™ve continued to build up some balances--we have about $28 million.  Last 

September, the Committee agreed that a buildup 
of foreign exchange balances of about $150 million would be desirable.  That amount appears 
to be perfectly adequate for our needs right 
now, and we would like to proceed and continue
 to build up balances as market conditions 
permit.   
Finally, I should make some note of the Ital
ian situation.  Their drawings on us still amount to $500 million of the $750 million we agreed 
to make available to them.  They have 
since taken down the medium[-term] EC oil facility
 loan and have arranged another $1.1 billion 
of short term swaps with other EC central banks and the BIS.  They also had a swap of $250 million maturing on June 22, the date of the ne
xt FOMC meeting and 
the day after their 
elections.  And in view of the continuing uncertain
ty and the nearness of that swap maturity to 
the elections, I would recommend that we be prep
ared to roll over that $250 million if they so 
request for another three-month period. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any questions on that?  I think taking things all in all, this is to my 
mind clearly the right thing to do.  Is th
ere any difference of opinion on that?   
MR. PARTEE.  This would be the first renewal?  

MR. HOLMES.  The first renewal was rolled over for three months.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I hear no objections.  Any other recommendations? 
MR. HOLMES.  That™s all I had, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Holmes. 
 We are ready now for your report, Mr. 
Gramley.  
MR. GRAMLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I™m sorry, I™m sorry--Mr. 
Broida insists that everything be done properly and legally, and we are all grateful to him.  The 
Manager™s recommendation has not been formally approved by the Committee.  May we infer that the Committee has formally 

approved?  I hear no objectio
ns.  Yes, Mr. Gramley. MR. GRAMLEY.  [Secretary's not
e: This statement was not found in Committee records.] 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Gramley. 
 I believe that the report on housing starts and building permits will be released-- 
MR. GRAMLEY.  It should 
be out this afternoon. 5/18/76 - 17 - 
   CHAIRMAN BURNS.  This afternoon.  I™ve gotten a preliminary reading on that report, 
and I think members of the Comm
ittee should know that the reporte
d figure on housing starts for the month of April is somewhat lowe
r than for the month of March.   
All right, Mr. Morris, let™s, for our economic 
discussion--ah, but we want to concentrate on any differences of views  from the approach or
 interpretation presented by Mr. Gramley and also 
on any supplementary information that members of
 the Committee think sh
ould be brought to the attention of the Committee.  Mr. Morris.    
MR. MORRIS.  Mr. Chairman, I have two points to
 make.  One is that I™ve sensed that the 
economy is really moving ahead more rapidly than 
our projections indicate.  I think one factor that ought to be given some attention is this w
hole business of retail sales.  The April figure, particularly, shows a slight decline--it seems to me that this could 
very well be another case of a seasonal adjustment problem because, if you applie
d the 1975 seasonal factors, instead of getting 
a decline in April, you would get an increase of 4.4 percent. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Really? 

MR. MORRIS.  Yes. 
SPEAKER(?).  Say that again, Frank. 

MR. MORRIS.  That if the 1975 factor was used, it would translate that slight decline to an increase of 4.4 percent.  CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yeah, but Mr. Partee inquires whether correction for the difference 
of Easter dates is being respected in this calculation.  MR. PARTEE.  You™d have much more effect
 on March and less in April last year, in 1975 compared to 1976.  
MR. MORRIS.  Well, I think, looking at these 
numbers, the last three months taken as a 
whole are stronger than with the new factors.  CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Using last 
year™s seasonal factors.   
MR. MORRIS. That™s right. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, that take
s care of that Easter problem.  
MR. MORRIS.  The other point I™d like to ma
ke, Mr. Chairman, is this.  I™m concerned 
about whether we are going to be prepared in th
is Committee to properly assess, particularly as 
we go into 1977, the capacity limits of the ec
onomy.  Back in 1972, this Committee made a 
misjudgment.  I think, fundamentally, looking ba
ck on those days, we misjudged the capacity 
level of the economy.  We ran into
 widespread shortages of materi
als at a much higher level of 
unemployment than we had anticipa
ted.  My question is, I™m worried about whether in this next 
expansion we are going to be in a substantially 
better position to make j
udgments than we were 
in 1972.   5/18/76 - 18 - 
   It seems to me we ought to, as 
a System, give a high priority in
 our research work to really getting a grasp on what the capacity limits really 
are in the various major 
materials, and perhaps 
this is a job that could be split up between the Re
serve Banks and the Board™s staff.  But it seems 
to me, that--I would hate to see us make the sa
me mistake that we made then.  And I think I™m 
particularly concerned that we™re again moving in sync with the 
other major industrial countries 
in an expansion phase, so that the chance of misj
udging the situation, it seems to me, is still very 
high.  Would you want to comment on that Lyle?   
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Lyle, first of all, woul
d you comment on the historical point, that is, how we judged the rate of utilization of capacity or misjudged, or whichever it may be, during 
the preceding boom. 
MR. GRAMLEY.  I think we 
underestimated in 1972--   
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, now, Lyle, let me 
try to stimulate your 
recollection.  We put out a new index on the rate of utilization of capacity of major raw materials industries, and when 
we did that new index..... MR. GRAMLEY.  That was put out only after 
we recognized the f
act that our overall index of capacity utilization in manufacturing was seriously misl
eading us.  I was building up to that.  I think there were three elements in the 
picture.  I think we tended to underestimate the strength of domestic expansive forces in 1972-
73.  I think we underestimated seriously the 
significance of the worldwide boom in economic 
activity in our own economy.  And I think, 
third, that we were not at all aware of the serious 
deficiencies in our index of capacity utilization 
in manufacturing.  We were led, as a consequen
ce of the resulting shortages that developed and 
our failure to perceive them, to [revise] our index-- CHAIRMAN BURNS.  When did the new index appear?  When did we first have it?  Do 
you remember the date?  
MR. PARTEE.  March or April 1973. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  April 1973? MR. PARTEE.  March or April 1973. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, now, that was not too late was it?   
MR. GRAMLEY.  Well, things were beginning to-- 

MR. MORRIS.  If we had had it in March 1972-- CHAIRMAN BURNS.  It would have been better to have had it in 1972.  I just want to ask-- Yes. 
MR. GRAMLEY.  The overall index reached its p
eak rate of utilization in the second and third quarter.  In the second quarter, for major 
materials the index was at
 93.4 percent, for the 5/18/76 - 19 - 
   third quarter about the same, 93.5.  So we were
 moving into that area looking for signs of shortages at a time when the index was very close to its peak.  
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yeah, alright, that™s helpful.  Now, Mr. Morris has asked a very important question.  How can we equip ourselves so
 that we would not make a similar mistake? 
MR. GRAMLEY.  I [and] the research staff he
re would be very happy for any assistance we could get from the Reserve Banks.  We do ha
ve a paper in process which is designed to assess what is likely to happen to rates of capacity utilization in the major materials industries if 
roughly the consensus forecast is re
alized.  I™m aware also that 
studies for other countries are 
being undertaken under the auspices of the OECD, so we may get 
some better information from 
that source.   
One thing I would point out, President Morris, is that the expansion that we are forecasting 
as a staff, and our forecast is
 reasonably close to the consensus, is a lot weaker than the 
expansion we had in 1972.  In 1972 we had the 
strongest expansion for the second year of recovery of any postwar upswing.  Real GNP in the four quarters ending in the fourth quarter of 1972 rose by 7.3 percent.  That™s an extraordinarily strong expansion.  Of course, it did occur after a relatively weak first year.   
What we are forecasting now is an increase in
 the second four quarters--that is, the four 
quarters beginning with the second quarter of this year, ending with the second quarter of 1977--of around 5-1/4 percent.  If in fact, our forecast underestimates signi
ficantly the expansive forces in the economy, and we get up into the 7 pe
rcent range, then I think we are going to have to reassess the meaning of the capacity constraint problem that we may face. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Lyle, let me follow up 
on Mr. Morris™s question.  Our index of capacity utilization apart from the ra
w materials group is unsatisfactory.  
MR. GRAMLEY.  Quite. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right.  Now, some
 work has been under way for some time to 
give us a significantly improved overall index.  What is the status of that?  
MR. GRAMLEY.  That™s right.  Well, we would 
hope that within a few months we will be able to put out an expanded index of capacity ut
ilization in the material
s industry so we will not 
only have measures of capacity utilization for major materials but for all materials.   
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I see. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  We are working and we hope to
 have, in the not too distant future, a new and completely overhauled index through all of manufacturing.  I think 
whether that index is useful in telling us about problems of capacity u
tilization, I™ll [wait for] some experience with it. 
Mr.  Chairman, I-- 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I would think it would be very useful.  And you think it would be available within, say, six months?   
5/18/76 - 20 - 
   MR. GRAMLEY.  I would hope so. 
MR. PARTEE.  On the materials? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  No, on the materials within 
a few months.  Within six months, possibly, 
we may have a-- 
MR. PARTEE.  Whole index? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Well, 
it™s quite possible. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, now, next let me
 ask this.  You know I™ve been impressed 
over the years with the reports, Mr. Mayo, we get from Chicago--your meetings with 
economists-- 
MR. MAYO.  Yes. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  --and presumably meeti
ngs like that are held in our [Reserve] Banks across the country, [but] I don™t see reports such as we get from Chicago.  Now, keeping 
in touch in systematic fashion,  not so much w
ith financial economists or
 general economists, but 
industrial economists, those working for industria
l firms, I think would be one way of meeting 
the needs that Mr. Morris has described.  And this certainly can be done by the research departments of our District Banks, and perhaps 
we ought to be looking to the future and be sensitive to the problem that Mr. Morris has desc
ribed so well and Mr. Gramley elaborated on.   
Perhaps we ought to strive for a collation of such reports over the next year, not committing ourselves to a ﬁPurple Book,ﬂ you know. 
 But over the next year, [collect] such 
reports from the research departments of indi
vidual Banks--these reports to be based on conversations with industrial economists and bein
g compiled for the System.  Now, Mr. Morris, 
what is your own reaction to that suggestion? 
MR. MORRIS.  Well, I feel intuitively that, 
even if we aggregate 
an index that you™re working on, and even though that total index may 
look not too bad, we may run into shortages in 
particular areas that could be very troublesome.  
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yeah, but look, first of all, the index that Mr. Gramley described 
will show numerous industrial components, it does now, and he™s planning an expanded index, 
and therefore there will be broader industrial representation--  
MR. GRAMLEY.  We have a good bit more indus
trial detail, too, than what is in the published index that we look at-- CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Now then, second, these surveys that I am thinking about--well, 
talking to industrial economists, they are going to
 talk about their industry, their firm, you see, 
and that™s what we want, and therefore the reports will be on a disaggregated or specific 

industrial basis.  5/18/76 - 21 - 
   MR. ROOS.  Mr. Chairman, we in St. Louis ar
e conducting a regularly scheduled series of meetings, not only with industria
l economists from various industr
ies but chief executive officers of the largest industrial firms in the area, and 
their economists attend these meetings.  We find 
that they are most enthusiastic 
about participating.  And as a result of their participation, not only do we receive valuable information, but I think 
from the point of view of the image of the 
System--these people are very flattered to be in
vited, and we found this to be very productive both in terms of gathering information and in 
terms of further identif
ying the importance and 
seriousness of our activities. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That™s ve
ry helpful.  Mr. MacLaury? 
MR. MACLAURY.  My question was on the conceptual framework of this capacity index.  The public gets it, and the way we talk about it, not in detail, is as a percentage of capacity utilization overall, and then by industry--which implies what is of course not true, that there is some sort of absolute level of capacity in each 
industry.  And I think that that way of thinking 
about it gives rise to a feeling that until on
e reaches 100 percent, then price pressures are 
relatively easy, and then after 100 percent it becomes a skyroc
ket.  And we get a lot of uninformed comment based upon that kind of a concept.   
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, we are not
 going to make mistakes like that. 
MR. MACLAURY.  No, we don™t, but my question 
really is whether there is any practical or feasible way of constructing the index or an index based upon increasingly less efficient plant 
utilization so that one gets an
 immediate index, if you will, of 
the price pressures that would 
result from the use of increasingly inefficient plant.  
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, this is a very basic question, a very difficult question.  I worked on that 40 years ago, and I knew more a
bout it then than I know now.  Oh, more than 40 years ago.  I don™t think we can do anything in this area now.  I think we™ve got to somehow use 
the rough, raw material that we can gather, wh
ile our staff continues working on the basic conceptual question that you™ve so rightly called attention to.  Does my suggestion meet with 
any--it doesn™t seem to meet with any enthus
iasm.  I still think it™s a good suggestion.  SPEAKER(?).  Sure. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  I would certainly support it 
wholeheartedly, Mr. Chairman.  I think 
qualitative input of the sort that you™re talking about is very valuable, and I would encourage the Reserve Banks to submit to us whatever they
 can obtain by way of information from their 
contacts.  CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I think this would have to be, if it™s going to be done, you know we need more than encouragement.  We 
don™t need too much system, but we need to 
organize ourselves for the purpose, and-- MR. GRAMLEY.  I think an appropriate place fo
r that to be taken up might be in the 
System Research Advisory Committee.  We ar
e not meeting today, but we will a month from 
now, and perhaps we can get some thinking st
imulated between now and then so that-- 5/18/76 - 22 - 
   CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I™d like to get started sooner.  Mr. Mayo, would you be willing to assume responsibility for getting 
the Banks, you see, to compile repor
ts of this sort to be made 
available?  These could be
 brief reports, gathered from convers
ations with industrialists and their economists?   
MR. MAYO.  Be glad to, certainly. 
MR. MORRIS.  My thought, Bob, was that particular commodities could be assigned to 
particular Reserve Banks such as steel in Cleveland, paper to Boston, something like that, so that we™d have continuing responsibility to the Committee from a particular bank organizing-- 
MR. MAYO.  Well, we™ll see what we can do, 
Mr. Chairman.  I would like to work with 
Lyle and his people.  MR. JACKSON.  Mr. Chairman, for the next 
meeting, why don™t we tr
y to encourage each Reserve Bank to make a special comment about
 industrial capacity in their Redbook comment?   
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Now, I think that™s a splendid suggestion. MR. ROOS.  Mr. Chairman, couldn™t these co
ntacts with industry not only [cover] the subject of industrial capacity but inventory accumulation and capital spending plans, things like that.  I mean we get a lot of valuable informa
tion covering a broad spectrum from these regular 
meetings that we have.  I don™t 
think we have to limit it.  
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I think that™s a very useful comment.  You know, that™s another area where we all went wrong in our judgment of the inventory situation during 1974 in 
particular.  But that was traceable to our faulty st
atistics, and our statistics 
were so faulty because our statisticians could not take adequate account of  inflation; the inflation was distorting the meaning of our inventory figures.  Is 
that a correct statement, Lyle?   
MR. GRAMLEY.  Indeed it is.  We had major 
revisions of the inventory statistics coming 
out in July 1974. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  And we were surprised by the magnitude of the accumulation, by 
the magnitude of the inventory boom that apparently had occurred.   
MR. WALLICH.  Mr. Chairman, I just want to
 put out a warning.  Capacity data derived from particular industries, and pa
rticularly locally derived, of cour
se, can be extremely helpful.  
There™s some danger in putting them together 
unless one bears in mind [that industry sources] 
very often talk about what they can do provided they get the labor, provided they get the materials.  They may not be thinking of the natio
nal effect of an expansion [in which] not only they but their competitors are expanding, so the Reserve Banks, in evaluating this, would have to 

be cognizant of that limitation of estimates on single firms.  
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think that all that we 
can really do in this fashion is to gather impressions in a more systematic way than we ot
herwise might, but I think 
that in the absence of 
authentic statistical data, it™s very important that
 we try to form impressions of what is going on 
as fully and as promptly as we can.  Mr. Partee? 
5/18/76 - 23 - 
   MR. PARTEE.  I might just note that the on
ly source of indicated pressure that was available in Washington in late 1972 came from the Redbooks.  
MR. MAYO.  Came from what? 

MR. PARTEE.  The Redbooks. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Now, isn™t that interesting. MR. PARTEE.  There was no other government
 source or no other government agency 
that had that information, so I think what we are 
talking about is very good, Frank.  It™s a sort of an attempt to develop a little further in the Banks
 a system for spotting this as it goes along.  And 
I would myself put much more confidence on it th
an I did at the end of 1972, when it seemed all 
by itself out there as an interesting observation.         CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I like very much Mr. Ja
ckson™s suggestion about improving in this 
respect the Redbook.  And my own idea as to a possi
ble  [ﬁPurple Bookﬂ] and so on, I withdraw.  Your idea is much better, and that can devel
op.  And we can do something next month already, 
you see, and the fact that individual Banks will go
 about this task in different ways, there™s no 
harm in that.  This Redbook has been useful, even though each Bank approaches the matter in a 

somewhat different way.  Well, I want to th
ank you, Mr. Morris, for your alertness and your suggestion.  Let™s hear from Mr. Balles now. 
MR. BALLES.  Well, I™d like to 
turn for a minute to the price 
outlook--this disturbing rise in April of the wholesale price index.  Even though a good part of it was in farm and food, there 
was a broad-based increase, as you know, in food materials, manufactur
ed products, sensitive commodities, the whole bit.  The immediate indica
tion I see is that it™s 
going to slow down, but 
what™s the staff view here on that outlook?   
MR. GRAMLEY.  What we are concerned about,
 as I indicated in my briefing, President 
Balles, is that price pressures will begin to develop a little more strongly than we had anticipated.  I don™t look for the serious problem to come from
 the agricultural side.  I think the run-up in farm and food prices is  a rebound 
from very low levels in agricultu
ral prices.  That™s not likely to continue unless we get very unfavorable weather.  The crop situation looks quite favorable, 
generally speaking, and we think that, at the retail level, the trend of food prices is more likely to 
be determined this year by wage costs than by 
what happens to the prices of raw agricultural 
commodities.   
On the industrial side, the increase in wholesale commodity 
prices in April still looks reasonably moderate.  And we™re worried about the announced increases we™ve seen in the metals area, particularly recently, but we think that 
if wage costs continue to rise at a rate which 
boosts the unit cost of labor--it™s somewhere 
around the 5-1/2 percent annual rate--then an increase in the general price level much above that
 would not be particularly likely.  You will see 
[greater increases in] individual commodities, but probably not in the overall indexes.  So 

something in the range of 5-1/2 to
 6 percent still looks to us like the reasonable estimate of the 
general rate of inflation between now and mid-1977.  
5/18/76 - 24 - 
   MR. BALLES.  Well, I hope you ar
e right.  I™ve been hearing for months now from my 
[Reserve Bank] directors--in [response to] the briefings we give to them, where our price outlook 
is pretty close to the one that you cited here--that they think we are far too optimistic.  They see 
pressures developing across a broad front that are 
going to lead to higher prices in the industrial sector and they say several things: wage settlements that go considerably beyond what the staff 
view seems to be within the System, efforts to
 reestablish profit margins that were run down 
during the recession period, and what have you.  There™s quite a divergence of opinion between the gut feeling of our directors on one hand and the research work that™s done by our staff on the other hand.  That remains an unres
olved question in my own mind.   
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, that™s an inte
resting point.  Are other Bank presidents getting similar impressions from their fellow directors? 
PRESIDENTS.  Yes, yes, yes, yes [etc.]. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Generally true? 

SPEAKER(?).  Mr. Chairman, since our last 
meeting, we conducted a series of meetings 
around the District with industrial leaders, major retailers, key 
businessmen, and with our own 
directors, both Branch and head office.  We are 
getting a very strong feeling that the recovery is proceeding much faster; business thrust is cons
iderably stronger than these numbers would 
indicate.  There is a definite feeling that prices are generally going to rise faster, that inflation thrust is much stronger than we project.  Th
ey are making decisions based on that and are 
proceeding on that.  I think we get a very 
strong feeling of that in our District. 
So I guess the only other question I would like [to ask] Lyle [is], what industries might be 
calculated to be the strongest capital spenders in your projections. MR. GRAMLEY.  What we are assuming is
 a strong pickup [unintelligible] in 
manufacturers.  The projection we have at this
 point is for an increas
e, year over year, of 10-1/2 percent in spending for 1976.  And by the middle of 1976, we figure that total business 
fixed investment would be rising 
in a general range of 12 to 15 percent at annual rates in real terms.  [We see a] quite widespread increase in
 plant and equipment spending, and a particularly 
large [increase] in manufacturing. 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 
 You said 12 to 15 percent in real terms. MR. GRAMLEY.  At annual rates, yes.  That™s
 not an unprecedented kind of expansion in business fixed investment. 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  No, it™s not unprecedented, but it just doesn™t seem to be 
in line with these surveys and so forth. 
MR. PARTEE.  Did you say in mid-™77 or ™76? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  By mid-™77.  By mid-™77. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Oh, mid-™77.  Okay. 
5/18/76 - 25 - 
   MR. GRAMLEY.  It™s going to take some time to
 generate a head of steam.  So that the year-over-year increase we™re projecting-- 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I think you said mid-™76.  
Could I fall [back] from this 
pace just a second, Mr. Chairman?  In reconciling 
these various views, [we]
 certainly have some 
of the same instincts and hear some of the same
 reports that John Balles does.  You just asked Lyle, he states a kind of basic forced pressure from the wage side, of 5-1/2 percent or so.  And [he] concluded that the overall price performance ought to be at 
about that [rate], and I™m trying 
to explore for a minute how you get to that conclusion.  I mean assume for a moment the 5-1/2 

percent is [correct] on the wage side.  CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Now wait, 5-1/
2 percent is the unit labor cost? 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  The unit labor cost, not the wages themselves, although even there I tend to think it may be higher than that
, but we are talking in a fairly narrow range.  But you do see materials prices rising.  The fuel
 thing, partly [depends] upon OPEC, I suppose, but it™s not going to be as good as it™s been, presumably. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Even
 if OPEC did nothing. VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Even if OPEC did nothing.  You do, I think, see some 
evidence of this desire to expand profit margin
s in an economic environment where that will 
become possible.  All these modifications to th
e basic unit labor cost kind of calculation would seem to [give] a plus to the [unit labor co
st] numbers.  We™re just wondering why you didn™t 
arrive at that conclusion. MR. GRAMLEY.  Well, I think ther
e are two things in our mind that will keep the rate of 
general price advance relatively close to the increase in unit labor co
st.  One is the fact that we 
think the outlook for food prices at the retail level is such that, on balance, retail food prices will increase a little less than the rate
 of increase in prices
 generally.  The other thing is that profit margins already have improved rather substantiall
y.  And this is a stage of the cycle where we often see profit margins begin to be trimmed. An
d what we have worked out in terms of a 
projection of corporate profits for the next four quarters, given an increase of overall prices only a little above the rate of increase in unit labor cost
, is a further increase in corporate profits.  It™s something like 20 to 25 percent.  So it seems to f
it as a consistent overall package, and we are led 
to believe therefore, that this is a reasonable price projection.   Now, I would say that, in looking at the staff™s record of price projections in the past, if I were to make a claim that we are fairly accura
te in this area, everybody in the room would know 
it™s pure fantasy.  But I would also remind you 
that the business community has been saying since early last year that, as soon as the economy gets back into r
ecovery, we™re very likely to get right back into double-digit inflation.  I don™t think the business community is a particularly good forecaster of prices either. 
MR. MACLAURY.  I am with Lyle on that.  I think our directors probably would share the same sentiments that have been expressed by ot
her directors, but I think they™re just wrong.  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  
Where are you putting it? 5/18/76 - 26 - 
   SPEAKER(?).  [Unintelligible]. 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  On
e other question on the unit labor cost itself.  How do you appraise what™s going on in wages now?  Are th
ey tending to rise with a more rapid rate?  
MR. GRAMLEY.  So far this ye
ar the performance on the wage side has been far better 
than our expectations.  And I™m a little hesitant 
to cite any numbers now, at the moment, because 
the Teamsters settlement hasn™t got into the index ye
t. In March and April, the rate of increase of average hourly earnings was only 4 percent at annual rates.  Now that™s way, way under what I 
think is a likely expectation for the rest of the year.  What we™ve been forecasting for the year as 
a whole is an increase in average hourly earnings of around 7-3/4 percent.  The experience so far is much lower than that, but we think it 
will bounce back up again once the Teamsters 
settlement--and the rubber settlement and the ot
hers to come in--get into the averages.   
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
  Well, I™d like to make ju
st one more comment on this 
price matter.  Irrespective of wh
ether most of the directors ar
ound the system are right or 
wrong--they may be wrong, I™m not sure--but even if 
they are [wrong], the fact that they believe 
that there is going to be a resurgence of inflation could be an important element in how they 
behave both with regard to inventory policy and capital expenditure policy.  And that kind of business psychology is something that perhaps y
ou ought to take into account in terms of the outlook. MR. GRAMLEY.  I think that™s a fair comment. 
 However, it™s difficult to tell exactly how 
to take it into account when businesses thus far ha
ve given almost no evidence that, with regard to either inventory policy or commitments in th
e fixed investment area,
 they™re acting in line 
with an expectation of wildly increasing prices.  All 
the reports we get are that businesses are 
still playing their inventory policy very, very close to their chest, very cautiously. VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Bu
t capital expenditure plans 
have picked up strongly this year, as you know. MR. GRAMLEY.  I know, but they picked up 
strongly in an environment of large 
increases in consumer spending, and they™ve done 
so much later than they do in a cyclical 
recovery. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You know, I™d say capital 
expenditures are still [unintelligible]. 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  But I don™t feel that a businessman would react to a firm 
expectation of prices accelerating by expanding inventory and capital spending.  I think they may 
react by saying this will bring in another recession.   CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, but I think that™s precisely what Mr. Balles had in mind.  He 
said take it into account, he didn™t tell us how. MR. MORRIS.  Mr. Chairman, one little bit of
 intelligence on these lines.  One of my 
directors recently returned from a business c
ouncil meeting.  He reported to me a dramatic 
change in the confidence of the business community represented there from three months ago.  
5/18/76 - 27 - 
   The confidence in the sustained expansion of the economy.  He wa
s surprised at the degree of improvement in confidence.  
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I don™t think there is any doubt about that. MR. PARTEE.  To supplement that, I think th
at there is typically a lag in business reactions to an improving situati
on.  That is, in the case of economists, there is a dramatic 
improvement in attitudes in January and February, 
and as the sales figures came in, and the better 
order [figures] came in, that spread to the busin
ess [unintelligible].  So I don™t think there™s anything unusual about this coming in by the dozen.   
MR. MORRIS.  No, it™s not unusual, but I think it does suggest that we are going to see a change in the conservati
ve inventory policies and plant expansion policies. MR. PARTEE.  But I would point out to you, Frank, as Lyle said, he™s got a rising [rate] of capital spending in real terms.  And a 15 per
cent annual rate by the mi
ddle of 1977 in [real] terms, which is a pretty good recovery.  If that
 had been months ago, I don™t think the Committee 
would have accepted [it].  The inventory accumu
lation is what, 20, 20 plus [unintelligible]. MR. GRAMLEY.  We™ve got the [unint
elligible] of inventory accumulation. 
MR. PARTEE.  And that could also be related to stimulation, not asto
unding in either case, but it certainly does depend on relatively strong business attitudes to get [that]. MR. MORRIS.  But I think we do have to face th
e prospect that our forecast could still be 
conservative given this major ch
ange that™s [unintelligible]. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I think that™s 
fair.  All right, 
 Mr. Black, please. MR. BLACK.  Mr. Chairman, I had two observa
tions on this matter of capacity utilization 
which we kind of left behind, but one is in regard to the suggestion you made that we collect 
what information we can on this.  I would caution 
that we ought to also take into consideration the existence of excess capacity abroad and our abili
ty to import.  I [raise] this since there seems 
to be more excess capacity abroad
 than there is here.  And the second observation is that there are contained in the Redbook, this time, three refe
rences I remember to industries that may be 
approaching capacity:  steel, paper products, and some chemicals.   
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  What about textiles? MR. BLACK.  Yeah, I think that™s true there, too.  And this may have implications for 
imports and inventories and plant and equipment 
expenditures that we may not have taken into 
consideration ad
equately yet. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Black.  Mr. Winn, please. 
MR. WINN.  Two observations, Mr. Chairman.  
First, if you look at the oil import figures 
and look at what™s happening in the Middle East, plus informed guesses, and they are only guesses, of the 10 percent increase in oil prices with the summer coming on, you [become] 
5/18/76 - 28 - 
   troubled in the price area on that score.  Second, with respect to automobiles and their 
importance in the recovery, we get reports of 
all kinds of 60-month credit terms being given.  
Sixty-month credit terms.  Now, that™s showing 
up always [in terms of] the other fellow [giving 
60 months], of course, but the frequency with wh
ich we run into this disturbs me--that it will 
alter your cyclical behavior in terms 
of replacements here down the road.  
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Have you heard about that?  
MR. GRAMLEY.  We have heard nothing here
 about 60-month terms; we™ve heard a good 
bit about the move from 36 to 48 [months]. 
MR. WINN.  That™s right.
  That™s the problem. 
MR. GRAMLEY.  The proportion of over-36-m
onth maturities is rising.  There™s no 
question about that.  MR. WINN.  But they all talk about the ot
her fellow giving 60 months, and the frequency 
with which we run into this--they who [claim 
that it is happening], of course, never [give 60 months], it™s the other fellow--but the frequency with which we run into it makes me realize that 
this has happened.  MR. PARTEE.  This is banks or-- 
MR. WINN.  Well, they say it™s 
always the finance companies.  But I™m suspicious even in 
terms of some of our banks of [unintelligible] competitive relationships.    
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Who™s in charge of our data on this area?   
MR. GRAMLEY.  That™s Mr. Fisher™s section. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Be sure to call-- 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Oh yes, we™ll get this under way.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you 
very much, Mr. Winn.  Mr. Wallich, please. 
MR. WALLICH.  I have a comment on cap
acity.  Since 1973, ™74, we™ve had very moderate plant and equipment spending.  We™ve had 
a good rise in labor force.  So overall, one 
would guess that the relationship of plant capacity to labor forc
e capacity has deteriorated, and we would be suffering from shortages and higher le
vels of unemployment.  This might have been 
offset if the area in which there were shortages had experienced a higher rate of investment in the 
midst of generally lower investment.  Is there 
any indication that that might have happened?  
[Can] one, for instance, match up our major 
materials index categories to McGraw-Hill 
categories?   
MR. GRAMLEY.  Right, we did have two years of
 very strong increases in capacity in the major materials industries relative to expansion 
of capacity elsewhere.  These were in both ™73 
and ™74.  The projections for ™76 don™t show any unusual increase in [capacity in] the major 
5/18/76 - 29 - 
   materials area relative to other i
ndustries, except a fairly broad-based kind of thing.  So I think that has alleviated the problem.  
But I think a greater factor tending to alleviate that problem of 
shortages of industrial materials is the fact that we do not have the synchronous, tremendous 
worldwide boom that we had then.  If that s
hould develop again, there is, I think, a serious question relative to the adequacy of capacity-- CHAIRMAN BURNS.  It could develop in 1977. 
MR. GRAMLEY.  It could, yes.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I™d go further and say that that is, as of today, a reasonable expectation.  MR. GRAMLEY.  I™m not a studen
t of the economies of othe
r countries, but I have the feeling, from what I have generally understood, that economic po
licies being pursued by most of 
the major industrial countries are much more conser
vative now than they were [earlier]. And that I think would tend to constitute-- 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You don™t need stimula
tive policies.  There™s been so much 
stimulation around the world that
 momentum has been built up within the private economy.  
That™s certainly our condition, and it™s the position of Germany at the present time.  I think 
France is close to it.  And before too long, I think others will join that procession.  So I™ve had my eye on the possibility of a worldwide economi
c expansion in 1977.  I think that™s exactly the direction in which we are moving.  Mr. Partee? 
MR. PARTEE.  Well, I was just going to comme
nt that, earlier we were talking about 
1973, and it is true that the world boom will have a 
considerable effect on the rate of inflation.  
But I think we also ought to remember that there 
had been two prior devaluations of the dollar,  so that the effect was to shift demand [to] the 
U.S. markets, particularly for finished materials 
used in [unintelligible] manufact
ure, like chemicals and steel and 
things of that kind, where the product is exactly the same regardless of the coun
try it came from.  Now 
we are not thinking in terms of further substantial devaluations of the dollar [unintelligible],  but that is one difference 
now compared to [unintelligible]. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, and hopefully it will 
be a little more responsible, etc., but I 
think the distinctive viewpoint 
to keep our eye on is price developments.  Not be too 
[unintelligible]. My instinct tells me that the businessmen are more likely to be right than 
economists on this issue, but all we can do is to be
 as alert as we can to the developments and not 
have closed minds, and I don™t think anyone arou
nd this table has a closed mind.  Any other 
comment?  Yes, Mr. Winn. 
MR. WINN.  Just one more comment.  As 
you look at the capacity expansion efforts, you want to keep in mind the energy bottlenecks, with
 gas and some of these other things not being 
as expandable as [other] plants in certain of these areas.   
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You notice it takes so much longer to expand capacity [unintelligible].  Mr. Jackson? 5/18/76 - 30 - 
   MR. JACKSON.  I was just going to ask Lyle.  We know that the cost pressures for price increases have been there all along, it™s just [that] they have not been able to be validated by the results coming in.  And it looks to me like your pr
ojections will indicate, 
if anything, that that aspect to demand is not going to co
ntinue to grow as rapidly as it has.  Is it therefore possible that even if these cost pressures exist, they wi
ll not be validated as well as businessmen might 
hope or expect?  As a consequence of 
the lack of growth in prices?   
MR. GRAMLEY.  Well, I think product market
s are improving quite nicely, now, and [if] 
our projection is realized, products are going to continue to improve.  We are projecting a continuing strong increase in consumer expenditure
s, around 5 percent, which is historically a very good rate of increase in consumer spendi
ng.  We are forecasting a substantial rise in 
business fixed investment.  A movement of i
nventory investment up to something like 1-1/4 
percent of gross national product.  If those kinds of markets mate
rialize, I would think it would be relatively easy for businesses to pass on their cost increases. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, they™ve managed to
 do not too badly even during the severe recession that we™ve gone through.   
MR. BALLES.  Mr. Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, Mr. Balles. 

MR. BALLES.  Just to follow on a comment made
 at the last meeting, 
there seems to have 
been quite a firming up of views with respect to dr
illing activity, that, while 
it™s still at a reduced 
level, it™s definitely going to pi
ck up at possibly [a] fairly substantial [rate] in the second half of the year.  We hear this both from the people in 
the oil business and from th
e bankers that they are talking to with respect to financing.  CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Now what is the reason fo
r that--expectation [o
f a] price rise?   
MR. BALLES.  There seem to be a number 
of reasons involved.  As near as I can determine, the most important one is increa
sing confidence that the 
government is going to 
exercise what elbow room is provided in the recent legislation with respect to authorizing limited 
price increases from time to time.  There also
 is developing some expectation that, when the 
legislation expires, they may in 
fact be relieved of price contro
l.  There are a couple of other things; one is that-- 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  When will the legislation expire?  Wasn
™t it [to last] around four 
years or so?   
SPEAKER(?).  I think about 3-1/2, something like 
that.  But there is a fairly long gestation period between drilling and getting the product in the market.  And th
ere is also the interpretation that some current weakness in product prices is
 viewed as temporary and that demand will soon 
turn that around.  Drilling costs are down in some
 respects, that is, rigs are available at lower rentals, and pipe is available at a lesser cost than it was a number of months ago, when there 
were shortages.   5/18/76 - 31 - 
   And apparently also some fields which 
were uneconomical now are becoming economic 
because of some changes in technology.  Appare
ntly they have techniques available now which 
enable them to fracture the rock down in the oil-
bearing strata and thereby get a greater release 
of the product than had been previously the case.  This is showing up in specific terms at the present time in the so-called Pearsall-Devine area
.  Those two little town
s are now boom towns, 
primarily because they feel [unintelligible] whic
h is long known to exist [unintelligible] there, 
but just on economic [terms] is now seeing 
quite a strong play in development.   
I would just record, without any attempt to evaluate, that 
the retailers on 
our board of directors were much less optimistic at our last mee
ting than at the preceding meeting--well, I said 
[I wouldn™t evaluate]--but my ow
n interpretation is that it™s b
ecause they are not looking through 
the effects of the [recent] pattern.  But they
™re knowledgeable, experienced people in this 
business, so I may be doing them an injustice in
 that respect.  These are general merchandise 
retailers.  There was a tendency on their part to explain what they judge as less vigorous retail activity on the grounds that the automobile dealers are getting [more business].  And they are inclined to feel that, with automobile sales real
 strong, it™s harder for them to capture the portion of the consumer dollar that normally would come 
their way.  But in terms of the staff™s general forecast, we see the general picture essentiall
y as has been described in their documents.  
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. [unintelligible].  Mr. Wallich, please. 
MR. WALLICH.  I wonder if I 
could make a general commen
t on two ways of looking at the outlook.  So, look at our projections--we have a very strong business spending outlook and yet a tapering off of GNP to the middle of ™77 [t
hat] results from the expectation that almost 
nothing else is going to [grow quickly].  Government is going to go slow, consumption is going 
to take off a little, housing will taper off strongly, 
then exports are flat.  So we™ve got the picture 
of just [business spending] being very powerful and pulling the economy along--everything else 
moderate.   Somehow this strikes me as an implausible pi
cture.  Either, it would seem to me, other 
things will be pulled up, with the exception of housing, if the impact of investment is as strong as 
indicated here, or else maybe investment spe
nding itself will suffer from this.  But I see a 
sectoral divergence here in the c
onfiguration of the expansion that strikes me as somehow a little 
unusual. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Gramley, 
you™ve already commented on that. 
MR. GRAMLEY.  I guess I would not interpret 
our projections quite the same way you do 
Governor Wallich.  I think if one looks back one finds historical precedent for the sort of 
projection we™re making, that is, in the second ye
ar of recovery, normally speaking, the rate of 
real GNP expansion slows substantially.  A typical postwar recovery has something like a 7 
percent [rise] in the first year--
using very broad numbers--and dr
ops back to the 3 to 4 percent range in the second.  Yet the second year is the year in which you have the biggest thrust from 
business fixed investment.  
What we™re looking at now is a projection in which true business fixed investment is a 
strong element, but we still have a very large expansion of personal consumption expenditures 
5/18/76 - 32 - 
   going on.  A rise of around 4-3/4 to 5 percent in real terms, the decline in the saving rate to 
around 6-3/4 percent by the end of the projection period, and we have a good rate of inventory investment continuing.  The rate
 of inventory accumulation rise
s further, up to about 1-1/4 percent of GNP, as I mentioned earlier.   
The only sectors from which we are not getti
ng a significant thrust are government, which 
you mentioned; and we may still be underestimati
ng state and local expend
itures; we may have 
misjudged fiscal policy; the housing sector, wher
e I think a strong case can be made that the 
further rise is likely to be moderate; and the net 
export picture.  In this latter connection, I would note that we have quite a strong increase in real exports plugged into our projections.  I remember that the real increase is on the order 
of something like 8 to 9 percent.  But an 
expanding economy also generates rising imports a
nd that takes away the expansive thrust  [unintelligible].  I think this is a fairly typical-- 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I would second what Mr. Gramley has said, but I would call 
attention to a growth phenomenon 
which I have not studied during the past 20 years, but which I did study very intensely in earlier times.  What I 
found in our studies of business cycles at the National Bureau [of Economic Research] was that 
if you take all [of the] some 10 business cycle 
expansions prior to the 1940s or 1950s, you find that in about 8 out of 10 instances you had what we at the National Bureau called a mid-expansion retardation.  That is, your GNP, if you like, expands and then there is retardation and then a re-acceleration in the second 
half or last third of the expansion.  You™ve got 8 instances out of 10.   Now I don™t know the record for the past 20 or 30 years, which is much more relevant to 
judging the future.  I don™t know it nearly as well and I don™t know in [unintelligible] precise terms.  But I would keep in mind that this phe
nomenon was very prominen
t in the business cycle history of this country in earlier times.  Any other questions or
 comments?  If not, the hour for 
the coffee break has come, so-- 
[Coffee break] MR. STERNLIGHT.  [Sta
tement--See Appendix.] 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Sternlight.  We are ready for discussion of Mr. 
Sternlight™s report.  Any questions or comments? MR. COLDWELL.  As the Desk was proceedin
g through this gradual tightening, were you 
giving weight, in [your] evaluation of the [moneta
ry] aggregates™ change, to the impact that 
might have developed from the Treasury balanc
e, currency, and shifts in corporate savings? MR. STERNLIGHT.  We were tr
ying to weigh the impact of a number of factors on the 
aggregates as we went through the period--developments in Treasury ba
lances, the introduction of this $2 bill, all these things were evaluated.  We were uncerta
in about the impact of a number 
of these factors midway through 
the period, and that was one factor causing us to be quite cautious in responding to the evidence in the aggregates.  As we went further along in the period, some of these doubts were resolved on the side 
of indicating that substantial growth was being 
sustained.  And we continued to react in a modestly but steadily 
firming direction.   
5/18/76 - 33 - 
   MR. COLDWELL.  As you look back
 over the period, with the large rise in April, what proportion of that would you assess would be a fundamental shif
t in demand for balances?  
MR. STERNLIGHT.  I don™t think that [I] could put [a figure on that]. MR. AXILROD.  I am going to be 
discussing that at some length. 
MR. COLDWELL.  I™ll withdraw the question and wait for your discussion.  CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, Mr. Axilrod is apparently a little bolder than Mr. Sternlight.   MR. AXILROD.  Sir, I™m not going to be putting a precise magnitude on that. MR. PARTEE.  Peter, in talking about the period, some of the language you used reminded 
me of the language we used to use about ﬁeven
-keelﬂ during the Treasury financing.  Would you 
regard yourself as being subject to even-keel considerations du
ring this unusually heavy period of long-term financing? 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Semi-even-keel. 

MR. PARTEE.  Semi-even-keel? 

MR. STERNLIGHT.  That does just about sum it up.  I would say that even without 
precise language in the directive alluding to even-keel, we feel th
at considerations relating to a major Treasury financing are part of that backgr
ound of domestic financial developments, so we 
do want to pay attention. MR. PARTEE.  I don™t have a figure in mind preci
sely, but given the projected size of the federal deficit, I would assume that there is 
going to be a continuing, very large volume of financing on a very frequent calendar. MR. STERNLIGHT.  I think that™s been true through this whole-- 
MR. PARTEE.  I just suggest to you that I think we need to be careful that we not constrain ourselves too much by consideration of those Treasury financings, or we may find 
ourselves quite unable to react to developments in
 the credit markets.  I hesitate, having been on 
the receiving end of these, to ask for a review of what our policy ought to be with regard to Treasury financing and even-keel, but I really think maybe there ought to 
be a new look at it, given the changes in practice and the frequency of financing.   CHAIRMAN BURNS.  We™ve done that.  We™ve had a new look for some time--in 
practice.   
MR. PARTEE.  In practice, but I mean-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Just not to leave the matter in doubt, we are paying much less 
attention to even-keel, and the Treasury understands this thoroughly and is not raising any questions or expressing any doubt.   5/18/76 - 34 - 
   MR. PARTEE.  The point is, gentlemen, I think 
we have paid more attention over the last 
several weeks.  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  No--from the vi
ewpoint of an ex-Treasury official, I 
think your comment is well-justif
ied--even going back a few years.  But I find Mr. Partee™s 
comments may be subject to a little different inte
rpretation, anyway as I read the record here.   We did discuss this a bit at the meeting last
 week.  And what was interesting about this past month, it seems to me, is, in part, that ac
tion was taken almost on the eve of a Treasury 
financing and very shortly thereafter.  I thi
nk the Committee did suggest
 that some account be 
taken of the Treasury financing itself, with the implication that one doesn™t act very vigorously right during the very days that this rather complex operation is 
going forward.  Unusual in that sense, but looked at in a broader prospective, it seems to me th
at this operation went on during the month with the minimal necessary considera
tion for the actual financing operation during the particular days when it took place.  
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  The term that I just 
coined, semi-even-keel
ing, doesn™t correspond precisely to the thought I had in mind.  I th
ink we™ve moved away from even-keeling by 
something more than 50 percent.  
MR. PARTEE.  I did not sit in on the calls any day of this last period.  My own feeling, looking back over the period, and given the strength of the monetary aggregates, is that we moved a little more slowly than I would have li
ked to have seen toward the 5-1/4 top on our range. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Might agree with that, but the difference here is so subtle.  The Desk got to the 5-1/4 figure--possibly I might have gotten there a 
couple days sooner, but it™s a difference, practically speaking, without much meaning.  Mr. Holmes, you have been engaged in 
this activity for a long time.  How would you desc
ribe the attitude of the Desk toward even-keeling in general and more specifically during the past month?   
MR. HOLMES.  I think that when you move th
e funds rate up a 1/2 percent during the period of a major Treasury financing, that so
rt of activity would have fit under nobody™s definition of even-keel, let™s say a couple of y
ears ago.  And while I think it is a real delicate operation, and we did have to keep an eye on the Treasury financing, we did try to get the [federal] funds rate up before the Treasury financing so the market could take that into [account].  
We continued to push it up as we got stronger and stronger confirmation of
 the strength of the aggregates.  So I think that moving the funds ra
nge during the period of Treasury financing was a pretty good accomplishment.   
MR. WALLICH.  How much did [you consider] 
the possibility that the aggregates might slow again during the period?   
MR. STERNLIGHT.  This was part of the reason for wanting to be quite cautious during the first half of the period. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  The New York [Reserve]B
ank had a lower estimate than our staff 
had.  They were revised.  5/18/76 - 35 - 
   MR. HOLMES.  Which was wrong. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, this time it 
was wrong, next time it will be right.   
MR. WALLICH.  You go by your
 estimates exclusively? 
MR. STERNLIGHT.  No.  We
 take both into account. MR. HOLMES.  We weight one by the other, Governor Wallich. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any other questions or comments? 
MR. BLACK.  I was on the call, Mr. Chairman. 
 I would like to commend the Desk on the 
way it handled itself.  I think they really did an admirable job during th
is period and would echo Alan™s observations that this wasn™t even-keel by any stretch of the imagination. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think that
™s valid.  I think Mr. Partee™s point--that in view of the magnitude of Treasury financing, we must rega
rd traditional even-keeli
ng as a thing of the 
past--this is something that now and then deserv
es repetition.  Let™s go on to Mr. Axilrod now.  And you are not going to forget Mr. Coldwell™s question.  MR. AXILROD.  [Secretary's note: This stat
ement was not found in Committee records.] 
MR. AXILROD.  I™m afraid, Govern
or Coldwell, that I can™t-- 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, no--I think you gave a very reasonable reply to Gov. 
Coldwell™s question.   MR. COLDWELL.  I have just one other que
stion, Mr. Chairman.  If you had looked 
across this valley from, I guess, late December 
through mid-May and had, first, washed out one 
change in the Treasury balance, then the othe
r change, do we then come out with something 
that™s reasonably balanced to the growth targets of the Committee? 
MR. AXILROD.  Is your question, if we had a total M1 plus U.S. government deposits? 
MR. COLDWELL.  Suppose you just washed out
 the government deposits as part of the 
package. 
MR. AXILROD.  The April rate of growth of 15-1/2 percent--my initial thought three or 
four weeks ago was that maybe 6 to
 8 percentage points of that can be attributed to government 
deposits.  If that were true, I believe that May would have had close to a zero growth rate.  So if it™s temporary it should come out [unintelligible].
  Because May seems to be growing at about 8 
percent--which I am beginning to 
believe is something like the unde
rlying  growth rate--I find it very difficult to argue that any of the increase in the April M1 had anything to do, except fortuitously, with government deposits.   
It puts me in a most uncomfortable position, b
ecause I then have to believe that people who received a transfer of funds 
out of government deposits in Apr
il realized at that point, but 
5/18/76 - 36 - 
   not sooner, that they had drawn down their cash more than they should have over the preceding several months and are [now] just 
holding onto it.  The analysis forces me into that direction, so I 
almost think that the rate of in
crease over the past four months 
in M1, which I think is on the order of something like 7 percent or more, is about the underlying rate of growth.  And movements in government deposits on average had very
 little effect on that.  It had an effect on month-to-month movements but not on average.   
MR. BAUGHMAN.  Can I follow on with a some
what related question?  Is there any 
indication that Internal Revenue ha
s been slower this year than in
 most recent years in processing 
returns and collecting checks?  
MR. AXILROD.  No, I have no reason to believe that.  The Treasury has not so indicated 
when we have talked to them. 
MR. BAUGHMAN.  I have had a few people indicate surprise to me that the checks 
mailed April 15 were not [debited in the period 
covered by] their April bank statement.  
MR. AXILROD.  I have not heard of any deliberate effort to be slow.  Whether 
inadvertently there is any slowing, the credit for that would be quite modest. 
MR. BAUGHMAN.  If they were slow, that 
would result in private balances being significantly larger than people had planned on them being. 
MR. AXILROD.  They were slow in sending to Treasury or slow in sending out? SPEAKER(?).  Slow in collecting taxes. 

MR. AXILROD.  Slow in collecting taxes--yes, 
that™s right.  But we
™ve come some way.  
We™re in about the middle of May, and we should 
have seen a sharper decline at some other 
point right now. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any other questions or comment? 
MR. MAYO.  On a perhaps minor point, Steve,
 we have noted the experience in our District, at least, of the $2 bill that we have 
put into circulation.  [The bills] are going into 
bedroom bureau drawers, etc.  The few mercha
nts that have accepted $2 [bills] from their banks 
have done so under pressure, and they come right 
[back] to those banks.  That™s been a typical experience, although we haven™t taken a full survey on it.  Currency has been expanding rapidly.  
I haven™t any numbers in mind, though, as to whethe
r the sort of thing I am describing has any monetary policy significance or whether it™s minimal. 
MR. AXILROD.  I don™t think the increase in the $2 bills could have affected the April 
rate of growth in the money supply; it was qui
te high, on the order of 16 or 17 percent at an annual rate.  And that annual rate of growth could affect the money supply on the order of  [unintelligible]--that part which is above norma
l that affected the money supply by maybe 1-1/2 
percentage points at an annual rate.  But I don™t think that the above-normal part can be 
attributed to the $2 bills in te
rms of money supply becau
se I assume that mo
st of the people who took the $2 bills are probably holding $2 less in 
demand deposits; maybe they are not, but $2 less 
5/18/76 - 37 - 
   of some other deposits--it doesn™t come, as it were, 
out of thin air.  So I don™t believe there has been a substantial or even a very significant M1 or M2 effect.  CHAIRMAN BURNS. How 
much did we issue? 
MR. COLDWELL.  About $200 million to $300 million. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  So that adds up to a major factor. 

MR. COLDWELL.  But you annualize it and it gets
 to be quite a bit of money going out over a short period of time.  I think Steve™s go
t a good point, that they had to pay for it some 
way.  If they pay for it by writing some checks for 
some $2 bills, that™s one thing, but if they paid 
for it by drawing down their savings account, that™s another.  But, I suspect from just the people 
I™ve heard talk about it, [they] got one and put it away.  How did they get it?  Well,
 they traded a $5 for two $2s and a $1. VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  If
 they needed the $5 bill to go to the grocery store, 
they™d replenish the $5.  It doesn™t come out of
 money in checking accounts if they are really hoarding it. MR. AXILROD.  That offsets about 5 percentage points on the currency growth rates, 1 percent on the money supply growth rate. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, it™s still a minor 
factor.  Any other question or comment?  
MR. MORRIS.  We have been exploring the st
range behavior in the demand for money in 
the past year and we have run into one phenomenon that I would just like to ask Steve about, whether it™s something that the System ought to e
xplore.  That is the big increase in net total funds purchased by the commercial banking system, which was running in the middle of 1970 at 
$4-1/2 billion; in the middle of
 1975 it is up to almost $18 billion.  [Would] an examination of 
this to see whether it would help explain the de
mand for money be worthwhile?  It™s a project 
that we could undertake, but I think you could do it more readily here. 
MR. AXILROD.  I don™t think that would help. 
 Even if it were relevant, that wouldn™t 
help explain the behavior between ™74 and ™75 and ™76.  But secondly, I personally don™t believe the behavior of the volumes in the federal funds
 market has very much to do with the money 
supply--the behavior in the sense that you are talking about.  I think the demand for money 
relates to other variables, and the behavior of the federal funds market is, as it were, a 
distribution mechanism for credit flows within 
the banking system.  They™re in two different 
worlds. MR. MORRIS.  But if you are a corporate treasurer and you are putting your money out 
for one day, would you consider this to be a part of your balance or not?  I™d be inclined to think that I would.  MR. AXILROD.  The RPs--I see what you mea
n.  The federal funds, the bulk of the federal funds transactions, yes, that is in that figure.  But not all are interbank. 5/18/76 - 38 - 
   MR. MORRIS.  I am talking about the net pur
chases of the commercial banking system. 
MR. AXILROD.  No. I think there, on the other point, if you want the analysis of corporate RPs as an alternative to holding dema
nd deposits for a short while--that™s the sort of thing [unintelligible]. SPEAKER(?).  I thought you were re
ferring to interbank transfers. MR. MORRIS.  No, I am talking about the purchase of funds from outside the banking 
system. 
MR. AXILROD.  We have been working and will
 continue to work on trying to refine the demand-for-money functions by not only the aggregat
e but by sector, and one of the things we consider in the corporate sector as an altern
ative to demand deposits is
 clearly the RPs--the overnight funds. MR. MORRIS.  And you should also look into the volume of funds purchased from thrift 
institutions, as a separate factor. MR. AXILROD.  Purchased from thrift institutions? 

MR. MORRRIS.  Right. 
MR. AXILROD.  By corporations? 

MR. MORRIS.  By commercial banks.  
That™s a part of this aggregate. MR. AXILROD.  Yes. 

MR. COLDWELL.  In fact, Frank, don™t you have a number of different nonbanking 
groups who are buying and selling federal funds? MR PARTEE. Selling. 
MR. MORRIS.  Predominantly the thrift
 institutions and the corporations. MR. COLDWELL.  I was thinking of some in
ternational banking groups, agencies, etc., that are also in this market. 
MR. AXILROD.  Most of those groups are not important holders of money supply.  Of the 
groups, only the corporations are important 
holders of money supply, so for only the 
corporations would it be extremel
y important that the availability of the federal funds type of investment would be an alternative to cash.  Th
e others are very trivial in our money supply 
figures. MR. MORRIS.  I think the fact that this series is growing--at the e
nd of ™74 it was almost $22 billion, the growth rate of this is not [out of proportion with the] growth rate of the money 
supply, and it may have some explanatory value. 
5/18/76 - 39 - 
   MR. AXILROD.  We will look into it. 
MR. MACLAURY.  In the same kind of contex
t, I think you have been looking at--but I don™t know the status--the extent to which corporations are holding their compensating balances 
in the form of nonnegotiable CDs to reduce the re
serve requirements for the commercial banks. 
MR. AXILROD.  I believe we are going to get a report on that in our next survey on noninterest-bearing time deposits.  We
 will [not] have back-data, but we will have some sense of 
how they trend. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any other questions? 
MR. BLACK.  Steve, we have touched on this several times in the past, but do you have 
any better idea now than we have had [as to why] the monetary base has been growing so fast 
relative to other reserve measures? 
MR. AXILROD.  I believe it is because currency-- 
MR. BLACK.  Let me rephrase--why has curr
ency been growing?  I know what you said, 
but why has that been happening?  
Do we have any better fix on that? MR. AXILROD.  I would have to check it against our normal relationships between 
currency and GNP, but currency is generally rather more sensitive to movements in GNP than 

demand deposits are.  We have a special factor 
in April that accounts for some of it--but the 
underlying strength in currency on the average of the last two or three months is indicative of the 
strength in retail sales and GNP. I can™t answer speci
fically whether it™s out of kilter.  I think it is 
well within the range of 
a reasonable estimate.  
MR. BLACK.  It™s been going on longer than two or three months, if I™m not mistaken. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any other questions?  If not, we are ready for our discussion of monetary policy, and I™d like to make, if I may, two or three in
troductory comments briefly.   I think it™s entirely clear that our monetary aggr
egates have been increasing of late at a rate 
that is simply unacceptable, and these increases ha
ve been widely advertised.  I think it™s highly 
important to recognize the fact that the moderate
 monetary policy that we™ve been pursing has 
made a certain contribution to the return of 
confidence across our economy.  And if confidence in the economy and in the Federal Reserve System is to be maintain
ed at its present high level, I think we must respond to the apparent explosi
on that is now taking place in the monetary 
aggregates.   At the same time, I think we should proceed ca
utiously because this spurt that has been 
experienced recently may be a temporary aberra
tion, and we should not 
overreact to what has 
taken place.  Some definite reacti
on I think is in order, but we mu
st not, in my judgment, run the 
risk of overreacting to the oversized 
increase in monetary aggregates.   
Now, we will be discussing the specifications fo
r the monetary aggregates and also for the 
federal funds rate, and let me indicate my ow
n thinking.  The members of the Committee may 
5/18/76 - 40 - 
   feel very differently than I do, but perhap
s by indicating my own thinking I™ll give you 
something either to assent to or 
to criticize, as you see fit.   
I think that the federal funds rate suggested 
by alternative B is acceptable, but I would raise 
the lower limit, and I think in view of what ha
s been happening, the federal funds rate should not go as low as 4-3/4 percent.  I would therefore suggest a range for the federal funds rate of 5 to 5-3/4 [percent].  Now that would permit a moderate increase, if 
necessary, in the federal funds rate.  It would indicate a reaction on the part of the System 
to what has been happening to the monetary aggregates.  I don™t think that, as of today, I would want to see the federal funds rate go above 5-3/4 in the month ahead.   
Now, as for the monetary aggregates--there I w
ould be inclined to be less liberal than any 
of the alternatives specified on page 6 of the Bluebook.  I would place the upper limit of M1 at 
7-1/2 percent.  I think that™s high enough.  And as for M2, perhaps reduce the upper limit to 9 
percent.  I think that™s high enough.  As for the lower limits of those ranges, well, I™d be flexible 
in my own thinking.  We could continue, perhap
s we should, with a 4-point range or possibly make it a little narrower if the Committee were so
 inclined.  I have no strong feelings on that, one way or the other.   Now that™s where I come out at
 the moment, and I™d like to 
listen to my colleagues.  I™ve 
given you figures to attack or to endorse as you see fit.  Who would like to speak first?  Mr. 
Mayo. MR. MAYO.  I find myself subscribing comp
letely to your reasoning and your figures on the federal funds constraint.  I think the 5 to 5-3/4 would be quite appropriate here, a central point of 5-3/8 which gives us another 1/
8 nudge if it should be deemed necessary.  
I am less sure however of your recommenda
tion, Mr. Chairman, on M1 and M2, feeling 
somehow [that] it wouldn™t be quite
 as consistent if we were to lower the ranges as much as you 
suggest and that it might hasten 
the arrival at the 5-3/4 percent [upper bound of the federal funds rate] range earlier than we ot
herwise would anticipate.  I would favor, therefore, maybe 
something like 5 to 9 and 6 to 10 on M1 and M2.  Of course, if we were to adopt your 
prescription we could still have an intermeeting 
telephone or wire session to perhaps change the 5-3/4.  But I feel the same way that you have indi
cated, that you don™t really see the need right in the month ahead to go above 5-3/4.  And I merely
 have that one reservation as to whether adopting too low a range on M1 and M2 might make 
the increase faster than we really want.  CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Let me comment on that.  
Your analysis, I think is entirely correct and that specifications I suggest might land us at the 5-3/4 figur
e sooner than would otherwise be the case.  But [in] looking ahead as best I can at the moment, I doubt I 
would want to see the federal funds rate go above 5-3/4.  An upward adju
stment between meetings might take place of 
course, but I would not want to contemplate that
 because the federal funds rate moved up some 
50 basis points within the past month.  A range of
 5 to 5-3/4, assuming that the 5-3/4 figure is 
reached, would mean another increase of 50 basis point
s, and to go faster than that at this stage 
strikes me as premature.  I t
hought more confirmation would be t
oo sudden a jolt.  Well, that™s my thinking. 5/18/76 - 41 - 
   MR. MAYO.  My reasoning is exactly like yours on the federal funds rate, but I think that if we lower the top of the M1 and the M2 range, we are putting the Manager, Mr. Chairman, in a 

position of getting to 5-3/4 too soon, and then what do you do next.  I don™t want to go above it either. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think our Manager, well,
 let the Manager speak for himself.  My 
guess would be that he would stretch things out and not get there too soon. MR. MAYO.  But again, my point is, Mr. Chairman, are we being unduly constraining? 
The Manager can [encounter] this by having M1 and M2 ranges that have too low an upper limit. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, Mr. 
Holmes, do you have a comment? 
MR. HOLMES.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I thi
nk it all depends on whether the current forecasts of the growth rate of money over the next
 two months are anywhere near right.  If they 
are, we would be unable to reach the upper end of this [federal funds rate range] even with a 7-1/2 percent [upper bound to the M1] range.  But given the normal margin of 
error, if we are too conservative in our estimates, yes, we could 
hit that upper end, and obviously you hit 7-1/2 before you hit 8-1/2. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, Mr. Volcker, I think you wanted to speak. VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, I don™t know that I have very much to add at this 
point.  My reasoning on the federal funds rate is very similar to what has been expressed by Mr. 
Mayo and yourself.  I could visualize going above 5-3/4 percent, but I wouldn™t want to do it without another crack at it in some kind of a meeting, so I™m 
happy with that upper limit and the 
general specification.   I share, for some of the same reasons a
nd maybe some additional reasons, Bob Mayo™s 
feeling that you™ve set the ranges [for the moneta
ry aggregates] a little on the low side.  The additional reason would be we™ve recently set long-term targets, and I don™t see any reason to 
deviate from them very far.  I would kind of stra
ddle that basic target that we have on M1, and we probably have to adjust M2 a little lower relative to M1 for technical reasons.  So I came out 
about 6 to 10 in my own mind for-- 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You came out where? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
  Six to 10 for the M2 number and the same as we had last 
month, 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 for M1, or 4 to 8, which straddles pretty much the long-term target. In 
either event, I would think that we are talki
ng about moving the federal funds rate by at least 
one-eighth now, and maybe one-fourth, certainl
y contemplating it may go to 5-3/4, but I don™t 
want to make any judgment about going beyond that. 
 So the crucial thing, I guess, is that upper limit on the federal funds rate, so we can pause a
nd take another look before we exceed that.   
But I would expect some tightening here.  It seems to me appropriate for the reasons you 
mentioned [regarding] the general economic clim
ate, including the fact that some people are 
going to be concerned when the exceptionally good 
price moves that we had in the first quarter 
are dissipated, as I think is inevitable in the short run at least. 
5/18/76 - 42 - 
   CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Volcker.  Mr. Jackson, please. MR. JACKSON.  I would generally share the approach that other people have expressed, Mr. Chairman.  But I would be inclined to think th
at perhaps a more stable approach towards that 
solution would be to use a federal funds range of 5 to 6, which would indicate a gradual movement towards 5-1/2 over the immediate prosp
ect, but then widen the range of M1 and M2 to, say, 4 to 8 or 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 for M1, somewhere in that range, and a 6 to 10 for M2, which 
would mean that you™d need st
rong validation of the continued growth [of M1] before you™d go above the midpoint of the 5 to 6 range.  It is the 
same approach, just a diffe
rent way to get there. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Jackson.  Mr. Kimbrel, please. 
MR. KIMBREL.  Well, I come out pretty 
close to Governor Jackson, but maybe for 
slightly different reasons.  I™ve felt that since the first of the year it looks to me that M1 and M2 
have exceeded the upper bounds of our long-run target
s, and I think it is not an exaggeration to 
suggest that the banks and thrift institutions in much of our area are almost awash with liquidity.  
South Florida for instance--the banks and savings and loan associations have reduced the rate on their certificates, and actually the thrift institutions are turning away funds in excess of $10,000 for any account already existing or any new account.  So
 what we see at least in that area is that 
capacity is available to finance expansion.   So, for logic alone, it seems that we at leas
t ought to limit our short-term maximum to the 
top of the long-term maximum that you have sugge
sted.  So I guess I would want to reduce even more than 7-1/2, to the 7 number relating to logi
c.  I guess the M2 does not make a great deal of 
difference.  But then for the exact same reasons 
Governor Jackson suggested, I™d like to see the 5 to 6 percent range [for the federal funds rate], with the idea that we™re going to center that maybe 
slightly above the current rate.  I guess this is not the point, but I would also like to inject that I 
hope we would be prepared to move promptly even
 with the discount rate if the [federal] funds [rate] moves above the current level. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you.  Mr. Coldwell now, please. MR. COLDWELL.  Mr. Chairman, I think our 
economic recovery is proceeding generally 
satisfactorily except for the cont
inuing high unemployment and the 
threatened price advance.  
And our policy move this past intermeeting peri
od to counter a rising aggregate trend seemed 
appropriate to me.   
I am concerned about overreacting to what I sa
w as some extraneous [factors  temporarily 
increasing] the growth rates of the aggregates, and if the aggregates are now going to subside to 
their fundamentals, and we don™t get some more 
of these extraneous things on the downside, why then I™m perfectly willing to 
continue resisting the higher rates of growth.  On the other 
side, though, we have moved the rate 50 basis points in an intermeeting period, and I™m hesitant 
to continue that pace of movement, which I pr
esume was in some of your comment also.   
I would prefer that we be a little more constr
ictive in this sense and aim at a federal funds 
rate lower limit in the range of 4-3/4 to 5, and I 
don™t care whether you put it at 4-3/4 or 5.  I™d rather not go down into the 4 range, having reached the 5 level, but I™m somewhat nervous about 
going up to the 5-3/4 range.  I really would not like to see another 50 point rise in the 5/18/76 - 43 - 
   intermeeting period.  This could build expectations
 to a point where the market could take it 
away from us and move much furt
her than perhaps we intend.   So I really prefer that we put a ceiling on 
[the federal funds rate] at 5-1/2 with the 
expectation that these aggregat
e numbers come out somewhere in
 this general ballpark we are 
talking about.  I don™t hear much around the 
table except that your 7-1/2 deviates from somebody™s, someone else wants 10, that™s a fa
irly wide number--you move more rapidly if you 
get a much lower figure, but somewhere in this 6 
to 10 range doesn™t bother me.  I don™t pay that 
much attention to that wider range, and if we continue to have a fairly broad zone of indifference, then it doesn™t matter that much. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Now wait. It does matter because it can cumulate, you see. 

MR. COLDWELL.  It can cumulate if the extran
eous factors were as insignificant as Steve seems to be portraying them--then perhaps the fundame
ntal is a 7 to 8 figure.  If they™re a little more important, as I thought they were, then perh
aps we get away from some of that.  We might 
even get some downward pressure
 on this.  And if that were to develop, and we drop below a 6 or 7 percent range, then we would be forced into a question of whether we move the funds rate 
down again.  I would really rather keep this m
oving in a very slow fashion.  If we see the fundamentals continuing on in a 7 to 8 percent 
[range], then I™d like to move up another one-
fourth, but I would hate to move up to a full 1/
2 percentage range again in this intermeeting 
period.  CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Coldwell.  Mr. MacLaury now, please. MR. MACLAURY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
As you know, the view from the North 
Country for some months has been that the eco
nomy is stronger than
 the staff had been forecasting, and I think we are still in that exte
nded position of believing that the staff is 
underestimating the strength of the 
recovery over the next four quarters.  I can™t see any risk of aborting recovery or substantially damaging c
onfidence by continuing gradually to show some 
resistance to the kind of monetary aggregates [growth] we have b
een getting in the last couple of months. Indeed, on the contrary, as I think you said, Mr. Chairman, the country has looked to us 
for a resistance to the resurgence of inflation, and I think we ought to continue.  We may indeed 
inspire sustained confidence by continuing to act as we have, and by that I mean resisting 
monetary aggregate growth that seems on the high side.   
I™ve been impressed in the Bluebook this time 
by two points in particular.  On page 8, it points out the path for the year ahead, given what looks like, at the bottom of that page, a 9-1/2 
to 10 percent rate of growth for M1 in the second quarter.  It points out that, for the following 
three quarters, one has to look at a 4-1/4 percent rate of growth if the midpoint is to be hit for a 
year as a whole. I thi
nk that™s significant.   And similarly, on appendix table 4, toward th
e back--it™s not a 
numbered page--it is 
likewise important.  [It is] projections and therefore has to be given a degree of uncertainty, but it points out that for the various alternatives, alternative C at the mome
nt, with a funds rate path for the second quarter of 5-3/8, leads to a lower funds rate range throughout the year than either of the other alternatives.  And that impresses me, 
and I happen to believe that it™s correct.   5/18/76 - 44 - 
   And it™s for that reason that I 
am inclined to buy--not alternative C in its pure form, 
because I think that going above 6 would be undesirab
le in the funds rate at this point in time.  
But since I endemically would pr
efer narrower monetary aggregate ranges and wider funds rate ranges--not that I deviate very far from what™s been said--but for an M1, I would like to see a 5 to 8 percent kind of a range, 3 percentage points rather than the 4, and similarly for M2, maybe 6 
to 9.  And for the funds rate range, it seems to 
me 5 to 6 percent, where Governor Jackson came 
out, is the place I, too, would like to [come out]. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you Mr. MacLaury.  Mr. Balles now, please. MR. BALLES.  Mr. Chairman, I™d like to set 
my remarks, if I may, in the context of a 
memo I took the liberty of sending to this group 
on May 12.  It took up the subject we discussed at length in the March meeting of this Comm
ittee, which had to do with really fixing our position, trying to get away from what we all r
ecognized are a lot of random fluctuations and statistical noise in any given week™s or any given month™s moneta
ry data.  The purpose of this exercise was to determine what I call the ba
sic trend in the moneta
ry aggregates, taking advantage of the well-known device of smoothi
ng the series through a moving average.  We 
happen to use in this case a 13-week moving average.   I appended several tables to that memora
ndum displaying graphically where the moving 
average stands in conjunction with our most 
recently determined range of growth of the 
aggregates for both M1 and M2.  I have also incorporated into that what I thought was a very useful suggestion from Steve Axilrod that we 
extend the latest actual weekly data, which the Board forecasts by week, for five weeks ahead to 
see what that in turn would do to the moving 
average.  And based on that exercise it™s clear to me, just from 
looking at the figures specifically on column 4 on each of these two tables, M1 and M
2, that we have been moving consistently in 
a bigger amount above the upper limit of our 12-month ranges, week by week, since early March.  The gap has been getting bigger and bigger, creeping up rather slowly.  I™ve been impressed recently by some articl
es in the press--one was by Joe Slevin, I believe, another was by Henry Kaufman--that so
rt of took the market to task for acting 
irrationally in response to week-to-week fluctuat
ions in the monetary aggregates, overreacting, 
as it were.  I was impressed when I saw the recently released report of the Bach Committee 

[unintelligible] by the Board of Governors.  One of their recommendations
 was that the System 
do something to sort of alert the market to th
e existence of random or nonpermanent deviations 
week by week or month by month in the trend of the monetary aggregates.  
I think one device by which we could do that is this smoothing device of the moving 
averages.  In trying to put to work my own personal view of what the basic trend is in the level of the monetary aggregates, and feeling that we need
 some device for linking the short-term targets 
to the long-term targets, I come out for this 
particular period [with recommendations] somewhat 
similar to [those] that you make.   
A federal funds range of 5 to 6 actually is what I had in mind.  I would not only support  
your upper limit of  7-1/2 [for M1]--if anything 
I would shade that a bit since our long-term 
range is 7 percent.  Unless we do something now to hold that upper limit down in the 

intermeeting period below the longer-term range of
 7 percent, we may continue to move even 
5/18/76 - 45 - 
   farther away from the range we have set for our
selves.  If I had my druthers I™d put the upper 
limit of M1 at 7 percent just so we wouldn™t 
drift further away from the upper limit of our 
longer-term range.  And if we were 
to make any effort to get back 
at least within the range within say a two-month period, the lower limit would have to be 2-1/2 percent, 2-1/2 to 7 would be how 
I would come out on the M1 range if we were to try to put this new analytic device to work.   On M2, [I support] an upper limit of 9, simply
 because that™s the uppe
r end of the longer-
term range, and a lower limit of 5 because a 5 per
cent rate is what would return it to the upper 
limit of the longer-term range w
ithin the month of June.   
This would all, of course, have to be subject to a federal funds constraint, and even though I would recommend a federal funds range of 5 to 
6, I would agree with you that we shouldn™t go beyond another 50 basis points or to a level of 5-3/4 before the next meeting.   
I believe that you have correctly stated the case, we should move with all deliberate caution in this upward adjustment 
of short-term interest rates. 
 But unless we begin to do it now, we™ll be faced with what Mr. MacLaury said, that [with] a squeeze later on in the second half of 
the year, we™ll have to really bear down on the growth of the aggregates.  I™d rather do it a little 
bit sooner and in less drastic move
s than if we were to delay action now and be forced to take more vigorous action at a later date. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, thank you, Mr. Balles, for very instructive comments.  Mr. 
Gardner now, please. MR. GARDNER.  Mr. Chairman, when we we
re discussing business confidence and expectations, I didn™t hear any mention of the 
experiences we™ve just been through in this economy, which seem to me to add a dimension to 
our deliberations on what we set as our goals or our short-term targets for a funds
 rate or monetary aggregates.   
It seems to me that we are aided a little bit 
because of the experience of our private sector in the last couple of years, and I do not believe we have to get 
people™s attention by beating them 
over the head with some heavy object any longer.  
I think the whole country is sensitized to the problems we faced, and the ample evidence of the 
recurrence of inflation is a grave concern.  I 
would therefore feel that our act
ions should be taken [in the context of] that particular new development.  I think recent history, Ly
le, does make some immediate difference on 
expectations, the capital spending plans, and what have you.   I would be perfectly satisfied to see the federal funds rate in the range of 5 to 5-3/4.  What I am trying to say simply is that our signals need 
not be as dramatic as maybe they [once] needed 
to be.  I think that™s evident 
from our experience in the last 
month, and so I would agree with much of what Mr. Balles has said, except that I™m cutting a quarter off of his federal funds rate, but I would be happy with a 4 to 7-1/2 [range] on M1 and 5 to 9 on M2. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Gardner.  Mr. Winn, please. 
MR. WINN.  Mr. Chairman, Bru
ce really made my speech and so I won™t really elaborate 
on that except to indicate that I think we really need to think of the longer scenario in terms of 
what we do today rather than in just the short run.  If we take the lower M1 and M2 targets as 
5/18/76 - 46 - 
   suggested, it seems to me we are in trouble alr
eady with what we have built into May in this 
period.  We would have to be at the top of th
e range already to achieve our objectives, so it seems to me that [we] are inconsistent in
 the way we™re trying to formulate them.   
I would prefer the 5 to 6 range, thinking that the market™s ab
sorption of the 50 [basis] point increases has been really quite outstanding.  I would hate to see us get above the 5-3/4, but I™d rather be on record as being in favor of 5 to 
6 to face the issues should they develop in this 
direction.  And I think we have got to give a li
ttle wider spread to M1 and M2 than I™d like purely because of what we™ve built in already in the May figures.  And certainly in terms of 
estimates, we are already at the top of the range. 
 So I think you would have to have a 5 to 9 M1 range to give any kind of maneuverability. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Winn.  Mr. Partee, please. 
MR. PARTEE.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I just have
 a couple of comments.  I do believe that 
the business situation is strong, perhaps stronger than the staff projections for the immediate future, in any event.  And with the kind of an increase we™ve had in employment in the last 
month, and the recent performance of the production 
index, and the possibility that something is 
going on in the business investment area and the inve
ntory area, why, I have to agree with what I think is the general view of the Committee that it™s too dangerous to just let strong monetary growth run unrestrained even though, in fact, it may well turn out to be an aberration.   
We don™t know, but the fact is that it™s a dangerous thing to not recognize it, given what we see in the economy generally speaking.  So I 
guess that puts me in the camp of saying that 
probably we have to move against this and we have
 to tighten a little further.  Actually, I think 
we™ve already made the really significant tighten
ing move.  That is, in the past month, that 
switch into a rising funds rate is having a marked effect on market 
interest rates, as we thought it 
would, given the sensitivity of the market.  So this is just a 
question of how much continuation 
we are prepared to see here
 in the period to come.   
Well, I think that what we take in the way of
 a constraint on the funds [rate] and what we take in the way of a range in the aggregates is very much interre
lated.  That is, you can have your choice.  As Bob Mayo pointed out this morning, 
you can have a constrained funds rate but also constrain your aggregates, and then, chances are, you are going to move right up to the top of 
whatever funds rate range you™ve specified.  Or you can have a somewhat broader monetary 
aggregate range around the most probable point estimat
e and have a little larger funds rate range and maybe not use the top of it.   
I have some inclination for going in the sec
ond direction rather than the first because I 
think I agree with what Willis just said, that gi
ven the April profile as 
it leads into May, it looks 
like we are going to have a fairly substantial May, and I wouldn™t like to see us immediately 
giving the Manager a signal that indicates he ought to be at the top of the range.   Well, I think my preferences for the specifi
cations were exactly the ones that Phillip 
Jackson gave, that is, an M1 growth range for the two months of 4-1/2 to
 8-1/2--it would be a surprise if we got 8-1/2, but the staff estimate is
 7-1/4, and so it™s not that much above it.  Look how much we™ve been surprised 
in the past month as we ran from 8 to 15 or something like 
5/18/76 - 47 - 
   that--5 to 15.  And for M2, I think 6 to 10 is certainly better, even if we take your specifications, Mr. Chairman; 6 to 10 is better than 5 to 9.  I do
n™t see that there would be that much impact yet 
on M2, although I certainly agree there™s a sensitivity to interest rates in that, and that at some 
point we™ll start to see 
these deposits run out.   And the funds rate, I think 5 to 6 is perfectly good as a range, recognizing that we wouldn™t get to 6 unless we had a high monetary aggregates
 [reading], that is, 8-1/2 for the two-month M1 and something like 10 for M2.   
And no one else has commented on this and so 
I would throw in also that I believe we ought to continue to give something like a 50-50 wei
ght to our reading of M1 and M2 as we have done in the recent months, certainly because of the 
performance of M2, [but also because it is] a 
proxy for M3, and M3 is very important to us 
in this period.  That™s all, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Partee.  Who would like to speak next?  Yes, Mr. 
Wallich. 
MR. WALLICH.  I™d like to be guided by some 
of the same considerations that others 
have mentioned, and broadly I follow what Mr. M
acLaury has said.  I am concerned that we have increased the annual rate of growth of our money in the past by about 1 percentage point for the last recent period.  We™ve used up something lik
e 1 percentage point of our range for the year ahead.  The thing that gives me some pause is not 
the move in the funds rate and associated other 
short-term rates, but the move in long-term rates.  
That, I think, is a pretty 
critical event.  One did not have to expect that this would necessarily happen [as a result of] short-term rates moving.  It 
shows the sensitivity of the market, and that is a crucial element.   
I would not like to see long-term 
rates move up very fast at this
 juncture.  Even so, I think one has to bear in mind that the im
pact of all this is likely to be 
quite late--late this year, early 
next year--so that if, by that time, a strong 
investment boom is under way, it would not be 
inappropriate to have moved relatively early with in
terest rates, even long-term rates.  As I look 
at the short-term rates to which we™re likely to be
 pushed if we stick to our long-term targets and 
don™t move relatively fast now, I am concerned because
 that gets into 9 percent federal funds rate 
territory, and, again, that I think is something we 
ought to try to avoid.   All told, therefore, I come out 
with a funds rate more on the high side, 5 to 6; an M1 which is the same as our long-term range if we are to
 get back to that 4-1/2 to 7; and M2, 5 to 9. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Wallich.
  Who would like to speak now?  Mr. 
Black and then Mr. Baughman. 
MR. BLACK.  Mr. Chairman, I have sometime
s shared the doubts that Governor Coldwell expressed about the [estimates for the] aggreg
ates, but I must admit, those doubts are becoming 
weaker as time passes, and I™m now prepared to 
believe that there is a substantial amount of the bulge that is real demand for money.  Accordingl
y I think we ought to move against it in more or 
less the manner you described.  I would agree with
 your specified range of 5 to 5-3/4 on the federal funds rate, and the ranges you suggested for the aggregates strike me as reasonable, 
although I could shift a little either way depending upon what the group wants to do.  
5/18/76 - 48 - 
   CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Black.  Mr. Baughman now. MR. BAUGHMAN.  Mr. Chairman, I™m impre
ssed with what John Balles announced as the situation and his suggestion about the need for paying respect to the long-term ranges that we 
project.  At the same time, I would have to adm
it to being a little bit weak-kneed at the present 
time with respect to moving as a
ggressively as his prescription comes out from that particular 
analysis.  So if I were a voting member I™d
 be prepared to go with your suggestion, Mr. Chairman, on the federal funds rate and also 
with your suggestions on the aggregates.  This means that we would probably be at the top 
of the federal funds rate fairly soon.   Alternatively, if we want to ma
intain the significant element of flexibility
 in the funds rate, then--and I guess I™m winding up pretty
 nearly in the same corner 
that I believe Governor Partee was--[I would support] a somewhat 
higher and little bit wider range on the federal funds rate; so [then] you will be working pretty much around th
e middle of that range but expecting to be 
associated with that somewhat higher rate of 
growth in the aggregates than proposed.  So it seems to me it™s kind of a 50-50 proposition and--
notwithstanding my general orientation toward 
narrower ranges on the aggregates and wider ranges on the federal funds rate--at this point in time my inclination would be to 
go in the other direction, which leaves me very close to your suggestion at the outset, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Baughman.  Yes, Mr. Roos, please. MR. ROOS.  Mr. Chairman, briefly I think that if
 we have to take a step, then no time is better than the present, and I would shudder to think if the appendix table 4 projections are valid.  If we procrastinate and have to, in the fourth quarter of this year and the first quarter of next year, face up to the sort of projection which 
is shown under alternative A and under alternative B, table 4, I think that could have disastrous effects--it would be a clamping down that would be 
really very painful to the economy.  So I woul
d agree with Mr. Balles.  If I were a voting member, I would be a 4 to 7 man on M1, 5 to 9 on M2, and 5 to 6 on the federal funds range. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Roos.  Anyone else? Mr. Guffey. 
MR. GUFFEY.  I™d like to go on record aligning myself with Mr. MacLaury.  I think he stated our feelings very, very well and I wish I had said it. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Very well, thank you, Mr. Guffey. Who would like to speak now?  
No one else.  Well, I think the 
general direction of the Committe
e™s thinking is quite clear and uniform.  On specific numbers there is some di
spersion, more dispersion than we™ve had in the 
past meeting or two, but that 
is thoroughly understandable.   Now, let me test the Committee™s 
thinking.  The range is fairly large in the case of M2, but a figure of 4 to 7-1/2 may be somewhere close to
 the average.  Running from 4 percent to 7-1/2 
percent for M1 may be close to being the mean 
of Committee thinking.  Let me therefore put the 
question to the Committee, and ask for a show
 of hands on the part of members of the 
Committee, whether a range of 4 to 7-1/2, while 
not preferred necessaril
y, would seem broadly 
acceptable. 
5/18/76 - 49 - 
   MR. WINN.  May I ask a question on that.  What
 would that mean to the Desk in view of 
what we know about the aggregates already?   MR. HOLMES.  Well, it would mean that if we
™re getting up to the 7-1/2, we would be moving the funds rate up relatively rapidly.  Our own estimate of M1 over the two months is 
something like 6-3/4, so there™s some leeway if
 it™s anywhere near right.  It may not be.  
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Th
e Board™s estimate is 7-1/2. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I would say this.  Now, I think Mr. Holmes has given the 
correct answer as far as normal Desk operations
 are concerned.  But I would still space out the adjustment of the federal funds rate.  Rath
er than move up promptly, I would move it up 
gradually over the month, and that is 
something for the Committee to decide. 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  May I raise a question or comment along that line, Mr. 
Chairman--7-1/2 does seem to me unduly constrai
ning, but I would not worry.  I say that partly because I still feel quite uncertain about wher
e these numbers are going to go, and we™re very 
much influenced by this big April figure.  If you look back, we were right on target with the December longer-term projections we had beca
use we were running low.  So it depends 
somewhat upon the perspective [from 
which] one looks at these.   The 7-1/2 percent seems all ri
ght to me if, indeed, we™re
 not going to go above 5-3/4 percent in the federal funds rate.  I have a little trouble expressing a preference on it without knowing what the upper limit of the 
funds rate is because I think 
that, with a 6 percent federal 
funds rate, this would very likely carry us to 6, and I don™t really want to go there soon.   MR. PARTEE.  I would associate myself with th
at. I mean, I can either buy that with the 
low funds rate or higher [unintelligible] with the higher funds rate. VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Right, right. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, let™s proceed then, 
tentatively.  That is, we can retrace our 
steps, but let me continue the way I™m going. 
 These are tentative indications of Committee 
thinking, and we™re certainly not voting formally.  I therefor
e ask for a show of hands on 4 to 
7-1/2 percent [for M1]--whether that is ge
nerally acceptable even though not preferred. 
MR. BROIDA.  Five, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Then I would make that 
a pleasant six, it just tips the balance.  Now and then, the Chairman--even though we are not
 voting--can make his influence felt.  Now 
let me test the Committee™s thinking on M2.  Ther
e the range [of opinion] is narrower, and let me 
test the range of 5 to 9--5 percent to 9 percent for M2, and let™s have a show of hands. 
MR. BROIDA.  Five. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, we come out the 
same way.  Now let me test the federal 
funds range of 5 to 5-3/4, taken on the assump
tion that the M1 range will be 4 to 7-1/2. 5/18/76 - 50 - 
   MR. BROIDA.  Seven, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, we™ve had some 
test of Committee thinking.  Would you 
like me to continue to test th
e Committee™s thinking further?  
MR. PARTEE.  Let™s try it the other way. 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  With
 slightly higher aggregates. MR. PARTEE.  And slightly higher funds rate. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, then, you see, the high monetary aggregates are in the 
minority of the Committee, but let™s take 4 to 8 
for M1 and for M2--well, perhaps 5-1/2 to 9-1/2 
and the funds rate of 5 to 6.  How many woul
d feel more or less co
mfortable with that specification as over against, I will have to repeat this--this is getting quite complex--an M1 
range from 4 to 7-1/2, an M2 range from 5 to 
9, and a federal funds rate from 5 to 5-3/4.   
All right, I™ve got the numbers down, and now we have to get them in our minds.  I™m 
going to distinguish between package A and package B.   Package A is as follows:  M1 at 4 to 7-1/2, M2 at 5 to 9, and federal funds 5 to 5-3/4. Package B is as follows:  M1 at 4 to 8, M2 at 5-1/2 to 9-1/2, and federal funds 5 to 6.   Are the specifications of packages A and B clear, or should I repeat them?  I take it they 
are clear, and we will now have a show of hands 
on which we prefer, package A or package B.  
Those who prefer package A will kindly raise their hands. 
MR. BROIDA.  President Volcker?   

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I guess so, I prefer.... MR. BROIDA.  Six, Mr. Chairman. 

MR. PARTEE.  I think you forgot one. 
MR. BROIDA.  Oh, did you have your hand up? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Yeah, I had my hand up, but only because I think the 
funds rate is more important than the aggregates. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Gentlemen, I don™
t know whether--you know the difference between A and B is not very large, and I would join those who prefer A.  We™re ready for a vote unless members of the Committee want fu
rther testing or further discussion. VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, let me just try tentatively--maybe there™s no 
sentiment for it--I™d prefer the 
aggregates more like you have them in B and the funds rate the 
way you have it in A. 5/18/76 - 51 - 
   SPEAKER(?).  So do I, and I™m not voting. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, all right, do you want to give me your numbers? 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
  Well, I™ll say-- 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  This is now package C. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
  Right--4 to 8 for M1, 6 to 10 for M2 [or] 5-1/2 to 9-1/2, I™m not going to fight about that 
difference, and 5 to 5-3/4 for the funds rate.  So make M2 
whichever way you want it.  CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, this is going to be good and complex and I™m not going to make it simple for you.  You™ve got to blame Mr. 
Volcker, you can™t blame me.  I™m a servant of 
the Committee, the servant of every member of 
the Committee, and now Mr. Volcker™s servant, 
and the complexity falls on his shoulders.  We™re
 going to indicate a preference as among A, B, and C.  Is that the way you want to do it? VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, I don™t know. That™s the simplest way, I think-- 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, you got us into this. 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Right. CHAIRMAN BURNS.  A is-- 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Depends on how you want to run your program. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right.  

Package A:  M1 at 4 to 7-1/2, M2 at 5 to 9, funds rate at 5 to 5-3/4.   Package B:  M1 at 4 to 8, M2 at 5-1/2 to 9-1/2, and funds rate at 5 to 6.   Package C:  M1 at 4 to 8, M2 at 5-1/2 to 9-1/2, and funds rate at 5 to 5-3/4.   Now, those members of the Committee who, on ba
lance, prefer package A will raise their 
hands. MR. BROIDA.  Four.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Okay, now those memb
ers of the Committee who prefer package 
B will raise their hands. 
MR. BROIDA.  Three.    
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Members of the Comm
ittee who prefer Package C will now raise 
their hands.  5/18/76 - 52 - 
   MR. BROIDA.  Three. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, since package A would also have my dedication, I think 
we™ll have a formal vote on package C, and the differences here-- 
ALL.  A, package A.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That™s that.  Well, the hour is advancing, and we have to vote also, of course, on the language of the directive.  I would suggest that we stay particularly at this time 
with the monetary aggregates proposal.   
MR. KIMBREL.  Mr. Chairman, in that contex
t, then, since we a
pparently really are [unintelligible], I wonder in the wording if we could add just one word in the fourth line, ﬁmoney 
market conditions consistent with more m
oderate growth in monetary aggregates.ﬂ CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, let™s have a show of hands on that.  The language as it stands as over against Mr. Kimbrel™s suggestion 
to read ﬁwith more moderate growth.ﬂ  How 
many prefer the language 
as it now stands?   
MR. BROIDA.  Six as it now stands. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, all right, we
™ll vote now on the monetary aggregates 
proposal, the language as in your work sheets--with a range for M1 of
 4 to 7-1/2 percent, M2 of 5 to 9 percent, and a funds range of 5 to 5-3/4 percent--and with 
M1 and M2 receiving approximately equal weight at the Desk.  And w
ith the understanding also that if these numerical 
guides should suggest a prompt move in the funds 
rate to the upper limit, that the Desk would 
not proceed in that way--that if an upward move was indicate
d, it would be spaced out over the month in gradual fashion.   MR. PARTEE.  Over the month? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, would be spaced out in gradual fashion, which could mean 
over the month, which could mean over three weeks.  I think we have to leave some flexibility 

for the Desk. MR. PARTEE.  Yeah. VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  He would understand that the presumption would be our 
current projections; it would be a small move right now. 
MR. PARTEE.  The center is 5-3/8. 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  A very small move.  
I think you™re just about where you are. MR. BROIDA.  A five-week interval. 
5/18/76 - 53 - 
   CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, there are no further comments, we™ve exhausted our 
arithmetical propensities, I be
lieve, and we are ready for a vote.  Would you be good enough to 
call the roll? 
MR. BROIDA. 
Chairman Burns Yes 

Vice Chairman Volker  Yes 

Mr. Balles  Yes 

Mr. Black  Yes 

Mr. Coldwell  No 

Mr. Gardner  Yes 

Mr. Jackson  Yes 

Mr. Kimbrel  Yes 

Mr. Partee  Yes 

Mr. Wallich  Yes 

Mr. Winn  Yes 
Ten to one, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Now, what else do we have to do? 
MR. BROIDA.  Special item that can be carried over. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, we™ll carry it over then. 

MR. MACLAURY.  This is not something we ha
ve to do, but it™s just a suggestion I™d like to make.  In the Bluebook, I find the charts on the 
monetary aggregates particularly un-useful.  
They tell us nothing, at least in my view, and 
I would like to suggest that the staff consider alternative charts taking into account those that John Balles has prepared as perhaps more meaningful to the group.  It™s ju
st a suggestion, and I™d like to hear some comment about what 
might be more useful to the group over time-- 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I think members of
 the Committee who have definite views 
on the graphic presentation should communicate those views to the staff, and the staff should take the thinking of the members of the Committ
ee into account.  Well, I think we™ve completed 
our meeting. 
END OF MEETING    