Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 29, 1988A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systemin Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, March 29, 1988 at 9:00 a.m.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBlackForrestalHellerHoskinsJohnsonKelleyParrySegerMessrs. Guffey, Keehn, Melzer, and Morris, Alternate Membersof the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Kohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryPatrikis, Deputy General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. Broaddus, J. Davis, R. Davis, Lindsey, Siegman,and Slifman, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountPRESENT:3/29/88Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Whitesell, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs,Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Lang, Rosenblum, and Scheld,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofSt. Louis, Kansas City, Philadelphia, Dallas, andChicago, respectivelyMessrs. Fieleke and Judd, Vice President, Federal ReserveBanks of Boston and San FranciscoMs. Rosenbaum and Mr. Weber, Research Officers, FederalReserve Banks of Atlanta and MinneapolisMs. Meulenydke, Manager, Federal Reserve Bank of New York-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMarch 29, 1988CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that Governor Johnson is thetitular, de facto, temporary chairman.MR. JOHNSON. I'd like to nominate Chairman Greenspan, ofcourse, as Chairman of the FOMC to kick this meeting off. So, I moveChairman Greenspan as Chairman of the FOMC.MS. SEGER. I second that.MR. JOHNSON. It looks like it's all done, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Doesn't strike me as a democraticelection! Would somebody like to move the Vice Chairman?MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I also move President Corrigan as ViceChairman of the FOMC.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No objection. I don't know when thatgame is in June.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's right. The Chairman istalking about a major international event we have coming up in June.We have a challenge of a softball game between the Bank of Japan andthe Federal Reserve Bank of New York.SPEAKER(?). We better beat them.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Much is at stake.SPEAKER(?). You're going to have a hard time.MR. ANGELL. You are not authorized to play for the System;it's just restricted to New York?SPEAKER(?). That's right.SPEAKER(?). Are there implications for the exchange markets?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You can wait for the outcome to see.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Will Mr. Bernard read the staff officernominees?MR. BERNARD.Secretary and Economist, Donald L. KohnAssistant Secretary, Normand BernardDeputy Assistant Secretary, Rosemary LoneyGeneral Counsel, Michael BradfieldDeputy General Counsel, Ernest PatrikisEconomist, Michael J. PrellEconomist, Edwin M. Truman3/29/88Associate Economists from the Board:David Lindsey;Charles Seigman;Thomas Simpson; andLawrence Slifman.Associate Economists from the Federal Reserve Banks:J. Alfred Broaddus, proposed by President Black;Jack Beebe, proposed by President Parry;John Davis, proposed by President Hoskins;Richard Davis, proposed by President Corrigan; andSheila Tschinkel, proposed by President Forrestal.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can we have somebody move and secondthose officers?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Move it.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. The next item ischoice of the Federal Reserve Bank to execute transactions for theSystem Open Market Account. Would somebody like to make a nomination?SPEAKER(?). I will move, sir.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You need to state a preference. Whydon't we try New York?SPEAKER(?). I'm going to: New York.SPEAKER(?). Do they have a staff that can handle thatprimary--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's their problem.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Can I raise a point of order, Mr.Chairman?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. By all means.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Going back to the organizationalmeeting schedule, I wonder if it might not be well for the Committeeto consider changing the organizational meeting from March toFebruary. The rationale I have in mind is that it always strikes meas anomalous that the presidents who vote for the annual targets atthe February meetings cease being the presidents who vote for thebalance of the year. I just wonder if in the interest ofconsistency--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I point out that a discussion ofprocedures is a later item on the agenda.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that that would be anappropriate item to bring up at that time. Why don't we do that? Ihave a motion. Do I have a second?3/29/88SPEAKER(?). I second it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No objections? Now we can vote on theselection of the Manager for Domestic Operations and the Manager forForeign Operations, System Open Market Account. The incumbents arecurrently, of course, Mr. Sternlight and Mr. Cross. Would somebodylike to make any other nominations, and if not would somebody like tomove, second or oppose?SPEAKER(?). Move.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. It is required thatthese nominees be acceptable to the Board of Directors of the FederalReserve Bank of New York, which I assume will occur with the usualformality.The next item is the Authorization for Domestic Open MarketOperations. Is there any objection to renewing the authorization asit stands? If not, we can consider that to be done. We also need torenew the Foreign Currency Authorization, the Foreign CurrencyDirective, and the Procedural Instructions With Respect to ForeignCurrency Operations. Any objection to renewing all three?SPEAKER(?). None.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If not, consider it done. We have thesame issue with respect to the Program for Security of FOMCinformation. Why don't you read the changes, Mr. Bernard?MR. BERNARD. It involves just a very minor updating sincethere is no longer a staff director. As noted in the memorandum datedMarch 23, the new language for page 2, Section A.3 would read: Uponadoption, distribution of and access to the directives would belimited to Committee members, nonvoting Presidents, staff officialsinvolved with the daily morning "call" from the Open Market Desk, theSecretariat, and the two Managers (or their substitutes).CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, the authorization isrenewed. Governor Johnson, I understand, is prepared to make anomination with respect to a variety of appeals authority.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I'd like to move that Governor Angell bethe FOMC member in charge of [Freedom of Information Act] appeals andthat Governor Seger be the alternate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Any questions on theexamination report of the System Open Market Account? Would somebodymove acceptance?MS. SEGER. I'll move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Second?3/29/88SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No objection. Now we are finally up tothe minutes. Without objection. Mr. Cross.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Mr. Cross?MR. JOHNSON. Sam, what did you say again about the currencyafter the end of the [Japanese] fiscal year?MR. CROSS. There has been a great deal of concern that,particularly during March, the yen has been held down artificially andthe dollar has been held up artificially because of concerns about theJapanese institutions who must complete their bookkeeping at the endof March. Much of this has to do with the Japanese insurancecompanies who, according to the rules that they follow, have to adjustthe value of their total holdings of foreign and dollar securities ifthe dollar falls by 15 percent, on average, during March from thelevel of a year ago. This would mean a very substantial recalculationof the books of these insurance companies. And there is a widespreadview that that possibility, plus traditional Japanese window-dressingoperations, which are very important, have caused the Japanese to takesteps to avoid the pressure to cause the yen to rise--to hold thedollar up against the yen, in effect, until after this March 31stdate. So the question now is whether, after the end of March, therewill be some tendency and intention, on behalf of the Japaneseparticularly, to shift out of dollars or to cease the operations whichthe market thinks are holding the dollar up, or to take other steps.MR. JOHNSON. What kind of appreciation would it take for therest of the month, or late in the month, to produce an average of themonth below 126 [yen per dollar]?MR. CROSS. It would have to go down pretty low at thispoint. We recalculate this every day; we just don't have the latestupdate. Yesterday it was something like 121 or 122. But one argumentmade in the market about some of the pressure recently is that this isless of a concern now that we've gotten close enough to the end of thefiscal year. There is less of a reason for the yen to be held down.MR. JOHNSON. The Japanese really haven't been intervening onthe scale that they had before, right?MR. CROSS. They have not been intervening in very heavyamounts, but they have been taking related steps. There was astatement by the head of the Japanese insurance groups last night,saying that he didn't expect a lot of sell-off of dollar securitiesafter the end of the fiscal year. I assume that the Bank of Japan puthim up to that. There have been other steps that they have taken tocontain some of these pressures.MR. TRUMAN. The question is whether institutions themselveswould be supporting the dollar in this period, since it also affectsthe institutions--not just the ones that are accepting the 15% rulebut the ones that are on a mark-to-market basis [unintelligible]particular interest.3/29/88MR. CROSS. Yes, I think that--MR. TRUMAN. It may affect the general institutions a lotmore across the board.MR. JOHNSON. It's going to be mark-to-market for all of themafter the fiscal year has ended, right?MR. CROSS. That's right, but--MR. JOHNSON. And there will still be a strong incentive forthem not to want the exchange rate [unintelligible] right?MR. CROSS. No, but the year-end is particularly important.And this happens even when we don't face the kind of exchange marketsituations that we face now. The Japanese are very conscious of theseyear-end figures, and toward the end of the fiscal year there are alot of pressures back and forth, reflecting that concern. So this isnot a new phenomenon.MR. JOHNSON. I have one more question. Maybe I've beenreading too much into this, but it did run on the wires here that theBank of Japan has decided to tighten up some. They made anannouncement that they were going to tighten up on money and bankreserves. At least the way that I read it over the wires severaltimes was that there had been some sort of announcement of slighttightening for short-term conditions in Japan. It seems kind ofstrange that they would do something like that.MR. CROSS. Well, they've been telling us that they need someslight pressures--again, because of those fiscal year-end kinds ofproblems. But we have not gotten from them evidence that they aretightening beyond that.MR. TRUMAN. This is an impressive movement with a[unintelligible] for the large banks.SPEAKER(?). Right.MR. TRUMAN. In fact, they have been progressively tighteningover the last several months and this [unintelligible] they'veobviously done their [unintelligible] this is one more out of about 3or 4 now this seems to have been [unintelligible].MR. JOHNSON. I understand what they are doing. I'm justsaying that the market seems--MR. BOEHNE. It seems to me that the larger issue, aside fromthings like the Japanese fiscal year, relates to times when we seethese exchange relationships coming unglued. Are we dealing withsomething that we can put a little more glue in there throughintervention and move forward, or is it something more basic--likechanges in economic growth or inflation or domestic economic policiesor that the adjustment process isn't moving as fast as it should. Iwould think that, while it is an impossible question to answer, youhave to ask it nonetheless when you are talking about what theappropriate response is going to be. If we think that it just needssome more glue, then we can achieve some good through intervention; if3/29/88we think that it is more basic than that, then by intervening we sortof throw good money after bad. It may mean that we have to seek a newexchange rate alignment, or it may take a more fundamental change inU.S. domestic policy. As I say, it is a question that there is noobvious or easy answer to; but it seems to me that we have to ask itrather than continue intervening willy-nilly and hoping that willsolve the problem. I'm not against the intervention--it just seems tome that we have to think the thing through a little more carefullythan to just say "Well, let's intervene and see what happens."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that you're raising an importantquestion that has no good answer. But an interesting issue is whetherthere is an answer to a secondary question: Can intervention evenremotely succeed on an incremental basis? In other words, do we makemuch progress by small interventions, which can't have any effect orare perceived to be ineffectual and may even be counterproductive?Or, if we have the choice, if the rate has to be sustained, do wechoose to intervene in amounts that do affect the market? I don'tknow how [unintelligible] reads the experience in the last six months,but it strikes me that the only times that I was concerned about theintervention were when [unintelligible] and it didn't seem to have anyeffect as we watched the monies being spent. But I know when[unintelligible] hit the markets heavy and hit them also on the wayup, I thought we received [unintelligible] response. We may not beable to answer the first question, and I don't think that we will everbe able to answer that one; but my own question is whether or not weshould at least be focusing on the more discontinuous intervention--whether you're in or out--not this dribble effect.MR. BOEHNE. I think that's a good point. I guess mine goeseven beyond that. It may mean that there isn't much that we can do ifthere is a fundamental misalignment here. Or if we're going to dosomething, it may take this more forceful intervention coupled with anoticeable change in monetary policy. I'm getting ahead of thediscussion but I think that--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a crucial issue. I don't thinkanybody denies that monetary policy is effective--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think that that is right in termsof the real question, but I'm not so sure that the question isunanswerable, in the ultimate sense of the word. I find it compellingto ask myself a question: What are the implications of a significantfurther decline in the dollar from where we are now? I think you haveto think it through on the trade side and on the financial side. Inmy view, the problem on the trade side is that the current forecastmay embody a speed of adjustment that is about as fast as we can hopeto achieve; indeed, it seems to me that it may border on the edge ofbeing dangerously fast, in the context of being inflationary. So, Idon't see that there is a whole lot to be gained in the foreseeablefuture on the trade side from a further decline in the dollar. Then,I ask myself the question: What does it imply on the financial side?And by financial side, of course, I mean our capacity to finance a$140 billion current account deficit this year. And that question, itseems to me, is more difficult. I can't quantify how much moredifficult, but I think the algebraic sign is clear enough. So, whereI come out, without being able to be precise, is that I see a clearrisk on the side of a further depreciation of the dollar and I see3/29/88very little to be gained by a further depreciation of the dollar. Idon't know what it gets us.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But it's a very interesting analyticalquestion as to whether one can make the judgment you're making--inother words;, it really gets to the crucial question of what's theelasticity of supply of our system in the manufacturing sector and howclose we are [to full capacity]. I think that it will be helpfullater if both Messrs. Prell and Truman could address this issue as tobasically (1) how much in the rate of change in the physical volume onboth imports and exports is related to the current exchange ratelevels; and (2) to what extent are we at the margin of capacity withrespect both to the existing forecast and to any acceleration ineconomic growth which would result from a further decline of theexchange rate. I think that that's the crucial question that really[unintelligible] about policy generally. Anyway, I didn't mean to getinto this at this stage. Any further questions for Sam?MR. HOSKINS. It's not really for Sam. It's just anobservation. It may be for Ted Truman or Don Kohn. On the questionEd Boehne raised--and you and Jerry also commented on--in respect tousing currency market intervention with large open economies, I thinkthat the empirical evidence is that if you sterilize you don't get anyeffects through intervention over time. I'd be interested in hearingcomments on the empirical research because I think the question--SPEAKER(?). Now, that is a technical kind of question in thesense that if you really do want to alter your monetary policy and usecurrency markets as a way to do it--that is, to allow money supply togrow or to shrink to match what you are doing--I think that is adifferent question.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a question of monetary policy.MR. TRUMAN. Yes, the research has been done--much of ithere--and some of it was in the report on intervention that was donemultilaterally. The actual report on intervention was done by [the G-7 central banks and finance ministers] and suggested that sterilizedintervention may be effective in the short run but was not likely tohave lasting effects. We do end up somewhat tied into a semanticproblem, in that it's a little hard to say there was $100 billion or$150 billion of intervention last year and it had no effectwhatsoever. I think that the thrust of the research might say that ithad some effect, but it's on the whole--small [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible] I think the onlyargument you can make is that sterilizing intervention can have only ashort effect and would be meaningful only to the extent that you canalter the psychology of the portfolio adjustment process. And withthe huge stock of assets out there, psychology is not an irrelevantconsideration because you can get very substantial moves for[unintelligible] period of time with no change in fundamentals, as Iwould read the same evidence. Long term, there can't be anythingthere and there isn't. But short term I think it's an ambiguous[unintelligible]--that you can get some temporary effect and if youcan do it after an appropriate time it probably can have some[unintelligible]. But I don't know of anyone who can solve the debateon this issue. It has been going on for a long time.3/29/88MR. JOHNSON. I think a lot of it depends on which way thefundamentals are taking the exchange rate, too. It's a lot easier tohave intervention speed up the adjustment if it's supporting thedirection of the fundamentals. If you're trying to fight thefundamentals, I think it's much more difficult--the seventies were agood example of that and, most recently, the last couple of years. Itdoes work even then on the psychology, but it's much more fleeting, Ithink.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no further questions forMr. Cross, can I have a motion to approve the transactions since thelast meeting?SPEAKER(?). I'll move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any objections? Domestic Deskoperations, Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Mr. Sternlight?SPEAKER(?). My recollection of the Continental Illinoisepisode three years ago is that there was a more marked quality spreadin the market then than what we see in the First Republic Banksituation. First of all, is that true? And if it is, why? Do youthink the market is getting used to this kind of bad news and hardenedto it, or what?MR. STERNLIGHT. It could be something like that. On theattitude toward borrowing, I think that one reason why a bigdifference didn't show up is that those attitudes were already kind ofcautious. Also, there had been a lot of borrowing; there was aboutone billion dollars of adjustment credit ongoing so that there was alot of room for those cautious attitudes to show up. But you'reright--there was a much more noticeable widening of spreads of bank[unintelligible] and Treasury securities. We've seen rather little ofthat [this time], and I think that probably does reflect just learningto live with that kind of situation.MR. JOHNSON(?). Maybe I'm wrong, but it could be, too, thatthis is viewed as a little more of a regional issue than Continental.If I remember right, there was a lot of concern about ManufacturersHanover at the same time and there was a great deal of concern thatthis might spread into the money center banks in general, whereas Ithink now the basic view is that this is a Texas or Southwest regionalproblem.SPEAKER(?). But didn't Europeans hold their paper more thanthe--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think that's a big part of theproblem. You don't have that wholesale deposit problem in this case.We have it to some extent, but it's very small compared to what you3/29/88had in Continental. I think that in terms of the market's sharpreaction, that put a very different coloration on Continental asopposed to this.SPEAKER(?). I do think that it might be a bit of a mistaketo assume that it's only a regional problem.MR. JOHNSON. I didn't say that it was. I said that was aperception.SPEAKER(?). In my own point of view, I think that perceptionmight not be exactly right.MR. JOHNSON. I can conceive of circumstances in which itwouldn't be.SPEAKER(?). Maybe there's greater faith that you people canwork it out down there, too.SPEAKER(?). Peter, we talked about seasonal borrowingbefore, but refresh my memory. At a time that seasonal borrowing isrelatively low, as it is now, it will take a higher level of borrowingto accomplish the [unintelligible]. Is there a [unintelligible], say,in December or January?MR. STERNLIGHT. I would have a little sense of that, yes.And I know that it doesn't show up in all the [unintelligible] thatare done. But it does seem to me that, particularly given these lowlevels of adjustment plus seasonal borrowings, that is a bit of afactor.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no further questions forMr. Sternlight, first, we need to ratify his transactions since theFebruary meeting and, secondly, authorize his leeway request. May Ihave a motion to move?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I so move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No objection? And on the leewayrequest?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I move that, too.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No objection? At our last meeting wehad a number of discussions on operating procedures and related issuesand a memorandum has been put together by Messrs. Kohn and Sternlighton that. Mr. Kohn would you give a report summary?MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have only a little toadd to the memo. [Statement--see Appendix. The full memorandum,entitled "Issues in the Implementation of Open Market Operations" alsois attached.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions or comments on the issuesraised? Peter, did you want to add anything at all?MR. STERNLIGHT. The only thing that I would do is underscorethe point Don made with respect to fed funds compared to borrowing. I3/29/88think that they are not so much contrasting positions, but points on acontinuum. I think of ourselves now as pretty much back to so-called"normal", but remembering that "normal" does involve close awarenessof what's happening with the funds rate. It did before mid-October oflast year, and it does now.MR. JOHNSON. First, I was going to say that I complimenteveryone involved in this study for a very careful presentation of theissues. I think it's very well done and balanced. I also complimentthe people preparing this for their remark on page four that says:"And it is money market rates, rather than the division of reservesbetween borrowed and non-borrowed components, that have the mostdirect impact on other financial variables in markets--such as long-term interest rates, exchange rates, and money growth--through whichmonetary policy is transmitted to the economy." That's the point thatI've been trying to make for a while, because it is the transmissionthrough the funds rate adjustment that is the fundamental feature ofmonetary policy that we're dealing with here--whether it's the effecton money growth, or other relative interest rates, or whatever.That's the transmission mechanism; it's not borrowed reserves.Borrowed reserves are simply a mechanism by which we adjust the fundsrate, and it's as simple as that.Now, I think there is a legitimate argument for doing it theway we are doing it. I think the point is made in the memo that aborrowed reserve target does allow for some variability in the fundsrate and for some market forces to show through. However, my ownpersonal view, and others may differ with it, is that the major reasonfor variation of the funds rate in pursuing a borrowed reserve targetis not market forces--it's basically reserve estimate errors andproblems associated with the reserve equation. It is rare for marketforces to actually be a major factor in variation of the funds rate,even though you might have some of that show up. In trying to be moresensitive directly to the funds rate as a means of setting monetarypolicy, you can still allow for those market forces to affect thefunds rate. You don't have to go into the market three times a day toadjust the funds rate to keep it within some narrow range. I thinkthat all you have to do is what we are doing now--to some extent, whatwe were doing for a while earlier--which indicates that you are moresensitive toward the funds rate than the borrowing objective. And youenter the market once a day at the normal time, but your operationsare geared toward sensitivity of the funds rate and not toward someborrowing objective which really has no meaning other than toinfluence the funds rate.Chart 2 in the paper is a beautiful chart that shows some ofthe problems with the procedure that we've been following. We had apaper prepared back in July, I believe it was, that was an excellentpaper too--it pointed out there was a consistent bias of actualborrowings above expected levels. We didn't know exactly why; we hada number of potential explanations for that. But it's alsoillustrated in Chart 2. But more important than the upward bias inactual versus expected in that chart, is the fact that I don't agreewith the argument in the paper that there are just very short periodsof deviation of borrowings from expectations and expected funds rates,because it's clearly not the case. One piece of information that ismissing on this chart is how often there were intermeeting conferencecalls or arrangements with the FOMC that explain the variations from-10-3/29/88expectations; I assume the expected line takes that into account. Forinstance, there's a prolonged period in the spring of 1987--I thinkeveryone here remembers this very distinctly--where you can clearlysee in the early months of 1987 this huge spike in adjustment andseasonal borrowing over the expected range. That took place for atwo-month period. That wasn't just a short fluctuation in borrowingsrelative to expectations. That was a huge spike. If I remember,borrowings averaged almost $800 million during the entire intermeetingperiod in which the expected borrowing was between $300 and $400million. That's not just a little fluctuation; that is a prolongedperiod of actual borrowing well above the expected level. You can seethe expected level tick up a couple of times there. The onlyintermeeting conference call took place on April 30th, during which weadjusted the borrowing assumption from $300 million to $400 million.But you can see that that doesn't nearly compensate for the actualborrowing. You can go back for a longer period earlier--you can seein the middle of 1986--when borrowings clearly averaged well aboveexpectations for a 4-month period; all of 1985 is another goodexample. But you can see that on that chart.So, I think that there is a serious issue of whether we canactually keep borrowings on an expected path. And my problem withthat is: What's the point anyway? The only point is to achieve somereasonable range for the funds rate, which represents the transmissionmechanism of monetary policy into the economy. So, I think that thesecharts and the data available here clearly show that there are someproblems with this approach. Now, I'm not sure that we have to dosomething drastically different. I've been very satisfied with theway the operations have been run in the last several months. But Idon't see why we can't pursue a procedure more consistent with beingsensitive to the funds rate rather than some borrowing objective. Itdoesn't make any sense to me that we would do otherwise.The last point I would make on that is that I just can't buythe view that being more sensitive to the funds rate is what got usinto trouble in the 1970s. I wasn't here then--maybe some of youwere--but from talking to people who were here and trying to studythat period, from what I can tell, the mere fact that we were tryingto be sensitive to the funds rate wasn't actually the problem. Igather that money growth wasn't all that bad relative to targetsduring that period. If anything, it had to do with a misunderstandingof money supply measures just like some of the problems that we havenow. Also, I think that it had to do with probably a slightlydifferent philosophy. But we're big boys and it's hard to believethat we can't sit here at this table and agree to set monetary policywhere it should be, whether it's being sensitive to the funds rate orwhat. And if we don't buy that, it means that we have to agree to aprocedure that tricks us into the right monetary policy. And I justcan't buy it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'm glad that you raised this issuebecause I share a lot of these frustrations that Manley has voiced. Ihave thought for some time that we were having a problem with choosinga borrowed reserve level and getting what we wanted in the way offederal funds behavior. A lot of unexpected behavior is short-livedand doesn't really have much impact. But frequently, the deviations-11-3/29/88are rather long and rather large; and in effect, I think they end upchanging the stance of monetary policy that the Committee wants andmisleading the market, too. As Manley stated very well, I think thefederal funds rate is the most important thing in determining thedemand for money and the behavior of the aggregates over time. And Ithink that the Committee has been confused by this, because at timeswe've gotten federal funds rates that were not what we'd expected atall and that has led to some misunderstanding. For example, at thelast meeting we had some discussion about what had transpired in theprevious meeting.Now, there are a couple of arguments that have been advancedin favor of borrowed-reserve targeting. The first of these is thatyou can get movements in anticipation of where we should go that aregenerated on the part of the market. We've looked at that fairlyclosely and sometimes this happens; but it just doesn't look to us asif the empirical evidence is really overwhelming on that. Youcertainly can find a number of instances--Manley cited some, and thereare others--where the market has moved the federal funds rate in a waythat we didn't want it to move. The Continental situation and rightbefore the October 19th crash, I think, are two notable examples. So,I don't think that argument holds a lot of water. But I think theimportant argument, and really the reason why we went to thisprocedure, was basically a political one. We were afraid that wecould not move the federal funds rate as much as we really felt weought to, unless we obfuscated in some way: We're not really movingthe federal funds rate, we're targeting reserves and the markets havedriven the funds rate up. That may have had some validity at thetime, and I had some sympathy for it. But as time goes on, I'vebecome more and more concerned about a procedure that really involvestrying to fool the public and the Congress and the markets, and attimes fooling ourselves in the process.What I'd like to suggest, if we have time for it, is analternative procedure that might conceivably be satisfactory for bothsides. The procedure would be to establish a band for the federalfunds rate, let's say a weekly average of 50 basis points, that wouldbe understood to be the range in which we would operate during theintermeeting period. The beginning point would be the midpoint ofthat, but the Desk, in consultation with you, Mr. Chairman, would havethe freedom to move anywhere within that 50-point range. This wouldgive us some leeway for market forces to work. And it could beunderstood that if the federal funds rate moved out of this range,then there would be consultation with the Committee. I think thatthis would be very clear to all of us and that it would work muchbetter, because now we sometimes get federal funds rates that wedidn't vote for and didn't want. So, I think a move in that directionwould be very helpful and clearly would be more honest. I would hateto have to defend what we have been doing on the grounds that, in asense, we really don't want people to know what we are up to. I'drather stand up, as Manley says, like a man, and do what we have todo. But I do understand the other argument, because in '79, I'm surewe would not have gotten some people to vote for the new procedure ifthey had not thought that it provided a cover for doing something theydidn't think that they could get away with. I've heard members of theCommittee state that. So it's not something to disregard lightly; butI think that our long-term credibility can be damaged if we use thatas a cover-up for what we're really doing.-12-3/29/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. Thank you. I also have very much enjoyedreading the papers. But I think there's a semantic unresolvedconflict that becomes apparent--in the paper itself, too--that's atthe bottom of what both Manley Johnson and President Black have beentalking about. For instance, if you look at page four, it is veryclearly stated that fluctuations in the funds rate can at times "leadto a misperception of the Federal Reserve's intentions." That's atthe top of the page. And on the next page it is argued that"Movements in the federal funds rate can convey information to policymakers about expectations and other aspects of financial marketconditions." And then it says a little lower down that "A narrowfocus on the funds rate tends to smother such market-generatedreactions". Either we see the fed funds rate as a signal to themarkets or we see the rate as a signal to us. If we are trying to getboth types of signals out of the same number, or we perhaps get thetwo of them confused, I think that we do have a bit of a problem.The second point is that I find it very difficult to believethat a $200 million or $250 million borrowing target is something thatis so precise that we can steer the entire economy with it. It issomething that is so minuscule in comparison to the markets that Icontinue to marvel at the good job that we are doing on it. Theseasonal factors and the other things that influence our requiredreserves are just overwhelmingly large compared to that small number.And then we are arguing here in the Committee about going from $200 or$225 million--you know, it's just something so small in the entireeconomy that I find it difficult to believe that that is really theentire fulcrum on which we can influence what happens in the countryat large. There's also the problem that the reluctance to borrowsometimes--I guess you can have the converse as well--would verystrongly influence the $200 million dollar number, as we have seen inthe last couple of weeks and months in connection with the Texassituation.Overall, I must say that I'm very satisfied with what hasactually happened. And so I'm torn here. We have a procedure, but Idon't really fully understand why it is producing the good results--results that I like. There hasn't been a convincing argument, Ithink, as to what brings that about. On the other hand, I'm reluctantto say let's get rid of this procedure if it will continue to producethese good results. But I'm not convinced that it will actually dothat. Suddenly, we may be off the track and we may be flying thatairplane right into the ground. And we'd still be wondering whathappened, because we had such a nice borrowing target, but somehow oranother the whole growth path of the aggregates isn't doing what we'dlike it to do.Now, there are really two papers in front of us--one by Ms.Meulendyke, in which there is a nice quick discussion of theprocedures that existed in the 1970s. It says the FOMC "instructedthe Desk to raise the federal funds rate within a limited band if themonetary aggregates were well above the tracking path or lower thefunds rate within that band if the aggregates were below the trackingpath." It sounds an awful lot like what Mr. Melzer has proposed,except that he was talking about the monetary base instead of theaggregates. But there isn't a lot of discussion about why that-13-3/29/88procedure was abandoned. It just says factually that in 1972modifications were made and, like many of us, I wasn't there. I'dreally like to have heard a bit more about why that particularprocedure would be an unsatisfactory one. I guess that's perhapssomething Mr. Sternlight can enlighten us on.MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think there was anything abrupt thathappened in 1972. We were getting into closer and closer federalfunds targeting that ended rather abruptly in 1979.MR. HELLER. Because there was a reluctance to adjust inorder to--in essence, we were not following this early 1970s procedurethe way it was laid out?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think there was a reluctance to makethe moves in the federal funds rate that, in retrospect anyway, wouldhave been a little more appropriate.MR. HELLER. So, it wasn't a bad procedure, you would argue.It was sort of a lack of moral fiber that--MR. STERNLIGHT. I'd regard that as an aspect of theprocedure that lent itself to that constraint.MR. PARRY(?). There was the additional problem, too, ofknowing what rate to aim at. That isn't obvious. There was areluctance, I think, in that period, to move the rate sufficiently.And secondly, there was some considerable uncertainty about what wouldbe the appropriate rate if one had the will.MR. HOSKINS. But if you had had borrowed reserves, therewould have been the same question about what the appropriate level ofborrowed reserves was.MR. BLACK. I think that it was the very hot politicalenvironment that made us reluctant to do that. You know, interestrates were getting pretty high about that time. There was a lot ofpressure on us and we knew that we had to do something. And we had tomake it palatable so we didn't get shot out of the water as soon as webegan to move. I think--I don't know if others would agree--that'swhy we did it at that time. I thought that we would end up targetingthe money supply; but I think most of the people in the room reallythought it was a way that they could get the federal funds rate upmore than they otherwise could get away with, in that kind of highlycharged political environment. That's the way that I read it. Idon't know; Jerry or some of the others who were here might see itsomewhat differently.MR. KOHN. I think it was the case--wasn't it, Peter--thatthe Committee would come into a meeting and would set a fairly narrowband for the funds rate. And then there was a great deal ofdependence on the staff projections for the aggregates--the funds ratecould creep in that band if the projections for the aggregates for thenext two or three months drifted away from what was desired. But itwas a very lagged process and the projections weren't always right. Ithink that's President Parry's point. It took a long time, given theprocess, to have adjustments made--with the combination of the narrowband for the funds rate and the projections---14-3/29/88MR. JOHNSON. That's consistent with what I said--Ianticipate the problem would be money supply problems.MR. GUFFEY. There's one other aspect of that: the marketunderstood that we were looking at the funds rate. And a 16th of apercentage point move in the funds rate moved the market at that time.We almost got trapped in our own procedure, in the sense that we hadto have a virtual consensus of this Committee and of the then-Chairmanto move more than a 16th of a percentage point on the funds rate,simply because the market reacted so violently to it. People such asthe Chairman used to interpret that data, I'm sure.MR. MORRIS. One other aspect is that I don't think we--I wasaround this place in the 1970s--sufficiently understood that theinflation psychology had become so strong in this country that smallmoves in interest rates were shrugged off. Moves in interest ratesthat previously would have had a big impact on the market had nodiscernable impact at all. And we were very slow to recognize that.MR. JOHNSON. There were interest ceilings in the bankingsystem; you couldn't even effectively get the rate [up]. Well, I'mnot talking about--SPEAKER(?). What part of the [discussion]--?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's be certain of that. What we'renow on is the side issue of the 1979 procedure, which I think is veryinteresting. Let's continue it, but let's limit it to a certainextent and stay only on the 1979 procedure. I'd appreciate goingfurther. But if anyone else who was here then wants to [comment],that was a terribly important period for exactly this issue, and Idon't wish to say that we shouldn't discuss it at all.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me make a couple of generalcomments. I think that Ann-Marie Meulendyke's memorandum that isattached to Peter's and Don's memorandum is very revealing, becausewhat it says to me is that there's nothing new under the sun--that thesame frustrations and the same debate has been going on since timeimmemorial.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are you still on the 1979 issue? Thenhold it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Okay. I'm sorry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Actually, we'll start with 1979. Andthen I think Governor Angell is next.MR. HOSKINS. I didn't attend the meetings, but I spent agood portion of my time as director of research [at the PhiladelphiaReserve Bank] on the 1979 issue, trying to widen the funds rate bands.We went through a lot of the things that some of us alluded to herewhen the base argument came up two months or three months ago; we wentthrough things like zone of indifference and zone of tolerance. Andduring that period--Peter is right--it is part of the process. If youuse interest rates, you're going to be procyclical. You may thinkthat you are going to be able to jump out in front, but the experience-15-3/29/88was that you just won't move interest rates sufficiently to get on topof an expanding economy.MR. JOHNSON. I agree. But how is that different from aborrowing target? I'm just saying that the borrowing approach has thesame problem with it. If you agree that that was a problem in 1979, aborrowing target would present the exact same problem. So I don'tknow--MR. BLACK. I think you can argue that, for some people, it'sa little easier to move the borrowing target. I argued as you did. Idon't think we ought to do that. But I do think that some peoplewould be more likely to move at the point in the cycle in which weusually make our worst mistakes [unintelligible] cycle.MR. HOSKINS. I'd do it a bit differently. I think that theborrowing target is more closely related to what I think drives theeconomy. And it may be that money matters--whether it's the base, M1,M2, or M3--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible] this is tough tomaintain. Maybe we ought to go back to the regular sequence.Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Yes, I'm interested in the discussion. I'mreally interested in Governor Heller's point; he made the point thatI'd like to make, but on the other side. I'm arguing his side--Ithink that he's saying that the system really isn't broke and let'snot fix it. It's working better than you expected that it would work,or theoretically would work, and that's enough.It seems to me that we have really three kinds ofalternatives: you can target the fed funds rate, and if you choose todo that, we've had experience with that and that can be accomplished;or you can target the money aggregates; or you can target reserves totarget money aggregates. I prefer the present position because we, ina sense, are in between. This would permit us, when we believe wecan, to emphasize once again the monetary aggregates more forcefully.It seems to me to go in the other direction, and to go back to fedfunds targeting, would be seen in the markets as an abandonment of thekind of sound money policies that came out of the policies thatresulted in this nation's double-digit inflation rates being broughtunder control. So it's a very symbolic issue. And the markets, Ithink, would respond very adversely if we were to move in thatdirection.In regard to the political consequences, it seems to me thatour experience in 1987--after the October 19th crash and all of thesepeople predicting recession--was that we actually did become very fedfunds oriented, and that that was the political incentive. If the fedfunds rate didn't respond properly to what we thought was the loweringof the target, then we got all excited. So it seems clear to me thathaving a fed funds relationship does put you closer to the politicalsituation. I believe that it is so important that money be restrictedover a period of time to maintain some scarcity. And this [reserve]pressure approach that we are under is one that enables us to proceedtoward a somewhat restrictive monetary aggregate targeting in thefuture. All of us know that that's important for price level-16-3/29/88stability. So I would consider a move to fed funds targeting to be awrong move and to result in inappropriate policy choices. Now if --MR. JOHNSON. But how does borrowing do that?MR. ANGELL. Now, if Governor Heller suggests that $200million or $300 million doesn't make much difference, I ask you: Howmuch difference does it make to change the fed funds rate from 6.75percent to 6.50 percent? I would suggest that in doing that, we'remore tempted to make that move. I would suggest that we would nothave made the move we made in February--which I thought at the timewas an incorrect move and I still think it was an incorrect move--ifwe had not been concentrating on the fed funds rate. It was onlybecause we thought that someone might see that very slight change inthe fed funds rate that we were encouraged, it seems to me, toaccomplish it.So I would go back, Manley, to the period in 1986 and 1987.I agree with you that we did not strictly follow in an unbiased mannerthe borrowing targets during that period. It seems to me that we notonly had some misses, but there were times that we accepted the actualoutcomes that were different. I'm not suggesting a return to thatperiod; I'm suggesting that the Desk follow more closely theadjustment plus seasonal borrowing targets early in the two-weekperiod. We start off following those very closely and we let the fedfunds rate move. It seems to me that there's no need on the last day,with contemporaneous reserve accounting, to try to make everything fitand hit the borrowing target on that last day. If we have our averagein there early during the two-week period, then I don't mind lettingthe fed funds constraints be more important on the last day to preventthose spikes. So, I share your frustration concerning the earlierprocedures and I don't want to return to them. I really want tofollow more precisely adjustment plus seasonal borrowings as aninterim policy that will enable us later to return to closer monetaryaggregates targeting.MR. JOHNSON. Then you're arguing for maybe as much finetuning as several days' changes in the funds rate, in order to stay onsome borrowing path continuously through the two-week period. Youknow, I'm just asking; if everybody wants that, that's fine. I'm justsaying, you can look at the evidence and see for yourselves that thereare long periods when the FOMC's policy directives have no meaning.And if that's okay with everybody, it's fine with me.MR. ANGELL. But I think all of us know why that took place;I don't think there's any need for us to go into that. I think we canpursue borrowing targets and have deviations of borrowing around thosetargets be unbiased.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Statistically, you can't, because you'redealing with a number which is positive and cannot go below zero. Sothe bias--especially as you're getting to the lower area--has to be onthe plus side.MR. ANGELL. You mean when you have strong deviations? Youhave---17-3/29/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I mean the bias. If you're tryingto hit a target which can have errors on both sides, it can never havean error which is below zero, so that the expected estimate is alwayshigher than the one you're shooting at.MR. ANGELL. But that bias is brought in because of thechoice of a borrowing target closer to zero. If we would alwayschoose a borrowing target somewhere between $500 million and $1billion, then we would have more leeway to have fluctuations on bothsides.MR. JOHNSON. But what if you don't like the monetary policythat goes with that? What if you don't want--MR. ANGELL. Well, then you can change the discount rate. Ifyou don't like the monetary policy that goes with $500 millionadjustment plus seasonal borrowing, you lower the discount rate.MR. JOHNSON. Well, that's the other implicit issueassociated with this procedure. It's led almost by discount ratechanges--using the discount rate as one of the primary mechanisms ofmonetary policy.MR. ANGELL. But you said that we're all strong men and womenwho can stand up and be counted, and I would suggest to you thatthere's no better way to stand up and be counted than to change thediscount rate.MR. JOHNSON. If the FOMC doesn't mind being dragged along bythe discount rate, that's fine.MR. ANGELL. I guess it's a surprising development here forthe members of the Board of Governors, for the most part, to bearguing that they want the FOMC to have more say, and for thePresidents to be arguing that they want the Board to have more say,which is what's involved.MR. JOHNSON. I agree that that is what's going on.MR. HELLER. "After you, fellow", right?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As I started to say, I think Ann-Marie's memorandum is interesting because what it says is that there'snothing new under the sun--that this debate, in various forms, hasbeen going on since time immemorial. One of the more revealing thingsin her memorandum, it seems to me, is that in 1968, as I recall, weestablished a system of lagged reserve accounting to help us hit afree reserve target; and as soon as we went through all the pain andexpense of doing that, we abandoned free reserve targets. What shedidn't say, of course, is that in the early 1980s we went toincredible pain and expense to institute a system of contemporaneousreserve accounting to help us set the money supply; and no sooner hadwe gone through the pain and expense of that we abandoned the moneysupply targets. Now, if that isn't coming full circle, I don't knowwhat is.-18-3/29/88But I think what is at issue here are two things that areinescapable. One is that it's a lot easier to ease monetary policythan it is to tighten. I don't care what indicators you're using; Idon't care what your philosophy is; it's a lot easier to go one waythan it is the other. And I think that the history of monetary policyaround the world is ultimately tied up in that question. I think it'salso true, as Manley said, that the borrowings number is obviously aproxy for a bunch of things. But so is the federal funds rate.Indeed, there's nothing particularly appealing about the federal fundsrate in itself. You can pick federal funds rates, which at differentpoints in time have been associated with wildly different patterns ofeconomic activity, inflation, and all the rest of it. There isabsolutely no magic in the federal funds rate and its relationship tothe things that we really care about. The funds rate in its own senseis merely symbolic of a bunch of things. So, whether you're talkingborrowings or the funds rate, I think, in some sense, you're talkingabout a proxy for a collection of things.And that's partly the answer to Governor Heller's question asto why, if the procedure is so lousy, the results are so good. Ithink the answer to that is, in part, because we all look through theprocedures. In other words, we do not focus simply on thetransmission variables or the proxy variables; we look through thosethings and we make judgments about them based on what we see in theeconomy, in inflation, and all the rest. Indeed, it seems to me thatthat's why there are conditional elements in the directive language.That reinforces the view, in my judgment, that the things we arefocusing on are imperfect proxies for the things we really care about.I don't fully agree with the argument that the move away fromthe federal funds rate was simply a politically driven decision,especially one that was motivated by obfuscation. I think it was morefundamental than that. I think it did reflect the earlier experience.And the experience was, as Frank said, that we were staring a roaringinflation in the face. And we chose [not] to, or were unwilling to,recognize it and respond to it. So, I think there's more to that thanpolitics and obfuscation. I also think that there's more to it inanother sense. It seems to me that, regardless of what we use as theproxy for policy, a very crucial question is: What constitutes achange in policy? We are always the ones who will have to answer thatquestion. So, of the decisions that we make, which do we regard as achange in policy? I think we have a responsibility to inform theworld when we make a change in policy, as opposed to a little givehere and there based on markets and developments and all the rest ofthat. That's the question that I think is on the table. At theextreme, if you have money supply targets and they're annual and youliterally view them as targets, you very seldom change policy. But ifyou're talking a federal funds rate that is a discrete number--thathas a point estimate attached to it--and you really want to say thatthat's your policy instrument, it seems to me that you are looking ata situation in which you're going to have to be saying with greatfrequency, Mr. St Germain, we changed policy yesterday.MR. JOHNSON. But, Jerry, we don't talk about borrowingtargets now for the times--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But again, I think there's a reasonfor that. And the reason is that they are construed in a way in which-19-3/29/88lowering your borrowing target is not viewed as a change in policy.It is viewed as consistent with an ongoing policy.MR. JOHNSON. Well, I'm not suggesting we announce to theworld that we're targeting the funds rate.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But what are you going to announce?MR. JOHNSON. We're going to do what we always do. We aren'tgoing to announce to the world today that we target borrowed reserves.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Again, I just caution you, you getto the point where you still have to answer the question: What is achange in policy? That I think--MR. JOHNSON. But that's no different than today. What is achange in policy today?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. A change of policy, in the contextof existing directives, is an increase or a decrease in the amount ofpressure on reserves. And it seems to me--MR. JOHNSON. But that's all I'm talking about. It's exactlywhat you do when you alter the funds rate because--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's not the same.MR. JOHNSON. But it is.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It absolutely is not the same interms of--MR. JOHNSON. How is it different?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It differs in the very sense thatwe're stuck on this problem right now. Now, when you go back toOctober, you're trying to hit a federal funds rate target to thesecond decimal point. And if you're going to do that, it seems to methat that carries with it the implication that policy defined in thoseterms is going to take on a short-run orientation that is going to bedisruptive to markets, more difficult to communicate. If we were tochange policy right now, what would you say in your testimony? I sawit on C-Span; you were asked two or three times: Has there been achange in the approach to policy? You said no in your recenttestimony. If we literally take the step of saying that we're goingto target the federal funds rate, I don't think you can answer thatquestion by saying no.MR. JOHNSON. The directive would read the same way it doesnow.MR. HELLER. Well, you're talking about slightly differentthings. I think Jerry is talking about getting rid of the monetarygrowth targets totally, right?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm talk--MR. HELLER. And you're thinking that, too?-20-3/29/88MR. JOHNSON. I wouldn't do that.MR. HELLER. You're keeping it, right?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What would you do, I guess is thequestion?MR. JOHNSON. I'd do exactly what we do now; the directivewould read exactly the same. We'd sit here and vote on a range offederal funds rates instead of a borrowing number or something likethat. And we'd do open market operations the same way we do them now.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But that's a change in the approachto policy.MR. JOHNSON. The directive would say slightly more, orslightly less, pressure on reserve positions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know, I think the question basicallyis there is no ambiguity on the issue of targeting some monetaryaggregate. They may be right or they may be wrong, but that's clear.And we think we used to know what the relationship was with theeconomy.MR. JOHNSON. But we would still be targeting a monetaryaggregate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm trying to get at an interestingissue here, because the question really gets down to how you woulddetermine what the appropriate funds rate is.MR. JOHNSON. The same way we try to figure out what theappropriate borrowing number is. How do we know what the relationshipis between borrowed reserves and monetary aggregates?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's what helps us.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's remember why we went to aborrowing target--basically because the monetary aggregates per sesort of broke away from their ties [to broad measures of economicperformance] and, as a consequence, required reserves tended not to beworking any longer. So, instead of nonborrowed reserves, we just tookthe top part of it, and knocked out the income velocity part which wasgiving us trouble, and we now have the borrowing target.MR. JOHNSON. But what--MR. HELLER. So you have that little thing that goes up anddown. It's like a little boat, and you have enormous waves bobbing itup and down. We don't know; we say as long as we stay two feet abovewater, we're fine.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This sounds to me, as Jerry said before,exactly like all of the discussions which led to the targeting ofmonetary aggregates. Because, in fact, then you had a tie-in.3/29/88MR. JOHNSON. But what is this borrowing target? What doesit have to do with monetary aggregates? It has nothing to do withthem.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But neither does the federal fundsrate.MR. BOEHNE. It does in this sense, Manley--I think thiscontinuum idea is useful.MR. JOHNSON. It doesn't have anything to do with monetaryaggregates.MR. BOEHNE. If you think of reserves and the money supply asbeing a "10" [on a continuum], and you think of the federal funds rateas being a "1", say, the more problems you have with the monetaryaggregates through reserve targeting, the more you want to move towardthe federal funds rate. And the borrowing is a point along thatcontinuum between total reserves and the federal funds rate. It's notthat borrowing per se is important; it's the degree of compromise youmake between the federal funds rate and the reserves procedure. Andthe borrowings thing is skewed in the direction of the federal fundsrate.MR. JOHNSON. I'm simply saying, if you hit your borrowingtarget precisely--say you hit it on the nose the entire time--whatmonetary aggregate growth would you get out of that?MR. ANGELL. Manley, analytically there's no--MR. JOHNSON. It's totally unpredictable--MR. ANGELL. There's no disagreement, analytically; you'recorrect, analytically. It's a question of emphasis; it's a questionof stance. Of course, you're going to get the one; you're going toget the other.MR. JOHNSON. I'd love to be able to narrow this argumentfrom conceptual theoretical issues down to whether we want to use thisprocedure for various other reasons. That's fine with me. I justwant to make sure we understand what--MR. ANGELL. I think we all do.MR. JOHNSON. On the theoretical issues of the procedure, I'mnot convinced that's the case. It sounds like a lot of confusion tome.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is, and I think Frank Morris willadd to it!MR. MORRIS. As I said at the last meeting, I think that whatwe're really doing under the current procedure is targeting thefederal funds rate. The reason is that if you target borrowing, thatmeans that you are automatically supplying nonborrowed reserves to theextent the market demands it. And that means that if the demand forreserves is strong, we'll supply an increased rate of reserve growthin order to have the effect of keeping the federal funds rate from-22-3/29/88rising. If the demand for reserves is low, we will reduce the amountof nonborrowed reserves and that will keep the federal funds rate fromfalling. I didn't mean that we're pegging the funds rate the way wewere back in the 1960s and the 1970s. What I think we are doing iskeeping the fed funds rate within a certain range. I think that is adesirable thing to do. I don't agree with Bob Black that we shouldpublish a range for the federal funds rate--if he meant that. I thinkpolitically we're a lot better off with the present form of thedirective, because if we get back to a period where we need to raiseinterest rates in sizable chunks, we're going to be a lot better offhaving that form of directive than having to announce a federal fundsrange of 50 basis points or something like that. On the other hand, Idon't think we should kid ourselves about what we're doing. I thinkthere's a good reason for staying with the present procedure, but weshould recognize that we're not controlling the rate of growth ofreserves--we're controlling the federal funds rate within a band.So, I think that when we have problems with borrowings--ifbanks are reluctant to borrow for some reason, or there's some othertechnical reason why the borrowing is getting out of line with therange of interest rates the Committee is talking about--the range ofinterest rates ought to be dominant and not the borrowing target. AndI think that is precisely what Peter's been doing, and that's why youget these zigs and zags. I think those zigs and zags are veryproductive and we shouldn't worry about it. It would be a lot lessproductive if we were getting that kind of movement in the funds rate;if there's some technical reason for it, I'd much rather see itreflected in--MR. JOHNSON. You're saying zigs and zags in borrowing areproductive?MR. MORRIS. They're more productive than--MR. JOHNSON. I agree with that.MR. MORRIS. If we tried to just keep it at a level--MR. JOHNSON. I agree.MR. MORRIS. The funds rate would be dropping all over theplace.MR. JOHNSON. I agree with what you're saying.MR. MORRIS. And I think that would be undesirable. So, Ithink de facto, controlling the borrowing is a functional equivalentof controlling the fed funds rate. But at the same time I think itwould be unwise for political reasons to change the format at thistime.MR. JOHNSON. I'm saying exactly what you're saying, Frank.I'm saying do exactly what you're doing now, except that you avoid thebig zigs and zags on borrowings instead of on the funds rate. That'sall I'm saying.MR. MORRIS. I think what we learned in the 1970s--and weshould keep it in the back of our minds--is that publishing a funds-23-3/29/88range at a time when we need to push the funds rate up would pose ahazardous duty. And we should never get back to doing that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry, publishing funds?MR. MORRIS. Publishing in the directive that the Managershould keep the funds rate within a small range. I think it would beunwise for us to go back to that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, when I heard Bob Heller'sremarks, I too was going to say if it ain't broke don't fix it, butsomebody already said that. Let me start with a procedural matter.First of all, I thought the memos, particularly the Meulendyke paper,were extremely useful. I wasn't around here in the 1970s and I foundthat historical perspective very interesting. I would like to suggestthat somebody think about publishing that somewhere for the market tolook at. Having said that, let me say something nasty now, and thatis, that while I enjoyed reading the memo, I didn't have much time toread it because it only reached me yesterday morning. I raise thatissue in the context of this discussion only because if we're going tohave more frequent consultations, which hasn't been discussed, thoseconsultations frequently will have accompanying memoranda; and if wedon't get them in time to really reflect on them, they don't do usmuch good.But turning to the substance of the issue, it seems to me asI went through all of this, that I agree with Governor Johnson thatthere really is very little policy difference between targetingborrowing and targeting a funds rate. I think we really are targetingthe federal funds rate, but in a more general way. And I'm persuadedthat we should not make a change for three basic reasons, which Ithink have been touched on by other speakers. First of all, it doesseem to me that we get very useful information from the market,because of the deviation in the funds rate in relation to borrowing.Many times those are market induced, and I think policymakers canlearn something from what the market is telling us. Secondly, andperhaps more importantly, it seems to me that by using a borrowingtarget as a proxy for the funds rate--or, if you like, for policy--we're able to probe a little better than we can with a funds ratetarget. That is to say, the uncertainty generated sometimes by theborrowing and the differential on the funds rate would enable us toreverse policy if we found that that was desirable. With the fundsrate targeting, we don't have that kind of flexibility. So, I thinkwe get some flexibility by using a borrowing target.The political argument has been talked about and I think weought not to underestimate that, because if we get into a period whenwe have to tighten policy, it's a very difficult thing to dopolitically. Some times it's more difficult than others. I don'tthink that our posture in the past has been to be publicly identifiedwith targeting interest rates--certainly not in recent years. I don'tthink it's a good idea for us as an institution to have that on ourbacks. As people look through the realities, obviously they'll see wereally are targeting the funds rate; but I think we get some advantageby staying away from the targeting of the funds rate itself. I thinkyou have to be in the market on a regular basis too, Manley; I don't-24-3/29/88think you can do it on a haphazard basis. I think you have to be inthe market a couple of times a day to really fine tune it.MR. JOHNSON. You mean borrowing or what?MR. FORRESTAL. If you were targeting the funds rate.MR. JOHNSON. The funds rate. Oh, I don't think you need todo anything different than what you're doing now. You'd go in once aday, around 11:40 a.m., but the action the Desk took would be moresensitive towards a rate protest than it would be toward a borrowingprotest.MR. FORRESTAL. But in the--MR. JOHNSON. That's the only difference that we wouldpursue. As a matter of fact, we would do exactly what Peter has beendoing for the last several weeks. I'm saying I think it has beenoutstanding.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, that's the other point I wanted tomake. If you find that you are getting major deviations, then I thinkyou can correct that. But I don't think we ought to be doing fundstargeting on a regular basis. Now, there are two other things thatwere said that I think need to be addressed. It doesn't seem to methat we are in any sense misleading the markets by this policy; Idon't think it's a deliberate obfuscation. I think the marketsunderstand, and we understand certainly, that monetary policy is notan exact science. And I don't think that using a borrowing target isdesigned to mislead anybody. Also, I don't think that thesedeviations--to use the analogy that somebody else did--are causing usto have the airplane on a crash course into the ground. I don't thinkwe're anywhere near that. Nobody has mentioned the intermeetingconsultation and discretion, so let me just raise that if it is anissue, Mr. Chairman.MR. BLACK. I mentioned it.MR. FORRESTAL. You mentioned it; excuse me, I must have beenasleep at that time. I think it's very important for the Manager, inconsultation with the Chairman, to have discretion. And I, for one,would not like to limit that discretion with any kind of numericalbounds. One thing I think we could do at regular meetings of the FOMCis to give some sense to the Chairman as to how we feel aboutdeviations from policy or a reversal of policy. But I think that canbe done in a general way, without saying if you want to change it $100million come to the Committee; I would leave that to the Chairman.But we could have some general discussion as to when we think, ingeneral terms, a consultation is necessary. And finally, I don'tthink we need any more meetings of the FOMC.SPEAKER(?). Ever?MR. FORRESTAL. I don't think the information to be gained,on say, a monthly basis, is sufficient to have us come together toreview the situation. So I would like to keep our present meetingschedule, gentlemen.-25-3/29/88MR. JOHNSON. I would too, if we're going to do exactly whatwe've been doing. But I think that's consistent with what I'marguing.MR. FORRESTAL. What I'm saying, basically, is just keep whatwe're doing because, as Bob Heller suggests, maybe we've been lucky.And maybe it won't turn out to be quite as good as it has in therecent past, but I think that's something we just have to accept. I'dbe willing to accept those deviations.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think just about everything has beensaid in this conversation. It's a question of emphasizing points.The first point is that we can debate this theoretically,conceptually, now and forever, and it's very frustrating because itinvolves compromise. We are trying to take two different approachesand compromise them and that's not very satisfying. It seems to methe choice, then, comes down to what works. My own preference wouldbe to get back to where we were before October 19th, which is what Ithink we have been doing. I don't think we're quite back there, butwe're almost there.I have a couple of reasons for that preference. One is thatit does seem to have worked reasonably well. But the point was madeearlier that no matter what procedure we have, it's always easy toease; that's not a problem. We've never had any trouble there. Thereal day comes when we need to tighten. I'm sure everybody aroundthis table now is much stronger and much more forthright, has morecourage and guts than anybody else in the history of the Fed, but Ithink there are some lessons from history. And the experience hasshown that the more you focus on the federal funds rate, the moredifficult it is at the time when you need to tighten, to do it. So, Ithink we need to keep a bit of fuzziness there. I would, on verypractical grounds, stay about where we are.On the other issues: I agree with the point that the Chairmanneeds some discretion. I have not in any way been upset by the waythat discretion has been used. Maybe I would have used it a littledifferently, but I think on the whole it has been done rather well.And I don't think we ought to hem the Chairman in with numerical kindsof constraints. There is a way, however, that perhaps communicationcan be sometimes improved. I don't mean to suggest that this needs tobe done every time the Chairman uses discretion, but we can havetelephone conferences. These conferences do not have to be officialmeetings; they do not have to be decision-making meetings. They cansimply be held to exchange views--a kind of meeting that really nevergets on the record if there aren't any decisions made. So, it mightbe possible, in the right kinds of situations, simply to have thesetelephone hookups.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is that factually correct? Can we havea meeting without being on the record?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Oh, sure.MR. BERNARD. Yes.-26-3/29/88MR. BOEHNE. If no decisions are made.MR. KOHN. We have done it both ways, Mr. Chairman.Telephone consultations without votes sometimes are reported andsometimes are not reported. I think more often reported than not.MR. BERNARD. In the last year or two, yes; but before that,it was the other way.MR. BOEHNE. Yes, I think over the longer run Norm Bernard isright; we had more that weren't recorded than were. If decisions aremade, votes are taken, obviously it has to be recorded. If not,there's some discretion. I agree as well that we don't need any moreFOMC meetings, as delightful as these gatherings are.MR. HELLER. You have the shortest commute.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I see no need at this point to change thecurrent procedures. Harking back to Ed Boehne's analogy of 1 to 10, Ithought there were some of us here who would prefer to go back tosomething like a total reserves target or a nonborrowed reserve targetprocedure at some point in time. Keeping the framework that'scurrently in place allows us to keep that hope alive to some extent,whereas if we go straight to explicit funds rate targeting I think wewould be doing ourselves a disservice. It's very hard to reverse thatprocess; my experience in the 1970s leads me to believe that. I wouldstay where we are, in terms of how we're doing this. In terms of theChairman's discretion, I really don't have too much to say about that;I think he's got to have the ability to make some decisions. And Idon't see an easy way to limit that in order to fulfill ourresponsibilities. I think it's a matter of trust, and I'm comfortablewith that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, if I wasn't confused before thisdiscussion, I guess I would be now. I don't know that I have verymuch to add. In thinking about the structure of the Bluebook, I guessI'm persuaded that focusing on a borrowing target and focusing on thefunds rate basically come out to the same thing. When you read aboutthe policy options [in the Bluebook] they give both the borrowinglevels and the interest rate they're consistent with. You canhonestly do it either way. Presumably, they pop out of the same kindsof equations. Having said that, I think one of the major reasons thisdiscussion has come up once again is the more fundamental problem thatwe're all aware of--and we've agonized over for several years now--which is the breakdown of the money/GNP relationship. Without that,we probably wouldn't be going through all this, because we'd be in amore comfortable situation of being able to focus on M1, M2, orsomething else, and just proceed along those lines.Having said all that, I guess I do have a preference forcontinuing to operate the way we were prior to October 19th--which Idon't think is very far from the way we've been operating the last fewweeks either--simply because I think that, on the margin, there issome value to going through the reserve side of the thought process.-27-3/29/88There's an awful lot of volatility out there, and a lot of shocks thathit the financial world and the real economy, and so on and so forth.And it seems to me that we're best advised to try to incorporate asmany of those things as possible.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think maybe I ought to clarifysome of my statements. I would like to say, first of all, that I'mvery sympathetic to what Governor Angell had to say: that what wereally ought to do is control the supply of reserves in such a mannerthat we control whatever monetary aggregate is going to determine thelevel of prices over the long run. I don't think we can really, inthe long run, control real variables; all we can control are nominalones. I think the objective ought to be stable prices. And that'sthe way I would want to do it. If we ever get to that millennium, Ithink that required reserves are probably going to be the best targetfor us against whatever aggregate we settle on. And I wouldn't wantany bands on the federal funds range at all; I would want that to befree to move enough to allow us to hit that target. What I wastalking about earlier was this interim period where the demand formoney has been unstable and our present procedures call for us to tryto gauge the dimensions of the demand for money and set the operatingvariable that will best give us the kind of results we want. And Ithink that's the federal funds rate.So far as this issue of discretion is concerned, I did notmean to take away your flexibility. I was trying to suggest a bandthat was reasonable--that would be agreeable to the whole Committee asan operating range within which you could adjust the rate. I'd liketo use the whole band--that 50-basis-point-average range that I talkedabout--and just have some understanding that if we went beyond that,you would consult with the Committee. There was some discussion, asyou remember, at the last meeting that maybe we shouldn't have changedthe borrowed reserve target without consultation. I didn't hold thatview, but some did. And I thought it was important that we reach someagreement on when there would be a consultation and that's the reasonI suggested it. But, basically, I don't want to do this over the longrun with the federal funds rate at all. I want to do it withreserves, somehow measured, if we can get back to a more rationalfinancial [unintelligible]. So, that's where I come out. Myrecommendation applies only to the interim period that we're in, andif I thought that this would prevent our going back to [reservetargeting]--Lee, as you said--let me change my position.MR. HOSKINS. Let me say, it has always been different.MR. BLACK. Let me change my position because I want to get,I think, where you want to get. And if this would jeopardize that,then I've made a bad mistake.MR. MORRIS. Bob, the interim can turn out to be a long time.MR. BLACK. I know; traditionally, it has been very long.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.-28-3/29/88MR. MELZER. I favor the normal operating procedures, pre-October, without the additional flexibility. The reason I say that isthat, in my mind, we've gone as far on this spectrum as we can gotoward funds rate targeting. And for a lot of reasons, all of whichhave been said--political, the relationship of the funds rate to oureconomic goals, and so forth--I would rather look at our business asbeing defined in terms of reserves, not interest rates. And frankly,even though it might be perceived by us as a subtle shift, if we begingiving Peter directions in terms of the funds rate, eventually that'sgoing to become known. And I think there's a point of intellectualhonesty in terms of communicating that to the public. I don't thinkwe can do that and expect that it will not become known. Then therewill be an issue of why this change in procedures wasn't communicated.The final point I would make--it can be made even with whatwe're doing now, but even more so if we went to a funds rate target--is that to be consistent with what has been done in the past, wecertainly would have to go to a proviso on some aggregate. In otherwords, you would have to have that balance in there. Just as we nowtalk about a degree of reserve restraint, subject to fluctuation inthe funds rate, if you went to a funds rate, it would have to besubject to some constraint on a narrow aggregate, in my judgment.That's all I have.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I'd like to make a couple of comments as a personwho was involved in banking most of the 1970s. The image was that thepolicymakers just had no courage to fight inflation, because thePhillips curve suggested that when you fight inflation you're going torun unemployment up and policymakers couldn't take that heat. I don'tthink people were focusing on whether or not fighting inflation bytightening monetary policy meant concentrating on one variable oranother. It was a bigger issue: they just thought people who madepolicy were a bunch of weenies and couldn't handle the big job. Thatwas the view anyway.I share Manley's frustration with the operation of the Deskat certain points, and I think my frustration reached its peak thistime last year. I would just hope that the record of our discussionswill really sensitize people to the concerns of some of us that whenwe think we've voted for a certain policy at an FOMC meeting and thenwe watch the numbers every day and see that we are getting away fromwhat we thought the Committee voted on--I think maybe this has been aworthwhile exercise. As I said a year ago, we went through a wholemonth where the daily explanation was that we couldn't predictTreasury balances or one thing or another, and that's why we weregetting away from both the borrowing target and where we thought fedfunds might be. And then the light dawned: well, in fact, we reallysnugged a bit. And if that was going to take place--and maybe weneeded to snug, by the way--then I think it should have been broughtto the attention of the FOMC. I think there should have been atelephone call or something. I agree, certainly, that the Chairmanneeds discretion; I would argue that with my last breath. But Ithought that was a policy change. Also, I'm very concerned about themessages that we send to market participants when we miss, forwhatever reason, and when suddenly the fed funds rate runs up--or runsway down, for that matter. I think we could take care of this3/29/88situation if we would release the minutes of the FOMC more promptly.That way we would remove all this mystery about what we're doing andthey would know. They wouldn't have to dig through all these entrailsto try to put together a message. And I think that maybe this minutespolicy is something else we could discuss sometime.I will shut up here by giving an analogy of whether you watchborrowings or fed funds. If you think of yourself as driving anautomobile, most of us, I hope, look out the windshield at the roadahead as we're driving along. But we also have rear view mirrors.And I don't want to ride with any of you who just look at either oneor the other, because sometimes you have to move the steering wheel toavoid side-swiping when you see the guy coming at you in the rear viewmirror. I think the windshield, in this case, would be the borrowingtarget; but we have to take into account the information we pick upthrough the rear view mirror which is the behavior of the fed fundsrate. And because we don't know these relationships really well, orthey change over time, I think we need to be very sensitive to thesemoves in the fed funds rate. Not that we're targeting a number,because I don't believe in that; but at least we should give attentionto it as an indicator of maybe something going wrong in theserelationships--whether there's some little change in banker attitudes,or whatever. Maybe this is a cop out by saying we should use some ofeach, but that's the way I feel.On the frequency of the meetings, I think that eight a yearis just terrific, with the idea being that we can converse in betweenmeetings. We have these nice "lightning rods" they set up on thistable and that makes telephone conferencing very easy when there issome policy change that might need to be considered or even a verymajor change in operations because of an event like last October 19thwhich, as you will recall, was handled by a whole bunch of dailytelephone consultations. So that's my three cents worth.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree with a lotthat has been said around the table. As a matter of fact, some fiveor six speakers ago Ed Boehne said almost everything that has beensaid and I agreed with him there.MR. BLACK. Is that your entire statement, Roger?MR. GUFFEY. Just in summary, my view is very much as statedby Frank Morris and Bob Forrestal: that the current procedure of usingthe borrowing target as a proxy, if you will, for the federal fundsrate or for whatever, gives us some latitude in our operations. Thatseems to me to be desirable at this particular time. And I wouldstrongly oppose moving to simply targeting a federal funds rate, oreven a federal funds range, because it seems to me that as soon as themarket understands that, then it becomes difficult, or almostimpossible, to tighten. You have to keep it a bit fuzzed up to permitthe Committee to operate [unintelligible].Perhaps the issue that is more important is the question offlexibility. And I think the last time I may have made some commentswith respect to that and what happened early in February. My view hasnot changed and I hope I stated it clearly then: I think the Chairman-30-3/29/88and the Desk need flexibility. It's clearly an issue in my mind as towhat is a policy change and how that should be communicated, eitherbefore or after action is taken; and that has to rest largely on theChairman's judgment. And I'm quite willing to place theresponsibility there. When you talk about what is a policy change, Idon't think that you can quantify that. I see in the memorandum thatwas prepared that there's a suggested procedure on page 7: that if theborrowing target is to be moved, the Chairman would have some latitudeto change the borrowing target by $50 million to $100 million. Idon't know, in some circumstances, whether that's really a policychange. But if it were so determined by the Chairman, I would hopethat consultation would take place, and take place before the changeactually was effected by the Desk.Lastly, I guess I would ask that there be some change in aprocedure that I have observed over a number of years, not just thelast 6 months or a year: at times a policy change, perhaps within thescope of the directive, was made within the week before the FOMC met.It was already done before this group gathered around the table. Iobjected strongly to it then, and I would object strongly in thefuture. I would hope that if there is a change, that it would be doneeither around this table or by consultation on the telephone. And Iwould not be in favor of more meetings in Washington, but it is prettyeasy to put together a telephone conference call.MR. JOHNSON. Let me just suggest, Roger, if you look atchart 2, you're in for a lot of phone calls.MR. GUFFEY. Well--MS. SEGER. That's all right.MR. GUFFEY. I'd rather do it that way.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, well, that's what I was talking about.MR. GUFFEY. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. But that's a lot of phone calls, if you look atthat chart.MR. HELLER. If I look at the chart here correctly, in 1985there were 10 changes in the borrowing assumption. Were they allphone calls? They weren't all FOMC meetings; were they phone calls?MR. GUFFEY. In 1985?MR. HELLER. Yes.MR. GUFFEY. Some of them were phone calls; and some of themwere recorded because there were actually votes taken. Some changeswere actually made without telephone calls the week before an FOMCmeeting.MR. HELLER. And they're plotted here as official changes?MS. SEGER. Yes.-31-3/29/88MR. JOHNSON. Yes, everything on that solid line is anofficial change.MR. GUFFEY. Everything was--MR. HELLER. But how can you have an official change withouta vote being taken?MR. JOHNSON. Well, that's what Don said. I asked him; everyconsultation that was a policy change is on that solid line.MR. HELLER. Oh, I see.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Every change in the borrowings levelis on that solid line.MR. KOHN. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. Yes; that's what a policy change is.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But not the other--no, that's whereI think there's a difference of opinion.MR. JOHNSON. You're talking about the chart--the top of thechart.MR. HELLER. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. Top chart.MR. HELLER. Yes, the box.MR. JOHNSON. What is a policy change if it's not a change inborrowing?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, that's the question.MR. HELLER. And what is plotted here?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Now, when you look at the rate of[unintelligible]--I think that is the crucial question.MR. KOHN. Every change in the borrowing assumption.MR. HELLER. Borrowing assumption by the Committee or by theDesk?MR. KOHN. Well, the assumption used in constructing thereserve paths. Sometimes these changes were made at Committeemeetings; sometimes they were made between Committee meetings.MR. HELLER. Without a Committee vote?MR. KOHN. They have been made without a formal Committeevote. That's not for all of them but--MR. HELLER. No, no, I just---32-3/29/88MR. KOHN. It has happened on occasion; and that's theflexibility that we're discussing.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That, I think, is the crucialquestion I was trying to get at before: What is a policy change? Ihave never felt that every change in the borrowings number in thatpath has to be considered a policy change. If a change in borrowingis made that is consistent with the way the directive was structuredby the Committee, it doesn't follow to me that that is a change inpolicy. Indeed, that's why I think that it's quite appropriate thatthat be done by the Chairman.MR. JOHNSON. Well, that's fine; but Don is suggesting in hispaper that $50 million to $100 million variation--MR. KOHN. Well, I think Peter and I had remembered thatthese are the kinds of changes that had been made between Committeemeetings. Let me just add a clarification in response to GovernorHeller. There are sentences in the directive which allow thesechanges to be made; and that was the direction of the Committee.MR. HELLER. I was just asking for the facts; I wasn't tryingto criticize anything. I was just trying to find out the factualinformation as to whether the line here reflected Committee votes orwhatever you actually put into the path.MR. STERNLIGHT. It reflects what was put in the path.MR. HELLER. What was actually in the path.MR. KOHN. That's correct.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But, again, it seems to me that'sthe--MR. HELLER. Well, I was looking at the chart because Ithought these were Committee votes.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. And I think it's crucial for you,Mr. Chairman, because as I tried to say before, ultimately thequestion that is on the table here--aside from the substantivequestion--is under what conditions do the procedures create asituation in which you are, in effect, required to make a publicstatement--through a testimony, a speech, or one way or another--thatFed policy has changed. And I don't want to get into a situation inwhich you have to do that every two months or every two weeks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me tell you how I would define it.I would define a policy change as one resulting from a change in theeconomic fundamentals which the FOMC did not perceive, or had notanticipated, and it required some form of adjustment. Incrementalchanges to fine tune are not policy changes.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Okay; then, many of these thingshere would not be policy changes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. Don, that's the way I look at it.But, I think it's important for the Committee, not the Chairman, to-33-3/29/88define what constitutes a policy change. It's in the discretion ofthe Committee to set policy. It's in the discretion, as I hear ithere, of the Desk in consultation with the Chairman to merely finetune in that context. But you cannot simultaneously have the Desk orthe Chairman define what a change in policy is, because that will ofnecessity always override the Committee. So, I think what is requiredis that we get an agreement about what constitutes a change in policy.As I read it, we have a meeting and there's a consensus which emergeswith respect to what the outlook is, and that is implicit in thedirective. Often the directive is very vague; if somebody were totell me that that is an extremely sharp [unintelligible] set ofinstructions, I would tell them I don't understand the language. Butwhat is clear is the preceding discussion about what the generalimpression is, what various numbers were--[the context] in which weconstructed that directive. And they are rather sophisticatedinsights which are very difficult to put down, but which I think arenot unambiguous. I know that if somebody asked me what the FOMC'sviews were at the last meeting, I'd have no trouble describing them--not in directive terms, but in terms of how the Committee evaluatedthe economy and the financial system and what it, therefore, thoughtwas an appropriate policy. As best I can see it, when things changesuch that the Committee's view of the outlook is changing and thattherefore alters the structure of the directive--that I would considera change in policy.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, from your perspective did we havea policy change the first of February?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, we did not.MR. ANGELL. Okay; that's what I was assuming--that wedidn't. But then, when you went before the Congress, I thought therewas an indication that there was a policy change.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I think that was merely anaffirmation of what the markets were questioning: whether, in fact, wehad nudged down slightly in the funds rate--which we had, by about1/8th. And the only reason to put that in at the time was not as astatement of policy change, but as an affirmation of what the marketshad been discussing.MR. ANGELL. I think that focuses on the point that if you'relooking at adjustment plus seasonal borrowing, then that small changemight have been consistent with, what, a $50 million change?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. A $50 million change.MR. ANGELL. A $50 million change. Clearly, it seems to me,if you make a $50 million change in borrowing, it's so slight that youwouldn't consider it a policy change and you wouldn't announce it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think the issue is not so muchwhether it should be announced but whether it should be confirmed ornot. The reason I chose to, at the time, was that a lot of peoplewere asking that question, and the simplest way of resolving it--instead of being sphinxlike--was just to admit to it. If it gets tothe point that every statement the Chairman makes is a statement of a3/29/88change in policy, then we really better think out what the Chairman issupposed to say.MR. ANGELL. But I think that's Jerry's point: that targetingthe fed funds rate may put you in a position of having to make astatement more often than would be the case otherwise. Do we reallywant that?MR. JOHNSON. I don't see how that would be the case.MR. ANGELL. It's because the market was able to discern [achange in the desired funds rate]. Under the adjustment plus seasonalborrowing procedure, the market wouldn't have known, on an 1/8th of apoint move.MR. JOHNSON. But you say that's not a policy change. Whywouldn't it be a policy change?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It really gets to a question of what thedefinition of change is, because it is extremely rare that there arebig discontinuities involved here. But there's an awful lot ofambiguity about when you go from here to there; it's not a clear cutthing. I must say that before I attended FOMC meetings, I had adifferent view of what constitutes the nature of policy, because Iused to read the directives and I couldn't for the life of me figureout what in the world they were talking about. But now, given the fewFOMC meetings I've attended, I'm realizing what it is.MR. HELLER. But there's a difference between long-run andshort-run policy, too. I think Jerry was addressing that earlier. Ifyou're setting your long-run monetary growth targets, and in order notto change your long-run policy you're making a short-term adjustment--let's say in borrowing targets--to get closer to that, you can arguethat your long-run policy is unchanged, and therefore, you've got tochange your short-term tactics. I think that's where the ambiguitycomes in.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's part of it. Regardless ofwhat you use as your indicators or your proxies, I think that one wayor another we have to try to project an underlying forward lookingconsistency in policy that ultimately overrides all this noise.Again, as I said before, I think part of the problem is that each ofus, in our own way, looks through the noise anyway. Obviously, ourjudgments about the noise are conditioned by what we see and feelabout the economy, inflation and the stuff that really matters. Andit's not easy to capture that in the directive either.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. At this point I'm not sure I can handle it! Iwas intrigued with a line at the end of Ann-Marie Meulendyke'smemorandum which says that what apparently started out as a temporaryprocedure has persisted, with modifications, for over five years. Itseems to me that there hasn't been such a significant change ofcircumstances at this particular time that we ought to make a change[in our procedure.] I'm not persuaded by either the memo or thediscussion that we really have a hard basis for making a change. Andif we do, I think it ought to be very well grounded. Having said-35-3/29/88that, I would have a reluctance to shift to any kind of fed funds ratetargeting. We are discussing this at a fairly benign period; theeconomy is moving along pretty well, inflation is higher than we likebut still not out of control, and the interest rate structure ispretty good. But that won't always be the case. As we've said acouple of times, there are going to be some circumstances in whichwe'll need to tighten. And I think the political pressure would cometo bear if we were using the fed funds rate as our focal point--thenchange would be very tough. I'm reminded of that line: "Don't shootthe piano player, he's all we've got." It seems to me the presentprocedure has been serving us pretty well; I don't see a reason formaking a change.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I'm not a proponent for changinganything we're doing. I'm satisfied with where we are and, therefore,I really have nothing to contribute to this discussion. I assume thatnothing's going to change; and if that's so, I'll be satisfied.SPEAKER(?). Except the discount rate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, as the one at the table who hasthe least background in this, I've been enormously instructed by thiswhole exercise.MR. BLACK. Say that again.MR. KELLEY. I don't want to get too explicit about what theinstruction was, but I have appreciated it. I came to this discussionwithout any firm convictions one way or the other, so it has been veryinteresting for me to listen to the arguments on both sides. WhereI'm coming down is to stay where we are, largely on the arguments thatsurround the flexibility that this procedure gives us. Also, I likethe way that market forces have at least an opportunity to showthrough on this procedure more clearly than they would if we went tothe other route. So, I'm comfortable with staying where we are.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I wouldn't change the current operatingprocedures either. I think the experience with fed funds targetingwas not very good and it seems to me that, for the time being, weought to stick with these procedures. Hopefully, some time in thefuture we'll be able to move more in a direction of using aggregates.I don't want more meetings.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It turned out much longer than we hadscheduled, but actually it has been an extraordinarily useful meeting.As I read the tone of the proceedings, what comes out is that weprobably would like something firmer to target. To somehow get arestoration of the monetary targets and income velocities that looklike we could use them, would get us back to the fundamental approachof what monetary policy is all about--namely, interfacing not withinterest rates, but with the financial variables in the system whichaffect inflation and real growth in the real world, rather than the-36-3/29/88intermediate proxies that are involved. I sense that there is ageneral view of satisfaction--that may be too strong of a word--asense of resignation to current procedures, largely with theassumption that this five-year transition won't last for another fiveyears. And, hopefully, we'll get to something a little firmer totarget.What I would like to suggest, however, is that rather thanjust allow this issue to fade away, we come back to it again at somepoint--maybe six months, maybe a year from now. So long as we're in atransition period, I think we should not behave as though it is apermanent, fully satisfactory and solid procedure. I don't thinkanyone around this table has said that. What I hear is a fairly broadconsensus that we stay where we are, but that we continually reviewit. If there are no objections, I would like to reschedule a reviewof this in nine months or a year or so, depending on what thecircumstances are.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Do it in December.MR. ANGELL. So this takes us back to pre-October 19th?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, we're pretty much back. Since timeis running short, I would ask the Vice Chairman whether we could leavethe issue of the timing of the organization meeting to the nextmeeting?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Sure.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Because we're not going to bereorganizing again, hopefully, for a while.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is probably an appropriate time tobreak for coffee and we will come back.[Coffee break]MR. PRELL. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, I might just apprise the Committeeof the data made available this morning. One is the leadingindicators series, which shows an increase of .9 percent in February,compared with a 1.1 percent decline the previous month. We also havenew home sales which were up 20 percent in February, but to a levelthat's just around the fourth-quarter average. That's consistent withthe other housing data we see.MR. PARRY. That represented a significant downward revisionfrom January.MR. PRELL. It wasn't significant, but it was .3.MR. FORRESTAL. Mike, I heard what you said aboutinventories, but I guess I am a little confused about the numbers that-37-3/29/88are in the Greenbook as compared to the text. The numbers in theGreenbook looked fairly high to me, whereas the text seemed toindicate a slowdown, which I agree with, in inventory buildup. UnlessI am misinterpreting the numbers, I would have thought there wouldhave been a greater effect on the economy from that level of inventorybuildup.MR. PRELL. The current number for the fourth quarter onnonfarm inventories is $57-1/2 billion, at an annual rate. We had$53-1/2 billion in the Greenbook, which went out before the GNPrelease. It's not very much different; there's a slightly differentlevel of auto inventories primarily. In our forecast, the rate ofinventory accumulation declines by $20 billion in the first quarter toaround $34-1/2 billion. That is, in a sense, a significant drag onoutput growth in the first quarter, and it occurred basically in theauto industry. We had, essentially, a $20 billion dollar swing in therate of inventory investment in the auto industry and that accountedfor something on the order of a percentage point on GNP. But thesurprise for us--as the data look at this point, and that's what we'rebuilding into our forecast--is that outside of automobiles the rate ofinventory accumulation does not seem to have slowed in the firstquarter. In the last forecast, I think we put in something on theorder of a $10 billion decline in the rate of non-auto inventoryaccumulation. So, in that sense, to the extent that businessesweren't as anxious to reduce stocks, you could view that as somethingof a plus for the economy in the first quarter relative to ourexpectation.MR. MORRIS. I think that one of the critical issues for thisyear is the ability of our manufacturing capacity to deal with thedemand that is going to be placed upon it. Looking at your numbersthat show only a very modest increase in capacity utilization, is thisa consoling factor to you, as far as being able to exert somerestraint on the ability of manufacturers to raise prices? Or shouldI read something else into it?MR. PRELL. I think we feel we are in a zone where there isconsiderable uncertainty. The capacity utilization rates are not evenacross industries. We already have seen price pressures in someindustries that we think are a function not just of the dollar declinebut of actual pressures on capacity, with a backlog in orders that hasbuilt up. There are many manufacturers who have their customers onallocation. They seem to have been rather restrained, to date, intheir pricing. In fact, in some cases, they could probably be moreaggressive but don't seem to be moving that way because of longer-runconsiderations, such as their customer relationships and so on. Butthe kind of increase we've had in capacity utilization doesn't signalto us a major change in that picture. At this point, we think thereare risks. If we were to write down a still higher number, our degreeof discomfort, or our worry about pressures, could materially change.MR. MORRIS. Steve McNees reminded me yesterday that theaverage miss in GNP forecasts made in the first quarter is plus orminus 1-1/2 percent. It seems to me that if we miss on the upsidethis time, we could have some really serious problems with pricepressures in manufacturing.-38-3/29/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. He was referring to the run-of-the-millforecast, not the staff's. [Laughter.]MR. PRELL. That's a hypothesis I don't want to test!MR. MORRIS. But it is a sobering number. We don't reallyhave much room. It seems that the forecast you are giving us is 2.7percent real growth; that's probably as much as we can stand withoutgenerating some serious price problems.MR. PRELL. I think that's what is suggested by our forecast,but there is uncertainty about many elements of this. One is on thelabor markets side. As I suggested, our work to date has failed tofind convincing evidence that the natural rate of unemployment (NAIRU)is lower than we currently are. The range of our estimates is fromaround where we are to a higher level. Others have looked at thesethings differently and have come up with conclusions that may give usa bit more room on the downside. So, for the labor market side, maybeit isn't quite the razor's edge that this kind of forecast suggests.On the capacity side, [unintelligible] just how things turn out in themix of demands and how rapidly expansion of capacity occurs in theparticular industries where demand is strongest. So, I wouldcharacterize the picture as being a little mushier than these precisenumbers suggest; but we do think that we're pretty close in our bottomline assessment.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I lost the tail end of your remarks,Ted. You cited a rule of thumb--and I think you said 10 percent--MR. TRUMAN. In the forecast, where we have a decline in thedollar at an annual rate of a little less than 10 percent occurringsmoothly over the forecast period, that's not a big factor, vis-a-visan absolutely stable dollar, because half of it comes after the firstpart of 1989. Remember now, inflation is a little higher than it wasearlier. With a situation in which you have something like a 10percent decline in the first quarter of 1988, the rule of thumb--taking into account feedback effects, such as a damping in demandabroad and increased demand here--would say that that would add 2 to 3percent to the level of goods output in the fourth quarter of nextyear. Goods output is now running $1.6 trillion in 1982 dollars.It's a nontrivial amount, but most of it is in 1989. But that's theaggregate amount; it's certainly true that you could well get severepressures in particular industries.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Goods output in the context you areusing it here--that's something I could roughly associate withindustrial production as well?MR. TRUMAN. Roughly, yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The problem of using that, of thepotential inventory change, is it because of consumption goods?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No.MR. TRUMAN. It would be investment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The GNP [unintelligible].-39-3/29/88MR. TRUMAN. Yes. Right.MR. JOHNSON. I just wanted to ask a question about themodels and the natural rate. What do they say about the kind ofpressures that develop for wages as you approach the natural rate? Iassume you get a lot of wage pressure after you pass the natural rate,but wouldn't you expect a good bit of pressure as you approach it?MR. PRELL. In the models, it generally would be constructedwith some discontinuity on this, so when you get there, then thingsemerge. But we also know we can't pinpoint it. Looking at differentvariations on structural models and different estimating periods andso on, we can get a very broad range of estimates.MR. JOHNSON. I'm just suggesting that if we were, in fact,at the natural rate, you would expect to have seen a lot ofcompensation pressures as you approached it. The interesting point isthat we have not really seen a lot of upward pressure as we reachedthe 5.7 percent rate. So it could be the capacity level. I think wewere starting to see some of those pressures maybe earlier last yearbefore--MR. PRELL. For last year, it's a matter of interpretation tosome degree. To put it in mathematical terms, there are other termsin those equations. One of them would be expectations about prices,and that could have given us the surprise we had last year, as opposedto the natural rate being different than we anticipated in our models.That is something we have taken into account in our forecast, in thatindividuals may not be setting their expectations as high as therecent inflation experience would suggest is necessary to maintainreal wages, because they are fearful about losing their jobs in thevery competitive international marketplace particularly.MR. JOHNSON. But that would suggest a lower natural rate.MR. PRELL. It could look that way.MR. JOHNSON. If they are fearful of their jobs in thisenvironment, that means the natural rate is lower.MR. PRELL. It depends on which terms you want to adjusthere, and it's not entirely clear. That's one way. In fact, if youback out the natural rate from our recent experience it suggests thatwhat we built into our forecast--if you take the price expectationsbeing developed in the usual way--could be a natural rate that isaround 4 -4.5 percent. That is the calculation; but we don't reallythink that the natural rate is that low. So, we think there issomething else going on in terms of the expectations of labor andmanagement at this stage [unintelligible] consistent with ourforecast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One thing we tend to forget is that whena lot of this discussion emerged on resource stringency and the like,we were in the 1950s and 1960s. At that time, we used to think that abig inflationary push was when the inflation rate went from 2-3/4 to3-1/2 percent. We had some really tight markets in those periods andwhat we learned, especially in retrospect, was that something happenedin the 1970s. It's not strictly the pressure question because we had-40-3/29/88much more pressure back in the '60s than now and inflation rates wereconsiderably below where they are now. There was very littleinflation premium embodied in long-term interest rates. And yet therewas this standard--they didn't call it NAIRU then, but they had thiscapacity constraint question. There is a tendency in today'senvironment to take the single points of the 1970s and say inflationpressures mean 3 percentage points, or 4 or 5 points. And I suspectwhat we are looking at is not this resource allocation pressure butthe issue of financial change that has occurred and the money supplyand expectations effect that you are referring to. But it may turnout that one fallout from this disinflationary period is that we mayhave--without our knowing it, and we won't know it until later--successfully lowered the response rate of the NAIRU or the capacityrestraint question.When we look at capacity--and the Fed is the official sourceof these data--capacity is a very dubious concept. You really don'tknow whether or not you have run into capacity until you have someobjective measures of the inability to meet customer orders. That isreally what it's all about. And the lead times on the deliveries onmaterials--with the exception of steel, [unintelligible] metalsproducts, paper and the like--haven't really expanded all that much.In other words, the system is producing to demand, and even though thebacklogs go up, there is no evident pressure. So, while I think weare getting close, and I think the issues we are raising are thecorrect ones, let's stay with the numbers. And the numbers at thisstage are still telling us that there is some flexibility there yet.There may not be much, but I don't see it, and I guess you don'teither. It's conceivable that the NAIRU may be lower or that excesscapacity in terms of current costs may be still larger in general. Iwould hate for us to make an assumption and start crying wolf, andthen stop crying wolf at the point where the whole thing blows up onus. I think we may have some flexibility here, but not an awful lot.As I see it, the facts don't show anything else. Do you disagree withthat view?MR. PRELL. I guess it's a question of whether the glass ishalf empty or half full--how much of these price increases you seecoming in materials and so on that you view as part of a broaderphenomenon or as one-time relative price adjustments. But the list ofitems that purchasing managers report in short supply has lengthenedconsiderably; and there seem to be lots of reports of supplies beingtight and various materials and components [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It seems that people still report ondeliveries in qualitative terms--only relative to something else.When they give you the real numbers [unintelligible].MR. PRELL. They don't seem to be terribly anxious aboutgetting goods. They're not ordering very much farther in advance thana quarter. So, your bottom line of there being some areas where weshould look at this carefully is, I think, [right]. We think thingshave tightened up, but it's not clear to us that there is imminentdanger of broad acceleration.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We are not getting an inventory rush,which is when things are getting tight, purchasing managers aregetting scared, and they really start to load up. They just haven't.-41-3/29/88MR. PRELL. What we do see is a mixture of things. We havecapacity utilization at the point where product markets have gottentighter; there is more pricing discretion on the part of manymanufacturers. If we do continue to get the effects on import pricesfrom the decline of the dollar, if wages do begin to pick up as alagged adjustment to the price increases that we have already seen andthe lower rate of unemployment, that is an environment where I thinkpricing could firm considerably.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that is exactly the way to putit. You're in a high risk area, where if anything goes wrong, pricescould accelerate. Any other questions before we go to the general goaround? We are now open to general discussions. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the Twelfth District economycontinues to exhibit strength and we see few signs of weakness. Aparticularly encouraging sign is the apparent broadening of theexpansion throughout the region. States that have had weak ornegative growth because of problems in agriculture, mining, and energyare now growing. Manufacturing is enjoying strong growth, especiallyin export- and resource-related areas. In our view, this expansiondoes not appear to be threatened by excessive inventories. Oursources generally indicate inventories are at or below desired levels.It appears as though retailers followed a more cautious inventory-stocking policy following the stock market decline in October.Looking at the national economy, our forecast is for lessgrowth in 1988 than in the Greenbook and about the same growth in1989. Differences in our forecast center around the size of inventoryadjustments and the amount of improvement in net exports. But, itseems to me that the important point is that both forecasts indicatereasonably strong growth this year and next. I feel that both ourinflation forecast and that of the Greenbook are very distressing,especially for 1989. It seems to me that the prospect of compensationper hour rising and approaching 5 percent in 1989 is intolerable, ifindeed, our objective is to move gradually to price stability.MR. KEEHN. I certainly agree with the direction of the staffforecast, and I think that from a national perspective the economyreally is improving with the passage of time. That is consistent withthe conditions in the District which are also improving and I thinkthe improvement is quite broad-based. I commented before on the steelbusiness: it is continuing to operate at a very high level; indeed,those in the Midwest are operating pretty much at capacity. And I ambeginning to hear a phrase that I haven't heard in a great many years,namely, "double ordering." People are very much in the business ofdouble ordering for steel; and if they get both, they are pleased totake both because they basically need the steel.But there are other parts of the manufacturing sector thatare showing good improvement. We have been hearing for some monthsnow about the improvement in the machine tools business from variouspeople in the District. Earlier this week we saw some articles on theimprovement that is taking place in that industry. Orders for miningequipment and railroad cars are better than they were--showingimprovement, albeit from low levels. There are no capacity problemsthere, but nonetheless the trend is up, not down. And, almostunbelievably, the heavy construction equipment industry has turned-42-3/29/88around again, quite significantly, and they are operating at a highlevel. In farm equipment, last year's big inventories of agriculturalimplements have largely been worked down, as retail inventories are ata much lower level; and production in that industry is picking up.Mike Prell mentioned that the auto production schedules for the secondquarter are higher--some 4 percent higher for the second quarter thisyear as compared to last year--given higher sales in the firstquarter. So I think, as I look across the District, that thefundamental conditions are showing signs of improvement.The mystery in all of this, at least from my point of view,is the inflation situation. I keep hearing about these big increasesin prices--in steel, aluminum, other metals such as nickel, and inpaper products and raw materials going into that industry.who is in the paper industry commented on the verysignificant price increases that they have experienced on their rawmaterials. So far it has been at the intermediate level; it hasn'tgone through into finished products. But I think there are somemargin squeezes out there, and I'm hearing about some anticipatedprice increases. for example, commented thatthey have price increases announced for April 1; they're not surewhether the increases are going to stick because their circumstancesare pretty competitive. Nonetheless, some price increases in finishedproducts are beginning to move forward. Certainly, that has not shownthrough in the price indices; and there would be no reason to make achange in policy now based on the indices. While the economic outlookcontinues to be favorable, and I think we can clearly be pleased withthe outlook, there are these upward pressures. And I think the worryhas to be on the inflationary side. That is the part of this that wehave to be particularly alert to.MR. BOEHNE. My District continues to be characterized byhigh levels of activity. The most common comment that one hears isthat labor markets are very tight: it's hard to attract unskilledworkers; turnover rates tend to be rising; local help-wanted indicesare high compared to the nation. When you talk to manufacturers, andsome retailers, and even bankers, there is a dichotomy between whatthey say and what seems to be going on underneath. If you sit arounda luncheon table and have an informal discussion, you would think thatwe were heading into a depression and things were terrible, in termsof the general conversation. But then when you ask them what they aredoing, what their orders are, what their plans are, whether they arehiring people, whether they are expanding, you get a wholly differentpicture. I find this dichotomy in their minds about what's going onto be fascinating.On the national economy, it seems to me we are in a period ofevolving risks: in November-December, the risks were on the side ofnot enough growth; the last time we met, I think the risks were aboutevenly balanced; and at this meeting, I think the risks have shiftedmore toward the inflation side. That's all I have, Mr. Chairman.MR. FORRESTAL. The better-than-average growth that we haveseen around the country is also reflected in the Sixth District. Wehave seen a remarkable resurgence in manufacturing over the pastseveral months, but with some slowdown in retail trade, services, andhousing, which I guess is pretty much the same around the country. Iwas interested, Mr. Chairman, in your comments about capacity-43-3/29/88utilization because, while the evidence that I have heard from peoplearound my District confirms a lot of what you said, there are someindustries, as you indicated, that are reporting difficulties infilling orders. In the paper, paperboard, and steel industries, thetime frame I hear is 5-6 weeks; but interestingly, in the paper andapparel industries, I'm hearing reports that some of this ordering maybe precautionary because of concerns about capacity utilization.Maybe that is equivalent to the double ordering that Si Keehn talkedabout. I think a lot of people still have some skepticism about thevalue of the dollar remaining where it is and the sustainability ofthe tradable goods sector. But even with that skepticism, I think thevery high capacity utilization in some industries is now causingpeople to take another look at the business investment situation. Infact, some are doing more business fixed investment than I had beenaware of before. Associated with that, I guess, business loans aroundthe District are up, on average. The thing that I hear talked aboutmore than anything else these days is price pressures. There is someconcern about inflation in the labor market in the District and just ageneral fear of inflation, which isn't really reflected in the numbersthat people give you. But there is this general sense that they areconcerned about it. Overall, in the District, our growth has beensomewhat stronger than the nation and we think that it's going toretain that edge in 1988.Now with respect to the national economy, our outlook forreal GNP is about the same as the Greenbook; ours is just a littlelower--2.5 percent as opposed to your 2.7 percent. But thecomposition is really quite different. We show substantially lessinventory accumulation, with the offset in higher personal consumptionexpenditures, particularly after the 1st quarter, and also morebusiness fixed investment. Our outlook for inflation is generally thesame as the Board staff's. I remain concerned not only about importprices, but also about pressures building in the labor market, whichI've heard about in the District. We haven't seen any dramaticbreakout in labor costs but I think the potential is there. The lasttime we met I guess I felt that the risks to the economy were fairlyevenly balanced, but I was more concerned about the downside than theupside. I've changed my mind now and I think that we face thepossibility of too much growth rather than too little at this time,especially given the small amount of slack in major industries.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, on the national economy, we wouldline up pretty well with the Greenbook forecast. We've felt for thelast several months that on the national level we [unintelligible]fairly good performance. Looking at the District level, and I guessmore particularly at Texas, about the only bright spot that we canfind is in manufacturing, where we are seeing improvement. We'rehaving employment in the manufacturing area as great as, if notgreater than, other parts of the country; and of course, the servicesindustries related to that are doing well. Having said that, I'vesaid about all of the good that I can. The overall unemployment ratein Texas, for example, is well over 8 percent, which is considerablyabove the national rate. Agriculture did have a good year; it ishoped that it will have another one. I think drought conditions mightbe developing and are causing us to wonder slightly about that.Obviously, one of the major things going on down our way isthe bank and financial conditions, which I understand we will get into-44-3/29/88later in some detail. But it's a very, very heavy overhang in termsof attitudes and willingness to take on new ventures. There'scertainly concern over the ability to obtain financing from financialinstitutions in the local area. The real estate situation obviouslyhas contributed very significantly to these problems and there is noshort-term solution to that. It's going to be more long-term, asopposed to immediate, as far as what's going to be happening in Texas.I think it's going to be a very close race between the ability of ourlocal financial institutions and businesses to improve their balancesheets and get a little sounder footing and the onset of a downturn inthe national economy at some point. If we do encounter such adownturn before we are able to position ourselves a little better, weare going to have even bigger problems than we already have.MR. MELZER. I want to comment on a particular area ofactivity: commercial construction. We had a group in recently and acouple of things came out of the discussion that really surprised me,in terms of psychology. St. Louis and the District in general havelagged the national economy in this area. We have not had theoverbuilding that occurred elsewhere, so I don't know if theseobservations are broadly applicable. We kicked off the discussion bytalking about the external adjustment process and what theimplications of that were for savings and investments--to see whetherthese real estate people were seeing any pressures on the financingside. And what we heard is that they are literally awash with money--foreign money, insurance company money, [unintelligible] October 19.Nobody mentioned that there was a flow of monies into real estatebecause of inflationary expectations. The other thing that we did notpick up in this discussion, which surprised me, was any sense ofcaution about the ability to build space, lease it up, and so forth.Well, I shouldn't say that--there was one person who was somewhatcautious. But the general mood was ostensible optimism. Finally, Iwas surprised at what I heard on the inflationary front: people on thebuilding side said that they could still build things for what it costthem four years ago. I asked specifically about steel. Two peoplesaid that the one area where they picked up some sense of pricepressure was on the operating side--that it was difficult to make thekind of margins they would like to make. So, I relate thatdiscussion.I also have some observations about what is going on with thetakeover and LBO activity and so on. Last night we met with aninvestment manager who was saying that junk bond spreads to Treasuriesare as narrow as they have ever been historically, and the GIC marketis very tight just because there isn't enough high yield product outthere to satisfy the demand. And I think to myself, here we arethree, four months or so after October 19 and there is all thisleveraging and speculative activity going on at a time when, frankly,I would like to see a little more caution.I think we are all comforted that consumer confidence hasheld up. But at the moment there is a lot of liquidity out there.I'm not saying that we provided it; I don't mean to suggest that wehave been pumping in a lot of reserves. But, if you look at theconstruction industry on the inflation front, it's kind of a tinderbox waiting to go off. If the inflationary psychology tips there, andthat gets factored into interest rates, people will try to move veryquickly to lock in financing and begin building before the inflation3/29/88hits. I think it could create a surge in spending. I am somewhatconcerned about that aspect, and as I say, just in general about thespeculative activity--the highly leveraged type of activity--thatresumed so quickly after October 19.MR. BLACK. I think these upward revisions that the staff hasmade are perfectly appropriate, Mr. Chairman, in light of the data wehave gotten since the last meeting. I keep thinking about a remarksomeone made then about how nice it would be if we could hold ontothese things--the low unemployment and the rate of growth for thesixth and now the seventh year of expansion--still without much pickupin prices. I'd buy that scenario any time and I guess a lot of otherpeople would too. I suppose some people might think that this is arather rosy scenario, but I really think the danger lies on the otherside: that we may get too much strength in the economy, more than wenow anticipate, and this might stimulate a sharp increase ininflationary expectations with the predictable fallouts on the dollarand U.S. interest rates. And I believe that that is a risk we can dosomething about with monetary policy. I think we ought to beconcerned about it, and in that connection, I would be getting alittle concerned about the strength in the aggregates. I would reallybe concerned if that continues for another month or so in the face ofapparent strength in the economy. I am not yet suggesting that theaggregates have gotten to the point where we ought to place as muchemphasis on them as we did a few years ago, but I think they now maybe giving us better information about the economy than they were awhile back. I think it would be wise to pay a little more attentionto them than to try to appraise the strength of the business outlookas we have been doing the last several months.MR. STERN. As far as the economy of the District isconcerned, the expansion is continuing at a modest pace, and isreasonably broad-based by now. I, too, have heard a few scatteredreports about double ordering, and I don't think there is any questionthat, at least at current exchange rates, a lot of businesses in ourDistrict certainly can compete with foreign producers and foreignproducts.As far as the national outlook is concerned, I have changedmy forecast pretty much as the staff has changed theirs in theGreenbook. I have been surprised by the tenor of the incoming data onthe national economy, which is generally better than I had expected.I think that does call for revising up the near-term forecast. Whatit says about the longer-term prospect for real growth, I am notaltogether sure, but it makes me marginally more confident about theoutlook. As several people already have commented, the reallystriking feature about the outlook--both the one presented in theGreenbook and the one that we have developed [at our Bank]--is theacceleration of inflation that seems to be in prospect. Obviously,there is a lot of uncertainty surrounding that, as there always is.And the acceleration is not dramatic, but I certainly find ittroubling. I think that perhaps that is the key aspect at this point.MR. HOSKINS. The Fourth District is pretty much as Ireported last time. Manufacturing activity is very strong. We haveseveral firms, primarily in primary metals, that have reported thatthey are at capacity levels; they simply can't produce anything else.One of those firms is considering some kind of expansion at this-46-3/29/88point, because they believe the demand is going to last a lot longerthan they had anticipated before. That is primarily because of theclient involved. We see a reaching of capacity limits now across abroad spectrum of manufacturing activities, from glass throughchemicals, at least with the firms within our District. Noteverybody, though, is planning to move ahead to build plants or expandcapacity; there are still a lot of people who are not quite ready totake that step.In terms of price increases, you heard me say last time that,at least at a couple of firms, primary metals--steel principally--haverisen 15 percent or so. I have not heard of any new price increasessince then, but that is coming out of the gate at the start of theyear with a pretty hefty price increase. We are getting the samething in chemical products now: 10 to 15 percent price increases. Butthey have not shown up in the national indices.In terms of the overall outlook for the country, we are verysimilar to the staff in terms of real growth. The composition issomewhat different: we actually have stronger PCE--as we've had forthe last six months, probably--and weaker net exports. I have someconcerns if you're right on exports and we're wrong. But if we'reright on PCE and you are wrong, we have a problem. Given thepotential for that problem, I see a resource-constraint type ofproblem; trying to make room to ship goods abroad with our resourcesrequires a slowdown in the expansion of consumption. If we don't getthat, then I think we are going to get the inflation forecast that myown staff is turning out, which is very similar to yours. Andfrankly, I find the CPI [projection] of 5 percent in the second halfof the year a very distressing number to have to face, when I thinkthat our objective, as I stated before, ought to be price stability--and by that I mean zero.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, we also have revised up ourforecast, particularly for the first quarter, but we still don't cometo as strong a forecast for the year as a whole as the Board staffdoes; we're roughly one percent less than that. We have not quite asmuch growth in the first quarter and substantially less in the secondquarter; the third and fourth quarters look about the same. Thedifference largely, as has been mentioned already, is in theprojection for inventories. We would see the growth of inventories tobe somewhat less than in the Board staff's forecast. I assume theunderlying assumption of the Board staff is that the buildup in thefourth quarter largely was voluntary and will continue at fairly highlevels in the period ahead. We would think that is not the case, andas a result, that is the difference in the forecast.With respect to the Tenth District, there has not been agreat deal of change from what was reported last month. I will justgo through the various activities. Agriculture has had a very goodyear, largely because of government transfer payments, but alsobecause red meat prices, principally cattle, have been very good.Export-related activities have picked up; there is some hope thatperhaps in 1988 the government subsidy that goes with that will, in asense, continue to permit agricultural products to be shipped abroad.With regard to energy, what had looked at the end of 1987 to be a bitof a recovery, particularly in terms of exploration, has turned backaround because of the instability of energy prices. For example, in-47-3/29/88December there were 363 rigs working in the Tenth District; in Januarythat fell to 307, and in February it fell to 271. It's simply amatter of the instability in those prices. People are not willing toput their money out to put a hole in the ground and hope that there'ssomething at the bottom of it. If some stability comes through OPECpricing, then I think that very quickly they will be back toexploration in our area. With regard to commercial real estate, it'sflat in most areas with the exception of Omaha and Kansas City. Butit's overbuilt in Denver, Oklahoma City, and Tulsa; and as a result,as Bob Boykin has mentioned, that is a long-term workout problem thatprobably isn't going to get any better in 1988.With regard to the overall tenor, it seems to me that fromdiscussions I've had with people in agriculture and manufacturing andretail business, their feeling is that things are indeed better. Theywould expect 1988 to be better. There seems to be no constraint oninput goods; there doesn't seem to be any upward pressure on prices.I would add an observation on the earlier discussion about the naturalrate of unemployment. It seems to me that because of what we havebeen through since 1979 and into the early 1980s, there may be a lagafter you reach that natural rate before prices really begin to rise.Then people realize it and are willing to take the chance of raisingprices, and you get the explosion in prices that I think the Chairmanmentioned. I think we are on very dangerous ground at the moment withregard to the level of unemployment--whether it's at the natural rateor not I don't know. I think you can go for a quarter or so beyondthe natural rate before you get that explosion in prices, but I thinkthe danger is on that side.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that our economy has some verybright spots in it. I am not quite as concerned as others that we aregoing to move from somewhat slow growth to very, very robust growth.Even though I had a forecast of 3 percent real growth fourth quarterto fourth quarter at the February FOMC meeting, there are still someareas in our economy that have weakness. It is my belief that pricepressures may not come because of output pressures but because of someof the developing notions about our policy response in a period inwhich the foreign exchange value of the dollar could come underserious attack. It seems to me that commodity prices, which at bestare mixed, have never really had the fallback that generally isaccompanied by their leveling off. Some commodity prices have movedup and some have moved down, and I suppose, on aggregation they seemnot to be posing a tremendous problem. But it seems to me that theyare high enough to motivate a lot of productive activity and a lot ofcapital goods orders, so that the producer durable goods orders couldvery well be higher in the second half than we have projected.I also share the view of Bob Parry and about five or sixothers of you about the inflation forecast for 1989. Frankly, I amnot as complacent as I would like to be in that regard. In the past Ifelt that we have been overpredicting the rate of inflation a little;yet it seems to me that we are now at a crucial point where pricerises could become rampant and could explode. That's why I am worriedabout the broader aggregates growing at almost double-digit rates inJanuary, February, and March. Knowing, as we found out last fall,that it takes quite a bit of time before changed opportunity costs ofholding money seem to affect the growth of those aggregates, it seemsto me that we are in a precarious position here where we could have a-48-3/29/88breakout on the price side that would be most unfortunate. So I, forone, believe I would like to join the 4-3-2-1 club. That is to say:How in the world can any of us be policymakers and not want to get therate of inflation, as Lee Hoskins says, down to a zero rate? If weare going to get it down, we really have to begin. And it seems to methat 5 percent doesn't do it; it needs to go the other way. Mypreference would be to start with four percent on the CPI in 1987, bedown in the 3 percent range in 1988, and proceed lower [thereafter].But I would invite anyone to join the club who would have a differenttimetable; I wouldn't care if you wanted to start in 1988 rather thanin 1987. But for those who really care about price level stability, Iwould think that we have to make some changes at this point.MR. HELLER. I think I would agree with the prettysatisfactory description of the overall economic growth picture, ofunemployment, and the good investment outlook as well. Some peoplehave pointed to some weakness. And, while we are making enormousstrides in the external sector, let's remind ourselves that we stillhave a long way to go there. Therefore, we can't let the domesticboomlet get totally out of hand, because we have to shift resources tothe export sector in the years to come to get that external imbalanceremoved. On inflation, there is one number that nobody has reallytalked about much--I'm glad I was able to look over Mike Kelley'sshoulder and take it away from him--MR. KELLEY. You are, but go ahead. [Laughter.]MR. HELLER. The Producer Price Index hasn't moved at all forthe last half year, and I think it's important to keep it that way.The price pressures that others here have been talking about arecertainly there--for example, in the metals sector. Monetary growthis higher than we have targeted and the dollar is under pressure. So,while I am very satisfied with the overall operation of the realeconomy, I think it is important to keep it that way.MS. SEGER. I have just a couple of comments, primarily basedon some conversations I had with people in the auto industry Fridayand yesterday. As I looked at the general statistics, I thought theconsumer looked as if he or she was pretty tight-fisted. Certainly,the retail sales look that way; the consumption numbers for the lastfive or six months have looked that way, I believe. People point toauto sales as some sort of exception, but at least the people I spokewith in the auto industry are not putting that kind of interpretationon this. What they are saying is that they had to put incentives on75 to 80 percent of their lines because they were sitting on thistremendous inventory, the dealers were squawking, and they had to helpmove the inventory out. In connection with all this effort, theyactually reduced inventories by 58,000 units between the end ofJanuary and the end of February. We seasonally adjust and we multiplyeverything by twelve. The dealers who are holding the inventories arepaying interest on actual numbers; they don't get seasonally adjusted.Anyway, there is this feeling that they have to move these things andthat there is a big advantage these days to keeping your productionlines running because your workers are happier and your suppliers arehappier. The auto industry has excess capacity these days, andtherefore, the pressure is really on them to do everything possible tomove these units. I sense that there is real fear about what mighthappen if and when they remove some of these incentives; they don't-49-3/29/88seem too eager to test the market real soon. In connection with this,the production schedules are looked at each week. They did announcesome higher schedule amounts for the second quarter. They look atthese on an ongoing basis, though, so they are not stuck with thehigher numbers if they don't believe the numbers are consistent withthe sales results. Also, in the context of the room in this economyfor producing for export, when you nail down some of the numbers, itmakes me think that we have more room than some people realize. Forexample, one automaker is talking about a big increase in exportopportunities for a certain make that we export to Europe: 400 unitsthis year and 1200 next year. That's a mammoth percentage increase; Ican't do it in my head. But, in fact, getting 400 units this year and1200 next year on the kind of base that they're talking about here isnot going to cramp anybody's style or their production facilities.Finally, I checked with two of the big three automakers on the pricepressure issue and said "I'm reading all this stuff in the paper;what's really going on?" One of them, who had just talked to theirpurchasing agents last week, said that in terms of what they areactually paying, they're not seeing this. I think the difference isthat we are confusing what is happening to some of the list prices andwhat sharp purchasers are paying.My final point is this: let's say the price of copper risesby a nickel. That is a tiny percentage of the total cost of a lot ofproducts. There are all sorts of things that we [consumers] pay for,like utility bills and labor and so forth; so I think you have to keepthis in some sort of perspective before you assume that the increasein copper prices will be approximately the increase in the CPI. I amstill not convinced that we are about to go lickety split at 90 milesan hour. I hope you can convince me that there is more strength therethan I am able to find so far.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't have much to add. Ourforecast is virtually identical to the staff's forecast. I think thatthe amount of room on the upside is just about zero. In other words,any acceleration of growth from these forecasts carries with itrapidly escalating risks that the inflation problem will begin to showthrough again. The problem with inflation is that if it starts toshow through, it could build quite rapidly. On the other hand, if GNPgrowth were even a percentage point or so slower than forecasted for aquarter or two, especially if that slower growth were in domesticdemand, I have to say that it isn't going to hurt my feelingsterribly. As I said earlier, I do view the exchange rate situationwith some renewed anxiety. It's not that I care about one exchangerate versus another, but right now I see clear risks on the downsidewith very little to be gained. To me, it's a question of risks versusrewards and I don't see much there on the reward side at all.I also have a lot of sympathy with the point that Tom Melzermade about the return of the wild, wild West to the financial scene.I, too, find it frankly astonishing that some of the things havereappeared as fast as they have, coming off the events of October. Idon't know what we do about that. I guess the answer probably is,nothing. But it clearly does bring with it some long-term problems ofa potentially serious nature. Hopefully, we won't have a recession inthe foreseeable future, but we will at some point. I don't know if it-50-3/29/88will be 1999 or 1989, but there will be a recession. And when thatrecession comes, the potential consequences of it--in a context inwhich the system is progressively more and more leveraged and basictenets of financial discipline don't seem able to stick--are very,very distressing. I don't think there is anything we can do aboutthat at the moment, but it is a big concern.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, there seems to be heavy sentimentaround the table that the risks are increasing on the upside and Ishare that. But I feel constrained to make a couple of points in theother direction. I think we should keep in mind, going back to whatFrank said earlier this morning, that GNP forecasts are subject to aplus or minus 1-1/2 percentage point error. He was concerned aboutthe plus 1-1/2, but let's not completely forget the fact that theminus 1-1/2 is a potential also. And there are a number of things outthere that could point toward weakness: some of the rates of increaseare slowing down; industrial production and retail sales are notexciting; you have potentially serious financial conditions in theSouthwest. I'm not 100 percent convinced that we are out of the woodswith regard to the lagged effects of the slow growth of the monetaryaggregates in 1987. Capital expenditures look like they are going tobe up, but new orders are down right now. So, there is some cause tokeep our eyes open, looking in the rear view mirror if you will,looking at the downside.In the area of inflation, if I may quote you from thismorning, Mr. Chairman, let's stay with the numbers. Bob Heller waslooking at how inflation has been flowing in the last few months. Ifyou look at the PPI particularly, but also the CPI, on a month-to-month basis against the same month a year ago, both of the indexeshave fallen every month for the last six months--and that includesFebruary, the latest figures. So, while inflation certainly has thepotential to rise--I see that the same as everybody else here--itabsolutely is not here yet. And I don't think it is unreasonable toexpect, particularly with a 4.8 percent fourth-quarter GNP, that ifinflation were going to show up, it would have begun to do so by now.So that makes me wonder if we aren't looking at some things that couldbe fundamentally different in that area than we're used to. I don'tknow that I believe that, or that it is true, but one begins towonder. In short, Mr. Chairman, I think there is concern about thepossible downside risks and perhaps some time to take continuingreadings on the inflation side; so, I would be somewhat slow to jumpon the assumption that things are going to get away from us on theupside.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, as I indicated earlier, I'm stillconcerned about the potential for the economy overheating this year,particularly in the manufacturing sector. I think later on this yearwe are going to be running pretty thin margins in a lot ofmanufacturing industries, in terms of capacity utilization. And onething we have learned from the 1970s experience is that if we aregoing to stabilize the economy and prevent inflation from blowing upagain, we have to be willing to act before it is clear thatinflationary pressures are here. If we wait until we see wagesescalating or prices escalating on a broad scale, we will have amomentum that is going to be very difficult to turn around. And Ithink we ought to keep that in mind when we rule on a policy today.-51-3/29/88MR. JOHNSON. I think that just about everything has beensaid. I second what Frank Morris just said: that if we are going tokeep inflation under control, we're in a situation that requirestaking some risk with policy ahead of the ball game, rather thanwaiting until the pressures start to show up. I think everybody hasalready said what is obvious to me, too: that the economy is doingbetter than most people would have thought after the stock marketcrash and that there probably are some significant risks that thingscould pick up and we would be close to some sort of inflationthreshold. I think those risks are there.However, we have seen since the stock market crash somepretty good improvements in the inflationary-expectation environment,although most recently we've seen some trends back the other way. Idon't know whether what we have seen over the last couple of weeks issimply a washing out of the recession forecast out of the market. Itend to think that is what we are seeing. Analysts and traders arelooking at the situation now and are just scratching the recessionforecast from their outlook, and the financial markets are reflectingthat some. But we have had, after all the major improvements infinancial conditions since the stock market decline, some trend backtoward firming up. Long-term Treasury yields have gone up about 50basis points relative to the funds rate, and some additional downwardpressure on the dollar is starting to develop. Commodities are sortof a mixed picture: some are strengthening and some are not; oilprices are jumping around; the broader indexes are sort of flat, butsome narrower measures of commodity prices are showing strength. Idon't really know what to make of this--whether everybody's breathinga sigh of relief that we're not heading for a recession or whetherthis is the beginning of some pressures that we need to worry about.One thing that is clear to me, though, is that the stock market doesnot appear to be settled. I think last week was a pretty harrowingexperience again with the stock market losing 100 points. So, I stilldon't get the impression that things are back to normal in thefinancial markets.I think that tells me that we're sort of on a knife edge,policy-wise. We can make the mistake on the downside or the upsidehere. But we have to take some risk. My personal view is that theremay be more upside risk, in terms of the beginnings of some pressuresindicated by conditions in the financial markets and in the other realeconomic data. But I think we ought to be very cautious at thispoint, because there are downside risks, as has been pointed out. Ithink the stock market is very uneasy about the situation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's getting to be 1:15. I suspect thatit would be appropriate, rather than to try to finish up, to continuethe meeting over lunch and truncate, to a certain extent at least, ourregular luncheon agenda. So, why don't we take a break now to getlunch and then we will continue the FOMC meeting.MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you have any analysis of how thestaff interest rate forecast affects the thrifts and the Texassituation?MR. KOHN. Not to my knowledge.-52-3/29/88MR. PRELL. Well, I guess we have the usual forecast. Wethink that thrift earnings might be cyclical [unintelligible]--I'msorry, I just don't have that.MR. ANGELL. I believe that forecast would [unintelligible]one large thrift almost $1 billion.MR. PARRY. I've seen some sensitivity tests for and ifyou have interest rates go up a full percentage point, it wouldaccelerate their losses substantially.MR. ANGELL. Bob, you and I are talking about the sameinstitution.MR. PARRY. All right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Kohn? If not, shallwe do our usual circle?MR. HELLER. Let me just ask a quick question, which has todo with the same problem I was talking about before. We have fedfunds rates still at fairly high limits. I'm not talking aboutcurrent policy now, but what if you wanted to have a fed funds ratearound 3 or 4 percent? If we're close to that [unintelligible]barrier, as far as the borrowing is concerned, what's going to do it?SPEAKER(?). Discount rate.MR. KOHN. Yes. I think the obvious answer was just given,which was to reduce the discount rate.MR. HELLER. Yes.MR. KOHN. Although there's a footnote in the Bluebook thatwe did run for fairly long periods of three or four or five months inlate 1982 and early 1983 with funds right around the discount rate.We have run also for a shorter period of time with the funds ratebelow the discount rate--in the credit control period in the spring of1980, for example. But you'd probably have to pay a lot moreattention to what the funds rate was doing; you couldn't do it off ofthe borrowing function once we got down to that--MR. JOHNSON. You could just target the funds rate below thediscount rate.MR. HELLER. Well, yes. But I always--MR. ANGELL. And that's fairly easy to do. All you do isjust let people borrow from the discount window without asking a lotof questions on whether they have collateral.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Do what?MR. KOHN. It has to be working off the excess reserve partof the demands for reserves. I think it would be very sensitive tosmall misses in factor projections and things like that.-53-3/29/88MR. KEEHN. Don, back on seasonal borrowings--a questionrelated to what I asked Peter at the outset this morning. Doesn't a$200 million borrowing level, now that seasonal borrowing is going up,really represent, in a slight sense at least, an easing of policy?MR. KOHN. I guess ordinarily, President Keehn, my answerwould be no. Almost all of our statistical econometric work suggeststhat those seasonal movements in borrowing don't get reflected in thefunds rate. But I would say that at these levels of borrowing, wherewe're down close to frictional levels and seasonal is such a highproportion on the adjustment side, I would have more questions. Ithink it could well be that if seasonal borrowings were to rise, evenat $200 million, this would have some effect on the funds rate. Andthat's one reason why I suggested that if that seemed to be happeningthat would be one reason for Peter to make non-policy adjustments inthe borrowing assumption over the intermeeting period if the Committeewanted to allow it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry has the floor.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that two significantdevelopments have occurred since our last meeting that have a bearingon this policy discussion. First, economic activity is stronger, andprospects are that growth will be more robust between now and the endof 1989 than was anticipated in mid-February. Second, since thegrowth is occurring with the economy operating in an area close tofull employment, the prospects for inflation have worsened. Mostdisturbing to me is the possibility that increases in labor costs willbe rising at more rapid rates. Such a development would be a majorsetback to our inflation--[Secretary's note: The transcript ends at this point owingto a malfunction of the recording equipment.]-54-