Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeSeptember 20, 1988A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, September 20, 1988, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBlackForrestalHellerHoskinsJohnsonKelleyLaWareParrySegerMessrs. Guffey, Keehn, Melzer, and Morris, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, andMinneapolis, respectivelyKohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryBradfield, General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. Beebe, Broaddus, Lindsey,Siegman, Simpson, and Ms. Tschinkel,Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Stockton, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Wajid, Assistant to Governor Heller, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Gillum, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Divisionof Monetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Balbach, Davis, Ms. Munnell, Messrs. Rolnick,Rosenblum, and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City,Boston, Minneapolis, Dallas, and Chicago,respectivelyMessrs. Akhtar, Meyer, and Sniderman, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Philadelphia,and Cleveland, respectivelyMr. Vangel, Assistant Vice President,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meetingof September 20, 1988CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can we have a motion to approve theminutes of August 16th?SPEAKER(?). I'll move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, the minutes areapproved. Similarly, we need a motion to accept the Report ofExamination of the System Open Market Account, which was distributedin late August.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Move it.MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Cross, will youbring us up to date on operations in foreign currency markets?MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Mr. Cross? If not, doI have a motion to approve his operations during the month since theAugust 16th meeting?SPEAKER(?). So moved.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MR. JOHNSON. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Sternlight,would you bring us up to date on domestic open market operations?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Mr. Sternlight? Ifnot, I'll entertain a motion for approval of the actions of the Desksince August the 16th.SPEAKER(?). So moved.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Now we'll go to theeconomic situation, Mr. Prell.MR. PRELL. Thank you. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. PRELL. I might note that this morning the CommerceDepartment released revised second-quarter GNP figures where thesecond-quarter growth rate was revised down from 3.3 to 3.0 percent.9/20/88That would still leave, after the drought effects, growth in thenonfarm economy in excess of 3-1/2 percent in the first half.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Questions for Mr. Prell?MR. BLACK. Mike, could you give us some of the details ofthe revision in GNP, including the deflator and the fixed-weightdeflator.MR. PRELL. Sure. Both the deflator and the fixed-weightprice index were revised upward. The fixed-weight price measure wasraised from a 4.7 percent to a 5.0 percent increase. The deflatorlargely reflected this; it was up from 5.1 to 5.5 percent. It's alittle bit of an unfavorable mix shift.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What was the composition of the changein the fixed-weight? What additional information did they have?MR. STOCKTON. It appears that most of the upward revision ofthe fixed-weight index occurred in the service category. That's anarea where, in addition to using some information from the CPI, theyalso bring to bear additional information. For instance, they usewage rates of hospital workers to help estimate the medical care costsand information they're getting from the banking industry to estimatebanking margins. So they do get some additional information inaddition to the CPI.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a rather large increase for asecond shot at the fixed-weight.MR. PRELL. We don't have the full detail yet, and we haven'thad a chance to talk to people about enough of the details. We'reflying a bit blind at this point.MR. BLACK. Do you know which components of GNP were reviseddown?MR. PRELL. Yes. There were, of course, small revisions in anumber of categories. The most dramatic revision in growth rate wasin nonresidential structures. As we had noted in the Greenbook, theconstruction-put-in-place showed a substantial revision in June. Sothis isn't a shock. There was a modest upward revision in consumerspending. There was a small change in net exports. There were justsmall changes sprinkled around.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Parry.MR. PARRY. I have a question about your forecast of netexports. There's a very substantial improvement in the net exportsover the period. I get the impression that if one were just to lookat the model forecast, assuming a relatively moderate decline in thevalue of the dollar, that you wouldn't get that significant animprovement. Am I correct in assuming that your forecast has a largejudgmental component; and if so, is that sort of the opposite of whatwe saw when the dollar was going down? When the dollar was goingdown, the model predicted a more quick response in terms of netexports. Now that the dollar has gone up, are we assuming that has a9/20/88delayed response as well--in terms of slowing the improvement in netexports?MR. TRUMAN. There's only two things to say about the modelover the forecast period. One is that in talking about trade thesedays, we have found that you have to sort out the effects of businessmachinery on both the import and export sides. On the export side inthe model, we may be slightly more--well, actually, not even that muchmore--optimistic than the models we use. Taking the second quarter asa base, we have improvement of $40 billion in the volume of non-agricultural, non-business machine exports; and the model that we usehas just improvement of $36 billion. So, the order of magnitude isquite small on that side and I think it's roughly the same on the non-petroleum volume. It's about the same in terms of the changes that weproduce. The other thing that's going on is that, starting from thesecond quarter of 1989, you get improvement on the volume side in theagricultural exports--which gives you a boost in this period when wetotal these figures. That's a special factor.MR. PARRY. So you don't know.MR. TRUMAN. We don't have a lot of optimism. In part, theoptimism that we have is built into the level that has been associatedwith the first half of this year. We have to acknowledge that perhapsthe first half has performed better than the models would produce forthe year. And we had chosen not to take [unintelligible]. In thatsense you have maybe more of a catch up with the [unintelligible] thefirst half of the year. To say one more thing: On the import side,we have increasingly tried to relate business machinery, which isquantitatively very important in GNP terms, to the forecast forbusiness fixed investment in general. So that's driven in large partby that forecast and our assessment of a large portion of that[unintelligible] is sort of how the world markets for computers seemto be developing. [unintelligible]MR. PARRY. Yes, thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Let me just follow up on Bob's questions.Since the last forecast session, many of the major economies in theworld have had upward revisions in their real growth forecast for therest of this year and also for 1989. I'm wondering, how do you factorthat into your export numbers? Or did you?MR. TRUMAN. Well, we didn't. The official forecasts havebeen revised up; they lagged way behind the data. We have not changedour forecast. In fact, this morning the Japanese GNP number came outfor the second quarter, which shows a decline of 3.9 percent at anannual rate; That is largely statistical. We had built in a declineof 2 percent at an annual rate. So that's a [unintelligible]. Oursense is that, if anything--although we have about the same outlookover the six quarters of the forecast--it is at a materially subduedrate relative to what we've seen. And that's largely because we havea tighter monetary policy picture for most of these countries, andmost of the countries are moving in the direction of fiscal restraint.Germany, the UK, and Japan are basically moving in the direction of9/20/88fiscal restraint over the forecast period. And then you have thattightening monetary policy move.MR. HOSKINS. Mike, could you refresh me on what the interestrate increase is--the assumption based on your forecast.MR. PRELL. We still have the federal funds rate rising tosomething in the vicinity of 9-1/2 percent by next spring. We havethe long Treasury bond rate moving a bit above 10 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. I have a question for Mr. Truman. I note thatyou're expecting a better than $25 billion deterioration in netinvestment income this year as compared to last year. But you show nofurther decline in 1989.MR. TRUMAN. That's largely a function of the capital gainseffects. You had net capital gains in the current accounts--I don'tremember these numbers, but on the order of plus $15 billion--lastyear because as the dollar declined you had a favorable valuationeffect on foreign investments. And this year, with the dollarappreciation, we are estimating a loss of $4 billion. The swing isessentially $20 billion in capital gains for this year versus lastyear. And that swing is what generates the investment income. Nextyear, with a much milder decline of the dollar--although we have asmaller positive factor--the swing is not nearly so important. Thereare some other special factors this year, including the fact there hasbeen a tax ruling on foreign investments in the United States thatrequires them to report them as income deferred tax liabilities. Thatwill generate a reported increase in income this year, and that'salready in the third quarter. And that shows up as an outflow lastyear and will reverse [unintelligible] a bit next year when you get apositive net effect. And that's the main--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I have basically two questions. One is, if wedon't get the dollar coming off from existing levels, what will thatdo to our ability to produce these kinds of net exports?MR. TRUMAN. You said there were two questions.MS. SEGER. Do you want to do them one at a time or do youwant to do several?MR. TRUMAN. The decline in the dollar is fairly gradual overthe course of 1989. There's very little effect--essentially zero--interms of the forecast of the real economy coming from that factor. Itwill begin to have an effect as you go off into 1990. Even theforecast of the dollar that we have using conventional models. Youcan have essentially an improvement in the trade balance falling outas you go into early 1990 if you just stop the exchange rate where itwould be in the fourth quarter of 1989. If you stopped it where it istoday, we would fall out earlier. That's something in the tradebalance of around $100 billion, depending on what happens to growthdifferentials--if things turn around and begin to deteriorate, or ifour growth is approximately the same as that of the rest of the9/20/88industrial world. But the forecast itself is not heavily dependent inthis time horizon on the course of the dollar.MS. SEGER. Some business people are concerned about theirability to be competitive at existing levels, but maybe that's not apredominant view. My second question is one involving a statement inthe Greenbook that staff continue to believe that additional pressurein financial markets would be required to slow the expansion, etc.And I guess this goes to Mike: Do you think you've seen the fullimpact of the tightening moves that we've had to date?MR. PRELL. No, but our thought is that even after we haveabsorbed those, that we will not open up enough slack, so to speak, orreduce the pressures on the economy enough, to relieve theinflationary pressures. Therefore, we need to hold growth belowpotential for a period of time. What we have in our forecast is avery slight shortfall of actual growth from potential and very slighteasing pressures on resources. And we think that, given theunderlying tendencies in the economy, we are going to need a bit morerestraint to keep things under control over the last two or threequarters of 1989.MS. SEGER. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Yes, Mike, I'd like a follow-up question toGovernor Seger's questions. Apparently, you have an optimum growthrate in mind, let's say, over the next four quarters. What would thatoptimum growth rate be?MR. PRELL. I don't know that we have an optimum growth rate.Basically, we sense that the pressures on resources are too great atthis point to hold the inflation rate down to recent levels. And wefeel some easing [of those pressures] is necessary. We believe thetrend of real output growth is somewhere around 2-1/2 percent.Therefore, we believe that we've got to grow something under that inorder to ease those pressures. We recognize the uncertainties aboutwhere the natural rate of unemployment is, if that's the operativeconcept. We recognize that the composition of activity can make adifference of--. This is a rough judgment, ultimately; I don't wantto get too precise about it, but basically we think we need someadditional restraint to get the economy below potential, and webelieve that that probably is necessary.MR. ANGELL. But, Mike, precision is helpful incommunication. I can take the time to pry the number out of you byasking you a series of questions, but it would save some time if you'dsimply tell us.MR. PRELL. I think I cited a number of 2-1/2 percent,Governor Angell, as what we believed potential GNP growth is.Therefore, it depends how fast you want to get the inflation ratedown. If--MR. ANGELL. What would you think would be the optimumadjustment process? I mean, do you like 1-1/2 percent better than2-1/2 percent?9/20/88MR. PRELL. Well, you're asking me to make a policy judgment,a subjective judgment about the short-run costs and benefits of apolicy you have in mind. What we have tried to make is a positivestatement: That if you want to avert some acceleration of inflation,we need to reduce the pressures on resources. The more that is done,the greater the chances are you will see no acceleration at all in theunderlying inflation rate next year and that you will be able to tipit down noticeably in 1990. I think it will take more than we havebuilt in here to make a decided move towards restoring adisinflationary trend by 1990.MR. ANGELL. But, Mike, there's a policy assumption involvedin the interest rate forecast and I am just not sure whether you'dprefer 1-1/2 percent real GNP growth or a 1/2 percent GNP growth or anegative 1/2 percent. I'd like to have some better understanding ofwhat you think it would take in order to get this best adjustment.MR. PRELL. Again, I don't feel I'm in a position to declarethe best adjustment. I suspect, going around the table here, thepolicymakers would have some different views about the risks theywould want to take and how rapidly they would want to move to bringdown the inflation rate. If I were to aim at the kind of inflationtrajectory that you've outlined--declines of 1 percent a year in theinflation rate--I would suggest that you would need a substantiallygreater tightening. You would need to bring growth down substantiallyfrom what we have in order to get back on that track. I don't thinkwe're on that track now, and I think you'd need substantially greaterrestraint--probably close to or even into recessionary conditions--inorder by 1990 to have an inflation trend down to 3 percent at anannual rate.MR. ANGELL. Thank you. The last statement finally answeredthe question.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Mike, what did you say your federal funds rateforecast was? Lee asked, and I forgot. Did you say 9-1/2 percent?MR. PRELL. We're looking for around 9-1/2 percent. Again, Idon't want to be too precise.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I know.MR. PRELL. A significant increase from where we are.MR. JOHNSON. And you're saying about a proportional move upin the long-run rate to 10 percent?MR. PRELL. Just about.MR. JOHNSON. The only question I have about that is that wehaven't seen that kind of trend with our moves on the funds rate thisyear. We've had a 1-1/2 percentage point increase in the funds rateand actually a sharp flattening of the yield curve. Long rates stayedabout where they were, maybe going up some, but much less thanproportionally. I think the yield curve has flattened from about9/20/882-1/2 percentage points down to less than 1 percentage point. What ifthat trend continues? What would the forecast say if the move to9-1/2 percent on the funds rate was not accompanied by a proportionalmove in the long bond? What kind of differential effects would thathave?MR. PRELL. As you know, some of this extreme flattening is avery recent phenomenon. Earlier in the year, you were getting moresubstantial increases in long rates as short rates rose. I guessunderlying this projection, at least in my mind, is a sense that themarkets may have overdone things recently and that part of this may bethe lack of long bond authority and unusual tightness in the long endof the market at this point. But we do have what would be a fairlysubstantial rise in long rates along with the short rate increases inthis forecast, partly on the presumption that the market will besurprised to some degree by what it takes in order to dampinflationary pressures. They would come around more to our view;there's a strict internal consistency in these forecasts.MR. JOHNSON. No, that's okay.MR. PRELL. If the rates don't rise--, they might not riseas much for a number of reasons. One could be a change ininflationary expectations. We may have had some of that recently,where the apparent willingness of the Fed to move earlier than somewould have thought may have helped to hold down long-range inflationexpectations. To the extent that that's going on, you're perhaps notgetting a significant real rate effect and thus the damping influenceon demand. If events transpire that cause real rates not to rise asmuch as we would anticipate in this forecast, then we might have adifferent outcome where investment demand may be sustained a bit morethan we have [in the forecast]. There are innumerable scenarios thatone could draw where the movement in long rates would have differentimplications.MR. JOHNSON. I understand. What I'm saying is, let's assumeit's inflationary expectations being adjusted, and that's why the longrates haven't gone up. Say that continues to be the case, but thefunds rate goes up to 9-1/2 percent without much change in the longbond due to improvement in inflationary expectations or something likethat. What would be the differential impacts of that?MR. PRELL. You're saying that if the flattening occursentirely because of reduced inflation expectations--MR. JOHNSON. Okay, entirely, let's say, to debate theextreme.MR. PRELL. It would depend in the short run in part onwhether it was a change in the long-run perception of whatinflationary trends would be and in part on whether it was areflection of a sense that the economy might be headed towardrecession. Clearly, in other historical experience we've seen amarked flattening of the yield curve just before downturns in theeconomy. If we were to move up short rates as much as we're talkingabout here and the long rate didn't rise at all--that would be a verysteep downward slope. And I suspect it would only occur in9/20/88circumstances where people would perceive that there was a significantlikelihood of a near-term weakening in the economy.MR. JOHNSON. Your view is, though, that these expectationswill be revised in the near future and that the long bond will moveback up?MR. PRELL. That's basically what we're assuming. It's verydifficult to psych out the market at this point. One can come up witha number of alternative hypotheses about why the market has behaved injust the way it has recently--in interpreting recent news and so on.Another factor is the dollar situation, in terms of our longer-runexternal position and what we think ultimately we need to correctthat. That's probably a factor that's going to be less favorable aswe move along in the projection period. And, as I suggested, we'represuming that the market will perceive that a greater degree ofrestraint is necessary to rein in inflationary pressures than perhapsit currently is. They will come around to [unintelligible].MR. JOHNSON. And if that's the case, then the long bondwould be surprised into further upward moves.MR. PRELL. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Mike, you've made I think a rather persuasivecase both in your written comments and your oral comments this morningthat we will need some additional restraint to hold aggregate demandto the level that's more consistent with reducing inflationarypressures. I wonder if I could get you to put yourself on the otherside of that question. I wonder if you could help a slow mind thismorning and articulate the case that maybe we won't need the kind ofrestraint that you're talking about to get the job done. In otherwords, I wonder if you could admit to where the cracks might be inyour argument and the things that might happen that would say thatwhile we might need a touch more restraint, maybe we've done much ofthe job that we need to do.MR. PRELL. I hope I wasn't too persuasive because there is arange of uncertainty about our forecast. For example, one of thoseareas of uncertainty obviously is the sensitivity of investment demandto what has already occurred in interest rate movements and thedollar. There's been some perception already that the futurecompetitiveness of some U.S. industry will be less than people thoughtpreviously; perhaps the momentum of investment might not be as strongas we have in this forecast. Fiscal policy we have interpreted asproviding a degree of restraint on aggregate demand. That is alwaysdifficult to interpret and it's conceivable that our underlyingpolicy-action assumptions could turn out to be wrong. And we couldhave a greater degree of restraint being applied, damping activitymore than [unintelligible]. Consumer spending has fairly consistentlysurprised us in this expansion by its strength, and as this hasoccurred, consumer debt levels have risen. We've outlined for youwhat we think the cash flow consequences are of rising rates onhouseholds. We feel this isn't a big problem, but again one wouldhave to admit the possibilty of some surprise there. The oil pricesituation is something imponderable and that's a very difficult9/20/88situation to sort out, because it has underlying aggregate demandeffects if we were to get a change in the price from our assumption.I feel reasonably comfortable with the inventory situation, but theretoo, there may be some pockets in the retail level that could exertmore of a drag on output in coming months than we have [assumed]. ButI don't see that as a very great problem. So, I think there are anynumber of areas across the economy where conceivably things might turnout weaker than we have.MR. BOEHNE. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mike, if you would for just a second speculateon the other side of the suggested policy recommendation for takingfederal funds up to 9-1/2 and 10 percent--the possibility that thatmight induce a recession somewhere along the line. What would be theimplications of a recession let's say in late 1989 or early 1990 ifyou began to see the federal deficit burgeoning and so forth? Whatwould be the broad brush of a scenario of a recession, given thelarger picture of where we are on the deficit and the new president inplace trying to get new policies established and so forth?MR. PRELL. Well, I'm not sure that that recession wouldappear soon enough to greatly affect the discussions about the 1990budget. But it's conceivable that, in your hypothesis, the picturecould change and then one has to make a political judgment. There aremany people, obviously, who would question the ability of the Congressto institute significant further deficit reduction measures if theeconomy appeared to be weakening. And the actual budget deficit inthose circumstances could become very large in 1990, which in effectwould exacerbate the long-run problem by adding further to the levelof debt. So, it's a pretty dicey situation. I think it's clear thatthey will have an easier time putting together a budgetary packagethat makes substantial ongoing progress in reducing the deficit in anenvironment where the economic outlook appears to be reasonablysatisfactory.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Mike, a few minutes ago you alluded toinventories as a possibility of adding a little bit to the downside.But I have the impression that your inventory path is really prettyconservative. Is that a fair characterization?MR. PRELL. Basically, if we strip away farm and strip awayautos, which are in good shape now--though there may be someaccumulation over the remainder of the year. But I think that's asort of a separable situation. Outside of that area, we're lookingfor a bit faster accumulation than we saw in the spring over theremainder of this year and then some slight tapering off. It's not adynamic factor in this projection. And as the Chairman has pointedout, in an environment where business activity is fairly robust andcapacity is getting tighter and prices are rising fairly rapidly formaterials and so on, it's not inconceivable that at some pointmanufacturers will become more aggressive than we've put into thisforecast. We have manufacturers increasing their inventories over thecoming months; but there could be an outside risk, as I noted in my9/20/88comments, that if things got out of hand on that score it could addperhaps to greater near-term strength in the economy. But it wouldset us up perhaps for more of a shakeout later on in 1989.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mike, I'm having difficulty understanding theconsistency between your interest rate forecast and the forecast forfurther downward pressure on the dollar. Help me with that one.MR. TRUMAN. Maybe I ought to do that. The forecast for thedollar is largely driven by the view that ultimately you have to havesubstantially smaller trade and current account deficits than we havenow. The exchange rate adjustment will be part of what brings thatabout. We don't have any strong view about when we're going to getit, but it would be over the next five years, say. So in building theforecast we have tended to put in a moderate decline in the dollar asa background factor, which does not have a big role in the short runbut it is the direction of where we think the pressure is going to be,as I said in my answer to the question from Governor Seger. Inproducing the forecast we tried to, in some sense, trim that longer-term view by what our assumptions about monetary policy here andothers [unintelligible]. Over the past several meetings of theCommittee we have tended to adjust up our forecast of the dollar; wehave less of a decline in the dollar cumulatively over the period forbasically two reasons. One is that the trade performance has beenbetter than we--and I think a lot of people--expected. Therefore, insome sense, the amount of adjustment you need in this process is less.So you don't have to build much into the medium-term framework. Wehave moved the dollar up because the presumed stance of monetarypolicy has been somewhat tighter. But over this immediate horizon, wehave the dollar flat, essentially, over the balance of this year.That is associated with a view that there's a perception of policy asbeing tighter. But as we move into 1989, there inevitably will besome slowing in the pace of current account adjustments from whatwe've had over the past three or four quarters, and we would expect toget some reemerging pressures on the dollar despite the increase inthe interest rates that we have had. We have tried in a very crudeway to talk about what it would take to stabilize the dollar, and itis a difficult question to answer convincingly--as I explained in thefirst part of my answer--if you view the dollar's course as beingdriven by medium-term factors. But the answer comes out somewhat likethe answer to Governor Angell's question: That you need more thanmonetary restraint in the short run [unintelligible] the dollar.MR. LAWARE. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mr. Prell? Ifnot, we've come to the general discussion where the individual memberswill give us definitive forecasts of the outlook.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I'll lead off. As far as theEleventh District economy is concerned, we're looking at what'shappening or might happen in energy--which over the past year or so isshowing a little bit of improvement and turning into more of a neutralfactor for us. As far as the outlook for the economy generally, theoverall mood of the people that we've talked to very recently has been-10-9/20/88a little more positive, although it's difficult for them--or for us--to point to specifics that show that something's happening.If we do get a sustained price for oil in the $14 range, thatwould probably indicate that we have no growth at all in our Districteconomy, whereas we currently have a forecast of sluggish growth ofsomething around 1 percent or less for next year. We are gettingreports of substantial capital investments that are planned or thatare under way in petrochemicals, particularly in Houston--the upperGulf Coast area. And they are, of course, benefiting from the lowerprice of oil.We were fortunate over the last several days to have missedsome of the rather devastating effects of Hurricane Gilbert. Althoughthere were tornadoes and there was some damage, it wasn't anythingclose to what had been anticipated. The real estate area continues,of course, to be the biggest drag that we have. And I do have a real--as opposed to an anecdotal--comment on that. About five years ago, wehad our bank property appraised in connection with a study that wewere doing. The appraiser came up with a value in excess of $30million, which a couple of our directors--particularly our then-Chairman who was in the real estate business--felt was low. We'vejust had our property reappraised in connection with another studywe're doing. The same professional independent appraiser group did itthis time. They're telling us that our property now is worth between$6-1/2 and $8-1/2 million. You know, that's something else.MR. BLACK. What did you do to it? Did you take care of thatplace?MR. ANGELL. Bob, it sounds like quite a bargain, doesn't it?MR. BOYKIN. Well, there are special factors. The key--andthis is not the place to make this statement--but I'll make it anyway.What they're saying is our building is totally used up in terms of itsusefulness.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Over the last five years!MR. BOYKIN. But I thought that was very, very significant.Granted, we have special circumstances; nevertheless I have a betterappreciation of what the commercial banks have been having to dealwith as they get new appraisals and reappraisals. And I don't believeanybody knows what real estate is worth any more.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, conversion in terms of barrels ofoil isn't that bad.MR. BOYKIN. That's all I have.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm sorry I don'thave a real estate study to talk about this morning. Let me turnfirst to the national economy. I have very little problem with theBoard staff's Greenbook forecast; in fact, if we were to build inroughly the same kind of restraint that's in the Greenbook we'd bevery close indeed. I think all forecasts these days are a little bit-11-9/20/88cloudier than usual because of the statistical difficulties with thedrought, so I think we need to be a little careful about forecastsgenerally.I'm very happy to see the recent deceleration, although Iwouldn't want to put a lot of credence in a couple of months' data.But I think the thing the markets perhaps are not focusing on is thatwe are still growing beyond our potential. And that is really what'sguiding my thinking and my judgment at the present time. In responseto Governor Johnson, there was a discussion about the yield on the30-year bond and long-term rates generally, and it seems to me thatthe market may very well be underestimating the strength of theeconomy and thus reducing its inflationary expectations. I thinkthere is generally a tendency among market participants and businesspeople that I talk with to feel that a slowing economy is a sloweconomy. I think we've gotten used to large numbers over the pastseveral quarters and the focus is not really on the potential of theeconomy. So, I not only agree with the forecast, Mr. Chairman, but Iagree with the analysis of the staff that unless the economy slowsappreciably, we will have to restrain growth further--take additional[steps of] monetary restraint--by the end of the year.I don't think I need say very much about the District becausenot a great deal has changed since the last meeting. Growth in theSixth District remains fairly spotty. The manufacturing tradeablegoods sector is doing quite well, but the service sector--particularlyin urban areas--is not doing well and is really quite sluggish.Construction is off. We used to report pretty regularly, as I saidlast month, that almost every state with the exception of Louisianawas doing better than the national average. That has really turnedaround. I think Florida now would be the only state that I wouldcharacterize as doing better than the national average. Theunemployment rate in all of our states except Florida is now abovethose in the rest of the country. The good news part of that, Isuppose, is that there's very little pressure on wages in this kind ofa market. I probed a lot for that among our directors and otherbusiness people; and while you hear a little bit of concern aboutentry-level people and trying to attract them with higher wages,basically we're not seeing any wage pressure at all. The same thingis true generally of prices. The price increases, where they haveoccurred, have been kind of spotty and in industries that are reallygoing flat out--paperboard, paper, and so on.The good news in all of this is that Louisiana andMississippi are doing better than they were. That's basically becauseof some chemical production that is now occurring in Louisiana as wellas the pickup in ship building. Although they are doing better, wehave to remember that they're coming from a very low base and theywould still have to be characterized, I think, as negative growthareas. On the agricultural side, higher prices for some agriculturalcommodities are going to improve farm incomes since the crop yieldswere not as affected in the southeast as they were in other areas ofthe country. That's all I have, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. With regard to the national economy--with somemodest adjustments for the fourth quarter of this year and the first-12-9/20/88quarter of next year due mainly to agriculture--our outlook is quiteconsistent with the staff forecast in the Greenbook. With regard tothe District, there's really very little that's new to report. Withthe obvious exception of agriculture, I think the economy continues tobe really very strong. But there are just a few signs of moderation--nothing pronounced. I think there are somewhat slower growth rates ina couple of parts of our economy. Retail sales, for example, weremuch weaker in the summer months than earlier in the spring. Andconstruction activity is down a bit. Another example is paperboard,which of course has been so very strong; after a string of almost twoyears of record monthly shipments, last month's shipments were downjust a bit there.It's too early to tell if these early signs are indicative ofa trend and if they're going to be sustained. It's entirely possible,I think, that the trends--particularly in some of the areas that I'vementioned--are the result of the exceptionally hot weather that we'vehad. Since the turn of the weather, I'm told by retailers that theflow of traffic in their stores is back up to more normal levels. Sosome of these things may have been very weather related.Perhaps the lack of any significant changes could be a goodthing. Anecdotally, at least, I don't sense a continuation of theupward pressures on prices that were so very evident earlier thisyear. I still think that the risks are very much on the side ofgreater inflation. But I am beginning to hear some comments about theleveling of prices for a variety of materials--or certainly that moremoderate increases are taking place as opposed to the big numbers thatwe had earlier this year. And at least one major manufacturer that Italked to the other day is forecasting that raw material purchasesnext year will be level with 1988--really no increase at all.Surprisingly, consistent with what Bob Forrestal has justsaid, I don't sense any deterioration on the wage front. Wage ratesdo not at this point seem to be accelerating. Also, there doesn'tseem to be a hardening of attitudes on the part of labor. I'm toldthat the attitude of organized labor continues to be veryconstructive, given the continued progress on work-rule changes. So Ithink the news there continues to be pretty good. Companies are notlosing ground on unit labor costs but, as a caveat on that, there aretwo major contracts out there that are currently reaching the finalstages of negotiations. We'll just have to wait to see how those workout. Again, I think it's too early to tell whether these early signsof moderation will be sustained. But certainly they are favorable,and for now it just could be the case that things are falling intoline pretty well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the Twelfth District economyappears to be growing at a relatively brisk pace, and I'd say that theoutlook for the District generally is favorable. A very strong orderbook for aircraft should assure strength in the Seattle area for acouple of years. That also boosts prospects in the aircraft industryin southern California. Prospects for the growth of exports arereasonably bright for such things as agricultural products, specialtyproducts, and also transportation and electronic equipment.Agriculture in the west appears as though it may actually be-13-9/20/88benefiting somewhat from the drought as a result of the higher pricesthat more than offset the effects of very mild reductions in yields inthe west. At this time, signs of weakness in the District are reallyquite spotty. And they're only concentrated in a few states--Alaska,Arizona, and Utah--and a very few industries as well. Residentialconstruction is weak. Dairy and livestock are rather weak as a resultof the fact that they're paying higher costs for feed. And aluminumand forest products are weak due to capacity constraints. It's ratherinteresting that even where you have weakness, it's in areas that arepretty much up against capacity constraints: in residentialconstruction, for example, that's solely a result of extremely strongexport demands for lumber. Weakness may intensify in the District ifthe very recent sharp slowing in retail advertising in California--which looks quite pervasive--is a precursor of softer retail sales.If I may turn to the national outlook, it's my view that it'spremature to conclude that the recent softening of economic statisticsis indicative of a trend that will persist through 1989. Rather, itseems more likely to me that if interest rates were to remain atpresent levels, growth of the nonfarm economy would probably exceedthe growth of potential over the entire forecast period. Thus,prospects for the underlying rate of inflation still are a concern,though obviously we're going to see actual inflation rates buffeted bymany special factors. If this expectation in our forecast is correct,then it seems to me that the process of tightening probably is notover and will have to be resumed sometime soon. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, our forecast at theBank is one that I think is close to the other side of Mike's coin.We do not have a significant increase in interest rates built into ourforecast; we have a bit of an upward drift. But for that reason andfor others, it's a forecast that ends up, on balance, with aphenomenal GNP growth rate--a percentage point and a half or so abovewhat's in the Greenbook. And because of where we are relative topotential, a good part of that excess shows through in terms of higherinflation. Indeed, by the end of the forecast period, our forecastwould have a very significantly higher inflation rate than what's inthe Greenbook.That is not a testimony to any one forecast, but I think it'svery vivid testimony to how much of a razor's edge we are on, in termsof what does or does not happen in the economy. I don't have a greatdeal of conviction per se about any one forecast, but I must say myinstincts continue to be very similar to Bob Parry's. I'll justbriefly share [some comments] with the Committee, Mr. Chairman, partlybecause this is such a very difficult period to read.In the first two weeks of September, we talked to a couple ofdozen firms to try to get a more systematic anecdotal appreciation ofwhat's going on. Now, a systematic approach to anecdotal reports isin no way a survey for purposes of OMB or anybody else.MS. SEGER. Can't be or you'd get in trouble.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. With that in mind, I'd like to touchon just a couple of the highlights. The firms that we talked to-14-9/20/88included about a dozen or so very prominent manufacturing firms withheadquarters in the Second District, some smaller manufacturing firms,and some very prominent retail firms. As of right now, what comesthrough is that the export sector is literally still booming. Exportsales were very strong indeed, with increases in volume termstypically well into double digits. There was only one case where thatwas not true, and that particular firm didn't seem very concernedabout it because they have a very large backlog of orders--orders thathaven't even formally been booked yet for jet engines that areultimately destined for overseas markets.On the question of the current level of the dollar, none ofthe firms expressed any concern about the current level. Indeed, theimpression was that even at current exchange rates, U.S. firms werequite competitive except in apparel and clothing categories. Therewere two small firms that did say that a yen/dollar of 140 was kind ofa threshhold for them. But generally speaking, there was no concernexpressed in terms of current exchange rates and the ability of thisstrong export performance to continue. But perhaps even moreinteresting is that we see here for the first time, in anecdotalterms, a number of clear cases of capital goods shifting away fromforeign suppliers to U.S. suppliers. I don't want to suggest thatthat was the universal pattern, but of the major firms, about an equalnumber reported that positive shifting was taking place. None said itwas getting worse, with the exception of one company that was doingmore sourcing from Mexico--which in some ways is a good thing, ofcourse. In addition, quite apart from capital goods, there were alsoa number of firms--and we haven't heard this for a long time either--that were also reporting gains in domestic market shares in general,relative to imports. In other words, they are actually now displacingimports in the domestic marketplace. Again, the major exception tothat is all of the clothing and textile firms--apparel-related things.That area is still lousy throughout, both at production and retaillevels. But in other areas there are some distinct changes. In termsof domestic sales performance, with only one or two exceptions, thesefirms reported current trends I think that were really quite strong,often in double digits.On the output, wage, and capacity side--again, none of thisis very scientific and I don't want to put the wrong cast on it. Butit's really interesting because about half of the big firms--and theseare the manufacturers, of course--reported no capacity constraints tospeak of or nothing they couldn't cope with. Whereas another halfreported some problems--and these were typically in the areas that wewould expect. When it got to the particular question of inputproblems, in terms of price, delivery delays, etc., again it was abouthalf-and-half. About half did report that they were having inputproblems defined either as rapidly rising prices or delivery lags.Those patterns were clear in steel, plastics, computer chips,aluminum, paper, and surprisingly, in some Japanese component parts.But the other side of it is that about half of them didn't reportparticular problems of that nature.On the labor question--and this is very interesting--theresponses broke almost straight down the line based on size. Thelarge firms did not report any particular problems in terms of laborshortages; the small firms did. The same was more or less true interms of wages in general. The overall impression that I get, not-15-9/20/88just from this but from listening to our directors and others, is thatthere is some upward movement on the wage side but it's notsignificant yet. That's defined in terms of maybe a 1/2 percentagepoint type of thing. But the conclusion that I draw from all thisimpressionistic data is consistent or compatible at least with my ownthoughts and instincts--that the risks are rather asymmetric in thedirection of greater pressures on domestic output and resources, atleast over the near term. On the other hand, it may also beconsistent with the view that while the inflation genie isn't perhapsout of the bottle, it's by no means clear that the cork is firmly inplace.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. The most intriguing information I've had sincethe last meeting didn't come from an economist or businessman but froma psychiatrist who happened to be sitting next to me on an airplanecoming back from Boston. He was writing madly and I could see theword depression, so I thought he was one of the crackpots who writesthe doom-and-gloom books about the end of the economic world. After afew minutes we got to talking, and I discovered that he is apsychiatrist specializing in depression. But the useful informationto me was that as he counsels people, one of the first things he asksthem is for information about their spending habits, particularly thespending that they do using little pieces of plastic. And what he'sdiscovered is that this is one of the early signs of depression--thatpeople go out on these big spending sprees. They buy cars--no,seriously--that they can't afford.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I know; I've done that!MS. SEGER. I'm not smart enough to make this up. They buycars they can't afford, do all this spending, and run their cardsright up to the limits--and this is just before they go over the edge.So we decided that based on what he saw and what I had seen in thestatistics that there are a lot of psychos running around.MR. STERN. Another problem for the Federal Reserve.MR. BLACK. Another problem for him; he can [profit?] fromthat.MS. SEGER. Yes, that's right, he's doing okay. In that con-nection, though, anyone I speak with other than him suggests thatconsumers as a whole aren't on a big spending spree. So I guess myview of the economy is a little less optimistic than the staff's.Also, on the housing side, some of the realtors I've spokenwith suggest, first of all, that the recent increases in mortgagerates haven't all been felt; and, secondly, that consumers arebeginning to react to the high prices on new homes. Also, in certainparts of the country, like Mr. Parry's enlightened California, thereare these tremendous restrictions on growth; and it's very difficultto get lots on which to build houses despite the whining about thehousing shortages. So I think that our forecast on housing startsmight be a touch high.-16-9/20/88Finally, as I think I hinted in my discussion with Mike Prelland Ted Truman, I'm a little less certain that we're going to get theexport improvement that we are forecasting. I would certainly like tosee it because, while certainly some companies are still competitiveat existing exchange rates and in [scenarios] that involve a slightlycheaper dollar, I don't think everybody is. And that concerns me. Sothose are the three areas where I guess I differ from the staff.Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think every point I wanted tomake has been made by someone--but some by one person and some byanother. Let me just summarize briefly. We agree very closely withwhat the staff has suggested in the Greenbook. We see the same signsof moderation, partly because of the employment figures and othernational figures, and also because of the grass-roots reports thatwe've getting from our directors, particularly in textiles andfurniture.But I'm glad to see this, because I thought the economy wasgrowing way, way too fast and the risks were all on the upside. Thissuggests that maybe they're less on the upside now than they werebefore. But like most of those who have spoken, I still think thatthe risks definitely are skewed more towards the upside and thatthere's a danger that the economy might overheat. These figuresshowing moderation have been around for only a month or two at most,and apart from housing, there are no real large parts of the GNPaccounts or significant sectors that show any signs of a great orsustained weakness.And then, if you look at the figures in section II of theGreenbook, they show that there is some upward pressure on both wagesand prices. Mike has just reported that the figures on the implicitprice deflator and the fixed-weight deflator for the second quarterwere worse than we thought they were, based on the initial reports.So in short, while I feel a little bit better than I did before,because there are some signs of slowing, I don't think we're out ofthe woods yet. And I would think that the staff's prognosticationthat somewhere down the line we'll need to tighten further is probablystill right, although now might not be the time to do that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. There's very little new to report on the Districteconomy. I'll try to dispense with that very quickly. As I'vecommented before, most of the District economy is and remains verystrong. The obvious exception is the areas affected adversely by thedrought; otherwise, the economy in the District is in good shape.As far as the national outlook is concerned, I find myself insubstantial agreement with the Greenbook forecast. I don't know howmuch of a further rise in interest rates might be required to stembuilding inflationary pressures, perhaps not very much, but I thinkthe Greenbook does appropriately identify where the risks are.As I look at the latest statistics, I think they do suggestsome slowing in the pace of expansion in the last month or two--a-17-9/20/88slowing that, as several people have already commented, is welcomed,in my judgment. But I find that there's maybe a little tendency toexaggerate this. Even though I wouldn't try to construe the Augustlabor market report as very strong, it's still a 200,000 increase inpayroll employment--2-1/2 million workers at an annual rate--which isnot a trivial increase in employment at all, especially given thetightness in labor markets that already exists. And, as I alreadysuggested, inventory/sales ratios look, if anything, on the low sideto me. So I think we may see more strength, at least in the nearterm, coming out of inventories than the Greenbook forecastanticipates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. The region continues as it has been: It'soperating at high levels, although there is some moderation; labormarkets are very tight; and, wage rates are higher than the nation asa whole.As far as the national economy, I subscribe to the view thatthe economy is moderating, but that more moderation is needed andadditional restraint is probably also needed. While the risks are onthe side of too much demand, I think we need at this point to keep avery open mind and shouldn't rush to judgment on it for the reasonsthat were articulated nicely by Mike Prell. I'd like to watch theeconomy closely and be prepared to tighten if necessary. But Iwouldn't rush into it at the moment, just because I have enough doubtsto think that a little patience is in order.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, we in Boston agree very stronglywith the staff's long-term conviction that the economy is so strong--its strength stemming from net exports and capital goods--that the jobof the Federal Reserve would be to try to keep this economy from goingbeyond capacity levels and generating a new inflationary cycle. Andwe agree that substantial increases in interest rates are likely to berequired to produce that.We're seeing a little evidence of a slowdown recently, butthis is the kind of flow that you often get in a very strong economy.I don't think we ought to get it in our minds that we've reached alevel of growth which from now on is going to be compatible with pricestability. I think it's a very short-term phenomenon we're talkingabout. And I think our financial markets have been impacted in thelast couple of months by a very special factor--a nonsustainablespecial factor--which is that private foreign capital inflows havebeen coming into this country at rates substantially in excess of theamount of our foreign account deficit. Of course, the counterpart ofthat is very large sales on the part of central banks, includingourselves. This I think has greatly strengthened our bond market; butit's not a factor that we can count on being sustained for very long.We've seen foreign exchange markets in the past couple of years turnon a dime. And I suspect that sometime in the next few months theappetite of private foreign investors for U.S. assets is not going tocontinue to grow at the present rate. And when that happens, you'regoing to see many long-term bonds go up by 50 basis points, and-18-9/20/88perhaps more, overnight. I think we're living in a special financialworld here which is not sustainable.Could I comment about the meeting schedule for next yearsince I can do so in an objective manner since I won't be here? Youknow we--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In a way in which you will choose now tocomment.MR. MORRIS. We set up this eight-meeting schedule at thetime we went to targeting the monetary aggregates. And the idea wasthat, since we're controlling M1 and presumably not paying attentionto anything else, why do we have to meet every month? It seems to methat the Committee would be well advised to go back to a once-a-monthschedule because we're in an environment in which I don't feelcomfortable that we're not having another meeting until November 1st.It's such a rapidly changing world that we live in that I think aneight-meeting schedule is too few. It's true that we can handleproblems in conference calls, but that doesn't quite substitute, in mymind, for the discipline of gathering around this table. I know thestaff won't like it because it increases their work load, and a lot ofthe presidents won't like it because of travel requirements. But Idon't think those considerations should be paramount. And I wouldstrongly advise you to at least think about going back to the once-a-month schedule because it seems to me that the volatility of the worldwe live in isn't well suited to this Committee meeting every five orsix weeks.As far as the New England economy is concerned, we'recontinuing to grow at about half the rate of the national economy,simply because of the shortage of labor. The only state in NewEngland which is growing as fast as the national economy is Maine,which has a very high unemployment rate of 4 percent. And it's theonly surplus labor area in New England, so manufacturing industriesare tending to push farther and farther north into Maine and threatenour little enclave at Lewiston, Maine. That's a very low-wage RCPC;it has the lowest unit labor costs of any check processing center inthe country, and my successor may not have that distinction for verymuch longer.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think you can tranship them toDallas.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I want to make a couple of comments onprojections based on a money-driven model and just what that lookslike. Essentially, I'd say the projections are very similar to thoseof the Board's staff. There are some differences between the secondhalf of this year and next year, but I would characterize the patternas one in which inflationary pressures are contained, but notsignificantly reduced, over that 18-month period. The projections I'mtalking about are based on an assumption of 4 to 6 percent M1 growth.And I guess the conclusion that I reached from looking at that--andobviously, this is the model output and then, just as the Board staffdoes, some subjective judgments are made--was that I'd be much moreconcerned about, say, money growth in June and July of 9 percent, than-19-9/20/88I would be about August of less than 1 percent. I think the generalpattern is such that the same conclusion comes out in this sort ofmodel--that the risks are more on the upside than the downside. Asfar as the District goes, the report is essentially the same as lastmonth. We're still showing weakness relative to the rest of theeconomy and in some areas, particularly in industries like textilesand apparel, there are employment declines.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to theTenth District, there is not a great change from last time. Tosummarize, we are still trailing the growth rate of the nationaleconomy. But in all areas, including energy and agriculture, there issome improvement--to be sure, improvement from a very low base. Manu-facturing is doing very well; retail sales have been holding up butnot very vigorous. By and large, the Tenth District is continuing ona trend to recovery, but a bit slower than the national rate.With regard to the national economy and the projection con-tained in the Greenbook, we would be very close to that except thatthe pattern we have is a bit different. If I understand the Greenbookforecast, the drought effect has largely run its course by the end ofthe year, whereas we would find the effect to be fairly even in eachof the four quarters from the second quarter of 1988 to the secondquarter of 1989. Notwithstanding that minor difference, it still seemsto me that we are projecting a very vigorous growth well into 1989.And, given the comments around the table and what we hear in the TenthDistrict with respect to wage and price increases not really showingup yet, it is still a matter of major concern that, on the nationallevel, we're putting considerable pressure on our resources. I guessmy view is that there is going to have to be some greater restraint inthe future in order to get the kind of pattern over the longer termthat we'd like to have.I would also like to add, if I may, that I happen to agreewith Frank Morris--as painful as it is personally because of thetravel--that going back to a monthly meeting schedule makes a lot ofsense, given the way we're operating at the moment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. The District overall remains pretty strong,particularly in manufacturing. We have some slow delivery times inparticular industries, and we have some price increases coming across,but nothing that startling at this point, particularly in the capitalgoods area. Wage demands on the manufacturing side have remainedmoderate, but we're concerned that because of the strength in theservice wage component--they're in the same labor markets--that infact, they'll begin influencing each other and then we'll see sharperwage increases across the board than we're currently seeing. Retailsales ex-autos have been flat and construction has been ratherlackluster. As you know well, our directors have felt very stronglyabout the strength of the economy, except that at the last go-aroundthey were not quite as adamant, as you probably noticed; I saw somedeterioration in their concerns about inflation. Nevertheless,there's still great strength in the District.-20-9/20/88As far as the national economic outlook, I guess I reallydon't have much reason to disagree with Mike's projections. However,if I were to estimate an error on it, I would say the error isprobably going to be on the upside in terms of strength andinflationary pressures rather than on the downside. We've seen theinflation rate move up a 1/2 percent or so each year. And, as youknow, that is the wrong direction from my perspective. I think weought to gear policy to that long-term objective, which implies we'dprobably have to face more tightening--perhaps more than the staff hasin place.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I'm very pleased with the present state ofmonetary policy and conditions in the economy. That doesn't mean Ilike the 4 percent rate of inflation. I just didn't believe that wecould make the exchange rate adjustments that were so necessary tomake--[along with] the rebound of oil prices from those lows and somerebound in wage rates from what I would call somewhat unsustainablylow nominal rates--without having some temporary bounceback in therate of inflation. I have no reason to think that the staff's realeconomy forecast is not within the range of that which is likely. Iwould tend probably to have a slightly higher net export figure, Ted--closer to what you had in the June Greenbook than those that you havein today--but there's not enough there to argue much about. I thinkif anything is different, consumer spending might be slightly softer,but it's very difficult to predict.The pleasing aspect of policy at this point in September 1988is that, as far as I can see, we've returned the growth of themonetary aggregates to the pace that was occurring in 1987--and Ithought the rate we had in 1987 was appropriate to provide a softlanding for the dollar. And it's very encouraging to me to see that,after the monetary aggregates responded to the somewhat easier stancewe maintained during the fall and winter, the aggregates haveresponded the way they have to our attempts to be serious about notletting M2 rise above the top of the target at the first of the year,even though we had a somewhat distorted base level. And now it looksas if M2 is going to end the year in the fourth quarter below themidpoint and could very well be as low as 4-1/2 to 5 percent at theend of the year. Don Kohn shakes his head a little bit at that. Ithink we have to keep in mind the time lag between interest ratechanges and response in those monetary aggregates.In June, as you may remember, I talked a little bit about thehint of changing commodity prices, and I think I was kind of readingtea leaves at that point. But we've had further evidence that themonetary restraint in place is having an impact on commodity prices--and even though we've had, it seems to me, a peaking of commodityprice rises earlier in the year, the drought gave us a kind of adouble-peak effect. But the commodity price picture does look muchimproved. I believe that the fight against inflation is a long oneand one that we must sustain over a long period of time; and I wouldbe willing, of course, to accept very low growth rates in the monetaryaggregates, but I would really suggest that zero may not be desirable.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.-21-9/20/88MR.HELLER. Thank you. Let me take a little bit longerperspective on the current situation. In 1986, we had 15-1/2 percentM1 growth and almost 10 percent M2 growth and that, I think, isreflected to some extent in some inflationary bulge, which is nowworking its way through the economy from producer prices slowly downto consumer prices. By the way, I think that lag is exactly what thetextbooks tell us it is--18 months or thereabouts, counting from the1986 area to slightly over the middle of 1988, with some variancearound it. Then, following what Governor Angell just said, in 1987 wesaw a very substantial slowdown in monetary growth and I think thatslowdown is starting to make itself felt in the real economy, which weare observing right now.As I think many people pointed out, there is some moderationin the economic growth picture in the Greenbook forecast. There'smore of that weakening, especially in the coming year. Personalconsumption next year is forecast to be 1-1/2 percent; residentialconstruction is negative; and there isn't one single sector which isgrowing above the 2-1/2 percent growth rate that was described asoptimal--except for domestic investment and exports. And I think it'sabsolutely essential, if we worry about growth constraint, that wekeep domestic investment growing at a solid rate. It is somewhatdisconcerting, however, that even the growth rate in that sector isforecast to be cut in half for the coming year. So, what we're aboutto do here is kill the goose that lays the golden eggs. We can't talkabout a growth constraint being relevant for policy when the onefactor that can ease that growth constraint, which is domesticinvestment, is being cut and restrained. I also agree that exportshave to be maintained. I'm happy to see the higher export growthrates. The current level of the dollar, I think, is entirelyappropriate. We're below purchasing power parity; therefore, we dohave a competitive advantage and we can make further inroads intoforeign markets.The scenario that was outlined by Mike Prell in response toGovernor Kelley's questions is the really scary one--the black box,the Pandora's box, that the new President would have to face if growthfalters, if we have the higher interest rates that we're talkingabout, and if the tax revenues are not coming in. So I see thedownside risks as a very unpalatable combination of factors indeed.The upside risks I see as rather minimal, because of the items thatGovernor Angell has outlined already. In my view, we're seeingessentially a moving through the economy of that inflationary bulge.If you look at the beginning of that process, you'll see very positivesigns--the commodity prices being maintained, the flattening of theyield curve, and also the strong dollar in international markets. Allare good portents of rather subdued inflationary expectations. So,basically I like the economy the way it is running right now. I thinkwe're exactly on the right track and I would like to do everythingpossible to keep it moving that way.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. I wanted to very briefly express something verysimilar to what Governor Heller just expressed, and I won't repeat it.I'll simply say I'm coming from the same place that he is. I hadexpressed before my concern about what could happen in the 1989-90time scenario. If the black box kind of thing begins to happen and we-22-9/20/88slide over into a recession before we have a chance to adjust furtherthe fiscal/monetary mix and the trade/consumption mix and so forth,I'll continue to have those concerns. I have a very low level ofenthusiasm for running a high risk of inducing a recession in the nearfuture. Hopefully, we do have some slowing going on and to quote EdBoehne from a few minutes ago, I think that this is not a time to rushto judgment. So I would prefer to watch and wait a little bit and seehow things go.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I really don't want to add much to any of that.I think everything has been said. We've seen recently some signs ofslowing as everyone has pointed out. That seems to have had amoderating effect in the financial markets and I don't know whetherthat's going to continue or not. All I know is that it looks prettygood right now and certainly doesn't lend any weight to overreacting.So I support what others have said.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare, do you have anycomments you'd like to make?MR. LAWARE. No.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we, then, go to relevantpolicy decisions.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. With that we'll take ourusual break.MR. ANGELL. Are there going to be questions?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry. I thought we might doquestions after the break. We can do questions now, if you like.MR. ANGELL. Don, we have in the Bluebook, the M2 and otherforecasted growth rates. What happens in 1989 quarter 1 and quarter 2with, let's say, alternative "B" and what would happen in quarter 1,quarter 2, and maybe in quarter 3 if you put in the staff's interestrate forecast?MR. KOHN. I can answer the second one more easily because Ihave a table in front of me.MR. ANGELL. Okay, that's fine; that's the most important.MR. KOHN. We have about 3-3/4 percent growth of M2 over theyear 1989 consistent with the staff's interest rate and GNP forecast.MR. ANGELL. 1989 over 1988?MR. KOHN. Q4 1988 to Q4 1989.MR. ANGELL. Okay.-23-9/20/88MR. KOHN. And that embodies slightly lower growth rates inthe first half of the year than in the second--on the order of 2-1/2percent in the first two quarters--and that's because we've assumedthat interest rates continue to rise through the first half of theyear. And then things level out.MR. ANGELL. So that means you need almost a 5 percent growthrate in the second half of the year to get 3.7?MR. KOHN. That's correct. Now, let's suppose interest rateswere flat. I don't have a direct table here, but I do have a sensefrom our model simulations that to those 2-1/2, 3 percent growth ratesfor the first half of 1989, I would probably add about 1-1/2 to 2percent per quarter if interest rates were kept flat. So I would havemore like 4 to 5 percent.MR. ANGELL. Okay, so the 2.8 percent rate that you have forquarter 4 would tend to rebound in quarter 1.MR. KOHN. It should.MR. ANGELL. If we did not have other increases.MR. KOHN. Absolutely--with the increase in interest ratesthrough August.MR. ANGELL. And it could rebound to 4 or 4-1/2?MR. KOHN. Yes, in the first half; and I would expect it torebound further in the second half as--MR. ANGELL. Thank you. That's very helpful.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Mr. Kohn? Ifnot, we'll have a recess.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Following up on Peter Sternlight'sremarks about the borrowing requirements, I think that policygenerally over the intermeeting period has required very little in theway of adjustment. In fact, it's very rare that the outlook seems tochange so little over so short a period. One thing that worries meabout the current economy is that it is vaguely reminiscent of a sagthat occurred in 1976--which everyone assumed was the beginning of adecline, and it was a pause which sort of disappeared. That was a bitmore in the way of a real slowdown. And I think we've got to be alittle careful that we're not looking at a false dawn.Export orders, unfilled orders are still very high. I see noevidence of any deterioration, even though there's been some slowdownin actual deliveries over the last three months. Capital goodsmarkets remain quite strong. The order structure, appropriations,does not seem to be deteriorating. It is true that there is somemarginal weakening on the edges in a lot of different areas--thetextile-apparel complex, I think, being the most obvious and the mostimportant so far as size is concerned. I think the crucial issue,which bothers me about the presumption that we would be in any way-24-9/20/88accumulating a softening from here, is that the inventory situationhas actually softened some. And I suspect that's in part the cause ofsome of the overheating or preceived overheating being offset. I'm alittle concerned about the numbers, because whenever you get this highin operating rates, seasonal adjustments for July and August oftentend to be a problem. The classic case is the steel industry, whichnormally shuts down for a couple of weeks as an ordinary seasonal, butin times of peak demand, such as now, it doesn't shut down. Then whatyou get is a seasonally adjusted sharp rise, unless somebody has thegood sense to cut it. And it comes right back down. I think that's apart of the surge that appeared to be a real acceleration in June andJuly and an easing in August. I suspect--at least looking at theinitial claims figures which I think are really relevant to thissituation--that basically, the economy probably continues firm,although not as aggressive as I think some of us feared somewhat alittle earlier in the summer and in the late spring. Corporate profitfigures look quite good. The report this morning was showing thatprofits continue to move forward in a reasonably good fashion and thatusually is a precursor of underlying capital investment--domesticcapital investment--being supported.So, in general, I think it is very difficult to visualize anyreally significant change in the outlook. I think we're neitheraccelerating nor decelerating. As a consequence, I must say I wouldfeel comfortable with just taking the last directive, changing thedates and a couple of numbers, and going with it. It is essentially ano-change scenario, asymmetric towards tightness, which I think isprobably right. My only suspicion is that we're not going to seeanything that will require moving in a tightening direction in theintermeeting period. But I find the possibilities of easing justabout as remote as I think they can get. I see no particular problemin continuing to be concerned about acceleration but I think that,unless and until we actually see the events as they emerge--until weget some evidence that this is in fact the type of pause which,frankly, I think it's likely to be--it would be premature at thisstage to tighten further. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I can certainly go with yoursuggestion. I, too, believe that we're more likely in theintermeeting period to need to tighten than we are to ease, but Iwould not take that to mean that there's not some circumstances inwhich we might be surprised. If there's a 60 percent chance that wewould not need to make any move at all, and a 30 percent chance wemight need to tighten, I think there are some circumstances that mightdevelop--, that conditions might change in an economy with certainkinds of financial bankruptcies occurring and certain kinds ofuncertainties. But I can--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If you're saying 60, 30, 10, I buy that.MR. ANGELL. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. If that's in the form of a motion, I certainlywould second it, particularly with the asymmetric language. I wouldpoint out, though, that I really do doubt that we're going to be luckyenough to get through more than a meeting or two without further-25-9/20/88tightening. I think there are pressures on the underlying rate ofinflation that are likely to intensify. And I think that some of thepotentially favorable developments associated with the price of oiland the rising dollar--as far as inflation is concerned--could easilybe reversed. At this time, given the uncertainties, it seems to methat alternative "B" is probably the appropriate path. But given myconcerns, I would very much favor the asymmetric language that wasincorporated in the previous directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Second the Chairman's suggestion.MR. PARRY. Third.SPEAKER(?). Third.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, as I had tried to suggest in myearlier comments, I think the risks continue to be on the upside inthe economy. I think we should not be lulled by this softening at thefringe, as you put it. So I would very strongly support yourrecommendation, particularly with respect to the asymmetric language.I think that we do have a period in which we can pause and take stockof what's been happening. And particularly with respect to thedollar, I think if we were to initiate additional tightening moves atthis time we might get another increase in the dollar, with the dangerof a ratcheting upward of rates around the world that would not beappropriate at this time. So I would strongly support yourrecommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I agree with Mr. Parry that theCommittee is going to have to be taking other moves toward tighteningin the not-too-distant future, but the timing is not right for themoment. And I would agree with your position.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your position too.The only thing I would add to it is that these rates of inflationprojected by the Board's staff, as indexed by the fixed-weightdeflator, are way too high. So, I wouldn't be completely satisfiedwith that outlook, although that may be the most it's reasonable toexpect. I would go right down the line with you on it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I also agree with yourrecommendation. I would add only one thing to it in terms of theoperations of the Desk. If what we're doing would suggest a federalfunds rate of, say 8-1/8, I'd certainly be more comfortable with aslightly higher rate than I would with a lower rate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further comments?-26-9/20/88MR. GUFFEY. I'll join.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I, too, agree with the prescriptionyou've put on the table. I guess I would be more in the Bob Parrycamp in terms of what I think the likely pressure points are going tobe in the intermeeting period. If I could, I'd just like to add aquick comment on the point Governor Kelley and Governor Heller madeabout the dangers of a recession-induced rise in the budget deficit inthe intermediate term. That really is pretty ugly in terms of asetting, not just for monetary policy, but more generally. But Ithink that of the things that could produce that result, one of themclearly is a rise in the inflation rate in the shorter term. If addedinflationary pressure does begin to show through more than it has todate, to be certain that is a recession in the making. So if we'rereally concerned about a recession-induced rise in the budget deficit,that's just double reason why we should be especially sensitive aboutany further upward movement in the inflation rate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we're still ahead of the curve.And that's extraordinary, if we can hold that.MR. BLACK. Except that the fixed-weight did hit 5 percentlast quarter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I'm a little suspicious of that.Until I disaggregate it, I don't know what to make of it, because allthe other price indicators don't capture that number. Furthercomments? President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I think if we're serious about the inflationobjectives, over time we're going to have to face further tightening.That's what I suspect right now. There's been a flattening in theyield curve; there's been some improvement in commodity prices; and, Ithink that needs to be recognized. But if I push forward, it looks tome like we've got more to do. I am encouraged by the moderation inthe aggregates relative to the past trend that Governors Angell andHeller raised. I'd have a lot more comfort I guess if, when we didsee the signs of inflation picking up, we could move aggressively.But, I think, given the sentiment of the Committee, I can certainlyaccept your recommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I'm in agreement with that proposal.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I would just express agreement.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Include me in.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.-27-9/20/88MS. SEGER. You can include me, too. I just want to mentionone other thing that I haven't heard commented about this morning, andthat is the risk to the thrift industry. That industry is alreadyvery weak, with many institutions on their backs. And a furthersignificant upward movement in interest rates, as the Board staffpresentation yesterday showed us, would add significantly to thenumber of insolvent institutions around. So I think that's justanother good reason for sitting tight. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. I agree with your recommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I agree with the recommendation. I'll just adda response to what Don was saying earlier about the financial marketsand some of the caveats that go with it. I think that's right. Ithink to some extent that the good behavior of financial markets has alot to do with the credibility that we've established with ouractions. And I think that if there are signs of market wavering--thinking that we are not credible on policy--then it'll show up andthat's the time when we should consider further actions. But I thinknow the signs look good, and we don't want to lose that credibilitywe've established with the financial markets. I think clearly this isthe right type of policy for now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I support the recommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare, you have any comments?MR. LAWARE. I do, too. No comments.MR. BOEHNE. Call the roll.MR. HELLER. Keep us [unintelligible], right?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Play your cards right, you can setan all-time record here.MR. KELLEY. That's where we can get a free lunch.MR. HELLER. The sandwiches aren't made yet.MR. BLACK. We had doughnuts, I know that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Technically, we have produced thefollowing operational paragraph.MR. BERNARD. The operational paragraph would read: "In theimplementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeksto maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.Taking account of indications of inflationary pressures, the strengthof the business expansion, the behavior of the monetary aggregates,and developments in foreign exchange and domestic financial markets,somewhat greater reserve restraint would or slightly lesser reserve-28-9/20/88 -29-restraint might be acceptable in the intermeeting period. Thecontemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent withgrowth of M2 and M3 over the period from August through December atannual rates of about 3 and 5 percent, respectively. The Chairman maycall for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager forDomestic Operations that reserve conditions during the period beforethe next meeting are likely to be associated with a federal funds ratepersistently outside a range of 6 to 10 percent."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anyone have any comments on thatparticular reading? If not, can I have a vote?MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesGovernor Heller YesPresident Hoskins YesGovernor Johnson YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesPresident Parry YesGovernor Seger YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm going to confirm that the nextmeeting is November 1st and, well, is this a record?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Frank Morris would know. Can youjudge in terms of the time, Frank? I can't remember any better thanquarter of 12.MR. MORRIS. No, that has to be a record. Even with BillMartin.MR. GUFFEY. In fact, we've always--MR. JOHNSON. No matter what.MR. GUFFEY. No matter what.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have a few topics on the agenda forluncheon, which I guess will be around 12:30. Let's recess until12:30.MR. HELLER. We'll take it!END OF MEETING