Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 13-14, 1988A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 13, 1988, at 2:30 p.m. andcontinuing on Wednesday, December 14, 1988, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT:Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBlackForrestalHellerHoskinsJohnsonKelleyLaWareParrySegerMessrs. Guffey, Keehn, and Melzer, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, andMinneapolis, respectivelyKohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryBradfield General CounselPatrikis, Deputy General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, R. Davis,Lindsey, Siegman, Simpson, and Ms. Tschinkel,Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1. Attended Wednesday session only.Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Stockton, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of Governors2Messrs. Feinman and Rea, Economists, Division ofMonetary AffairsMr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Wajid, Assistant to Governor Heller, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Gillum, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Divisionof Monetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMr. Eisenmenger, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof BostonMessrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Lang, Rosenblum,and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of St. Louis, Kansas City, Philadelphia,Dallas, and Chicago, respectivelyMs. Lovett, Messrs. McNees and Miller, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Boston, andMinneapolis, respectively2. Attended portion of Tuesday's meeting relating to review of recentexperience with borrowing and the federal funds rate and theimplementation of open market operations.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meetingof December 13-14, 1988December 13, 1988--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move the minutesto get started?MS. SEGER. I'll do it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Second?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection they are approved.Mr. Cross, would you bring us up to date on foreign currencyoperations?MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Mr. Cross?MR. BOEHNE. Could you elaborate on your comments about theGerman mark--the view that the mark is too weak?MR. CROSS. I didn't say that I thought it was too weak.MR. BOEHNE. I know. The Chairman thinks it's too weak, butit's at the top of the snake, is it not?MR. CROSS. The mark has weakened some during the course ofthis year on a weighted-average basis. At the same time, the Germancurrent account balance has been strengthening, their trade balancehas been strengthening. Now with us, our trade balance has beenimproving, Mr. Chairman. There is a European entry factor or elementto this, and the Germans have been increasing their trade balance witha number of their European partners, both in the EMS and outside theEMS. So, their concern has been that the mark not appear to be tooweak during the period when they see the trade balance strengthening.MR. FORRESTAL. Sam, it was reported this morning thatperhaps the market is looking for a trade number of around $10 to $11billion. Is that your assessment of what they are looking for?MR. CROSS. Well, we have heard numbers anywhere from $8-1/2to $12-1/2 billion. Now, it gets a little confusing because there aretwo bases for calculating it these days, and we are not always surepeople are talking in the same terms. The general view seems to bethat the trade deficit will be around $10 billion this time. Butthere are some--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's with seasonal adjustment?MR. CROSS. That's CIF, yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. CIF, with seasonal adjustment?MR. CROSS. Yes, CIF and seasonally adjusted.12/13-14/88MR. FORRESTAL. So, with anything above $10 billion, you'dexpect some pressures on the dollar?MR. CROSS. Well, I wouldn't jump to any big conclusionsbecause we've had other occasions when the number came in very welland the dollar moved down. I believe the market has seen that it'spossible to get hurt by shorting the dollar too much. And I think thetrade figures are certainly hanging over the market in an importantway. So I think a lot of participants are not anxious to do too muchuntil then. It could be that a good trade figure would provide alittle more support, but it's not a sure thing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. If this is too silly a question, tell me and Iwill retract it. How do you decide, when you intervene, whether toreally come in like "gangbusters" or to make sort of an anemic effort?In your comments, it sounded to me as if you said that earlier in themonth market participants were disappointed with our intervention--I'mparaphrasing--because it looked as if we were just trying to let thedollar down easily and we weren't really trying to hold it up. Did wereally intend that?MR. CROSS. That was not our intention and indeed when I gotasked, at the press conference when we released this quarterly report,whether we were just trying to smooth the dollar, I said we weren't.We are trying to do more than that.MS. SEGER. So, why didn't we go in and really hit it then?MR. CROSS. Well, for one thing, unless you're really goingto intervene in very, very large amounts it's not always crystal clearjust what the reaction is going to be to an expenditure of 'X' amountof dollars. But also we have to work this out very closely with ourcolleagues in the Treasury who may or may not feel that it is a goodidea to intervene very strongly at a particular time. And, also, notin the precise amounts always, but we do try to coordinate our effortswith the other central banks so that we all give the same kind ofmessage. There were occasions in this period when a number of peoplein the market thought that our efforts were not big enough really tosmack the exchange rate in a decisive way. I do think that over aperiod of several weeks as we continued to do this that the cumulativeeffect of this became more noticeable and more important.MS. SEGER. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Mr. Cross? Ifnot, would somebody like to move to ratify the transactions since theNovember meeting?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So moved.MS. SEGER. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]12/13-14/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Sternlight?MR. MELZER. Peter, what's in the market in terms of theconfusion over borrowings? How are people interpreting policy rightnow, and how importantly do borrowings figure into that?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think there was a realization as wewent through November that we must have made some allowance for whatthe market also perceived as a change in the relationship betweenfederal funds and borrowings. In fact, on the very day the Committeewas having that conference call--November 22--I happened to read oneof the market letters, and the writer assumed that we were probablyusing something like $400 million rather than $600 million, so thatparticular analyst happened to hit it right on the head. The furthersource of confusion or uncertainty was the spikes in borrowing fromsome of these technical problems. The market has an idea that thosehave been a factor. I don't think they know the precise dimensions ofit, but they generally have become aware of the problems in the wiremechanisms and in fact are aware that a particular bank was unable tomove its funds out, and the ones who were supposed to get funds knowvery well that there were problems and hangups from that.MR. HOSKINS. Peter, I'm unclear how you decide how much toadjust in terms of borrowings versus how much to accept in terms ofthe rise in the federal funds rate on a daily basis. One thing wecould do is maybe have Don Kohn arrange for borrowings to hold a rangefor the funds rate. But it's not clear to me when you decide toaccept a funds rate and when you decide not to accept it.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we generally speak of an expectationof a funds rate that would prevail given a certain level of borrowing.And I think right along we've felt that there is some degree offlexibility of--oh, I don't know--at least 1/8th percentage point oneither side of whatever is the central point. And certainly for agiven day it's even more room than that. It's more the persistentdeviations that would be a problem. As the deviations build up to begreater than 1/8th or 1/4th percentage point and more persistent, thenI think it creates the kind of problem that led to the discussion heldon November 22 where it was felt that maybe a discrete adjustment ofthe borrowing level was in order. I don't know if I have the preciseformula. It is something that's talked about daily and in discussionsthat people at the Desk would have with Don {Kohn] and his associates.MR. BLACK. Peter, is it fair to say that most differenceshave been resolved in favor of the federal funds rate?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we came through periods in this recentintermeeting interval where the deviations got to be sufficient sothat the concern about the funds rate moving too far did become aconstraint. I think I can say that in the period just since theNovember conference call, there was a fair amount of flexibility givento letting the funds rate move. We started out saying at thatNovember call that we expected funds to be around 8-3/8 percent, andit seems to me it was largely market expectations that brought therate up to 8-1/2 and 8-5/8 percent on a number of days. We wereputting in reserves at that time, but we were doing it mainly with aneye to the reserve needs and not with such extraordinary intensitythat getting funds back down to 8-3/8 percent was an overriding12/13-14/88objective. I think we were allowing some flexibility in the fundsrate that emerged in that period in the context of the informationthat had come along in the market and given the asymmetric directiveand all.MR. BLACK. Yes, I was on the [morning conference] call thistime, and I think that's an excellent description of what you did. Iwas really referring to the longer run. It seems to me that in thepast most of them have been resolved in favor of the federal fundsrate. Not all certainly, but I think that's what it has usuallyyielded.MR. KEEHN. Peter, you commented on the 30-year[unintelligible]. Is there an expectation that we will do more, or[what] is the market reaction to what we've done so far?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think the market expects that probablywe'll be exercising more restraint over the near term. Many peoplewould expect to see by year-end, [unintelligible] or maybe going intoearly next year, that funds would push higher, that there would beadditional restraint exercised against the strength of the economy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's an interesting question ofwhether you combine the premium on the [forward] markets of thefederal funds rate with the shape of the yield [curve for] bonds. AndI think that the markets certainly are looking at (1) the forwardmarket and the funds rate, and (2) the spreads between the funds rateand the bill rate and CD rates. I think you can clearly see thatimplicit in the short end of the market is the expectation that thefunds rate will be higher over the next 30, 60 days. Any furtherquestions for Peter? If not, would somebody move to ratify hisactions since the last meeting?SPEAKER(?). So moved.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So moved.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Before we getinvolved with the borrowing and funds rate relationship and its--, Iguess this naturally brings us to Don Kohn and the most recent[unintelligible]. The larger [unintelligible] the less we know.MR. KOHN. That's probably right. Actually they wereoverwrought, right?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They were thrilled.MR. KOHN. [Unintelligible]. We are not Mozart, we recognizethat. I have only a little to add to the memos we've already seen andto the comments Peter already has made in today's discussion.[Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Kohn?MR. JOHNSON. I think you're right. I mean, that was a welldone explanation. And as you pointed out, what resulted was probablynot much different, but I think that's because of the flexibility thatwas pursued by the Desk. I really would hate to think of what the12/13-14/88result would have been if you had actually tried systematically toproduce that borrowing target. This is just more evidence in myopinion of the need for flexibility and sensitivity toward the fundsrate in situations like this. Since I've been here, there have been,in my opinion, more periods of instability in the borrowing functionthan of stability. And so I'm not at all against this procedure aslong as it's flexible. But trying to blindly pursue that problemtarget is very hazardous.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. Well, on previous occasions I've said that I wasalways amazed that $100 million changes could move the economy aroundlike a [unintelligible]. I think the current [unintelligible] showsthat it is very difficult to have a stable relationship betweensomething that small and something that large. It's sort of likehaving a big pyramid standing exactly on its tip. Making minuteadjustments at the bottom can balance the pyramid, but it's not at allclear that that will always avoid major movement of the pyramideither. In any case, like Mr. Johnson said, as soon as we see someinstability there, we are ready to abandon the operating proceduresthat we have, and we immediately go back to federal funds targeting.I sent around a paper from the OECD and last week [at theOECD meeting] there was a topic of discussion indicating thatvirtually every single country represented around the table had anoperating procedure that was focusing on a federal funds rateequivalent. On the other hand, a number of the countries typicallyused a monetary growth range for various aggregates as medium-termtargets. And, on balance, I think that is probably as good acombination as one can get. You know, use the fed funds operatingtarget itself and then have a medium range monetary growth objectivein mind and steer the federal funds rate in order to attain thattarget. That allows for deviations like those specified in Don Kohn'spaper. That's a very good paper, a very thorough discussion. Thesevelocity changes that we can assess and predict with pretty goodaccuracy [unintelligible] might be amazed in that respect[unintelligible] take that into account. As a result, I think wecould have a very consistent package that would allow us to attain thetargets with a higher degree of precision than the borrowing targetprocedure allows us. What I would do with borrowings is use it as anindicator variable, a variable to watch along with the others. Thenyou would get the market signals, the market feedback, that you couldstill take into account and incorporate along with the other thingsthat we are watching, but you would do so in a systematic and explicitfashion. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further comments? Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I just have a question. How bad does therelationship have to get, or how unreliable, before we should dropthis approach?MR. KOHN. I don't know.MS. SEGER. So, as Manley Johnson indicates, it seems thatthe rule has been that the relationship hasn't been super terrificrather than that being the exception over the last four years or so.12/13-14/88MR. KOHN. That's a question the Committee has to answer. Iwould say that we tend to focus on the shifts; that's when the issueis brought to the attention of the Committee and when the discussionsoccur. It's not clear to me that we don't have long periods in whichthe relationship is sufficiently on track to get approximately themoney market conditions that the Committee thought it was getting whenit specified the borrowing objective. There have been periodic shiftsto be sure. I can't answer for the Committee what its range oftolerance is. I think I tried to indicate in my closing remarks thatI thought that by treating both the money market conditions and theborrowing flexibly, we had gotten through what could have been a verydifficult period without having to key very firmly on specific federalfunds rates and getting locked into narrow federal funds targeting sothat we retain the basic borrowing objective. But at the same time,Mr. Sternlight was sensitive to the potential for the funds rategetting way out of whack with what the Committee expected. So, somesort of compromise was worked out that in my view worked out prettywell in the end.MS. SEGER. If you were a robot and you just had pushed forthe $600 million and kept going until you got it, what would yourguess be as to where the federal funds rate might have gone?MR. KOHN. [Unintelligible]. We have in the Bluebook anindication that under alternative "C," $600 million, that the fundsrate would be getting up toward 9 percent.MS. SEGER. You don't think you'd go over that?MR. PARRY. That's after an end-of-year adjustment as well?I mean, it could even be higher in the short term?MR. KOHN. It could be higher over short periods of time,that's right. I think it would settle down.MS. SEGER. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, as I've indicated a lot of times,what I hope we are going to move to eventually is some kind of reservetargets and make the necessary institutional changes so they'll work.I think it's important in the interim that we recognize that thisborrowed reserve target is not a reserve target in the usual sense.The real instrument under current procedures, as I perceive it, is thefederal funds rate because this is what determines the demand formoney and consequently the rate of growth in the aggregates. And theborrowing is simply the device that we use to try to control thefederal funds rate. I think it has confused us, and it has confusedthe markets on occasion. I remember that Manley and I were arguingthis back at the March meeting I think it was. I would favoradopting, if we could get a consensus, a wider range for the federalfunds rate and dropping the borrowing target. I would then give theDesk, in consultation with you [Chairman Greenspan], enough freedom tomove anywhere within this half percentage point limit [for the federalfunds rate] that seems consistent with the directive. I still favorthat. I think this [recent intermeeting] period illustrated that. Ithink Peter Sternlight handled it beautifully the way he jumped back12/13-14/88from one and then the other. I do think most of the time we haveresolved it in favor of the federal funds rate where there weredifferences. And I think that's the more important of the two.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. The disturbances or shifts seem to be larger interms of magnitude more recently, which naturally raises concern aboutwhat do I look for going forward. And during the time period in whichwe were setting policy, I think my concerns were the same as PresidentBlack's--that we were confusing the public as to what we were about,and certainly if we were to keep talking about reserve restraint asopposed to fed funds rates. Somehow, I think it might be clearer ifwe did one or the other. The flexibility, it seems to me, simplygives a perception, at least in my mind and perhaps for some others,that we are doing nothing but following market rates up and not makingpolicy directly. That is, we simply support whatever the marketbelieves rates ought to be. So, I guess in that sense I'd be happy tocut it one way or the other or to have a more formal agreement on whatwe are doing with a range for borrowings. But if it turns out thatthe funds rate is what we ought to use, and if it has a wider band, Ican support that position.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think we need to step back from just thenarrow issue of this procedure or that procedure and ask the broaderquestion about policy itself. And I think in the last several yearsthat policy has generally been good. If you compare what has happenedin the last several years and went back over the last 20 years or so,I think in general we have done most of what should have been done inthis particular cycle. And I think that that is borne out by the lifeof the cycle and the fairly good control we've had over inflation.Now, the issue is, has this procedure been helpful to us in achievingthat goal? Have we achieved good policy in spite of this procedure?My own sense is that this procedure has been helpful in guiding ustoward better policy. No procedure is perfect. And I think we'vefound that, whatever procedure we've used, there are always times whenyou have to override it. And Manley Johnson's point is correct thatat some point we have to override it so much that maybe we ought tolook around. But on the whole, looking at the broad picture, I thinkthat this procedure has served us well and has made for better policy.MR. JOHNSON. Actually, I'm not suggesting that I woulddisapprove of the way the Desk has managed lately. I think it washandled with sensitivity--with a sensitivity that I wouldn't mindseeing [in the future]. I mean, my concern has always been with astrict borrowing target.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I also think that operations were handled verywell in this period. But I have the general sense that we are movingcloser to a funds rate targeting regime, and I agree with the commentsabout the confusion that that can create internally and externally. Ithink in general--and I believe for reasons that Ed Boehne wasimplying without saying--that it has helped us to define our business,if you will, as being reserves and not interest rates [even though we]12/13-14/88characterize changes in policy as changes in the degree of reserverestraint as opposed to changes in a target for a market interestrate. I think that's helpful in deflecting political pressures and soforth, but if we continue to move closer in a sense to a funds ratetarget I feel we ought to be explicit about that. But if we did, Ipersonally would feel very strongly about having a different provisothan we have right now. In effect, the borrowed reserves regime istargeting the funds rate, and then we have a proviso based on thefunds rate that really can never be operative. So, were we to goexplicitly to that, I'd like to see, if we had had at times in thepast some kind of proviso based on the reserve base, whether thatwould have given us the kind of balance I think we are looking for inthe directive.I guess, finally, I might ask just a rhetorical question, andthis is part of the confusion: How are we going to describe what'shappened in this intermeeting period where in my mind the degree ofreserve restraint has been measured by the borrowings target that hasbeen set? In effect, we are saying we really increased the degree ofreserve restraint at the same time that the borrowings target has comedown. I think that puts the confusion in perspective. If youdescribe the degree of reserve restraint in terms of what balances thefunds rate, that's one thing. But in my mind that's not really what"degree of reserve restraint" meant. Why don't I just leave it atthat? I'm not sure that's easily answerable, and I think I know howwe can do it.MR. KOHN. We, of course, added or suggested the addition ofa paragraph to the policy record describing the November 22 meeting,which attempts to reconcile those two things.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me this was avery good and a very enlightening paper and one of the things that itsought to do is to uncover reasons for the lack of borrowing and Ithink all of those given were very plausible. One other occurred tome and that is that we have not changed the discount rate very oftenrecently and there may be a perception in the market that our failureto move very often on the discount rate will in effect increase thespread between the discount rate and the federal funds rate as we goforward and therefore produce a greater hesitancy on the part of banksto borrow at the discount window. Whatever the reason, we have thisshortfall. As I've thought about this, it strikes me that we are ineffect targeting the federal funds rate; we are really doing that.And I think I understand all of the reasons why we don't want to admitthat we are targeting the funds rate. But since the periods ofinstability seem to be greater than the periods of stability, I wonderif the time hasn't come to really examine this procedure and perhapsjust confirm what we are really doing and that is targeting that rate.I wouldn't do it now because I think we are in a period where we hadsome confusion in the market due to computer failures and we are atthe end of the year. So, I think we need to have a little moreevidence as to whether or not this relationship will come back to amore acceptable level. But I think the time really has come for usperhaps to think very seriously about going to a pure funds targeting,not the 1/8 percentage point degree of precision that was attemptedbefore but some range of federal funds rate targeting. Now, I agree12/13-14/88with what's been said about our policy having been pretty good overthe last couple of years following the current procedure, but I thinkthe policy results have been obtained basically because of theflexibility exercised by the Desk rather than because of the procedureitself. So, rather than continue to produce memos about this, talkabout it all the time, I think maybe the time has come to examine itvery carefully and make a decision in the early part of 1989.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Well, it's been an interesting discussion overthe years, and I've always said that you are analytically correct andit's good to have you and Don agreeing on that. But there's a veryimportant point that I think we have to keep in mind, and there's avery important reason that we do not want to target the federal fundsrate explicitly. The discount rate is now an announcement instrument.And if we explicitly choose a federal funds target and we change thatby 25 basis points, or change it by 12-1/2 basis points or 50 basispoints, then that part of open market operations becomes anannouncement target just like the discount rate is. And I believeit's [unintelligible] to have two kinds of instruments, one instrumentthat we use that's subtle, that's not quickly understood and has thecamouflage of market forces at work, and another policy instrumentthat's very clear and has an announcement effect. So, I would neverfavor going to explicit federal funds targeting even though that is away to accomplish exactly what we wish to accomplish. It carries anannouncement effect with it that I would not prefer. What I wouldprefer doing, Don, is to examine quite a few options other than theexisting options to accomplish the same kind of program and maybe somethat might be able to accomplish it with some more regularity. I'vetalked from time to time with you about a total reserves [target] anda scheduled total reserves which could give you whatever elasticityyou choose. A variant that we sometimes refer to as the[unintelligible] would in a sense give you a total reserve [target]with a cap on it on both sides. But I think there are other ways wemight explore without going to explicit federal funds targeting.MR. BLACK. Wayne, wouldn't a lot of that announcement effectbe lost since this wouldn't be released until Friday following thenext Federal Open Market Committee meeting?MR. ANGELL. Well, if we were to give the Desk, let's say, anexplicit 8-5/8 percent funds rate to shoot for within a specifiedrange, once you change that rate it's going to be known immediately inthe market--as it was previously when explicit funds rate targetingwas used.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, one fact I want to throw on thetable with respect to this is that with very rare exceptions I don'trecall the Desk operating on both sides of the market during onemaintenance period. In other words, if you're going to focus on anexplicit funds rate with an announcement effect, you're going to haveto be in there generally not just once a day on one side throughoutthe whole maintenance period but you're going to have play it on bothsides. And I think that gives a different statistic than 8-5/8. Ithink that if you're forced to stay on one side you can't, even if youwanted to, calibrate a funds rate target exactly.12/13-14/88MR. ANGELL. Are you suggesting you can have an explicitfederal funds target--and nothing else--and that's the instruction inthe directive, and not have the market perceive precisely that we havea fed funds target, and the market wouldn't know when we have a 25basis point change?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it makes a difference how theDesk endeavors to calibrate that particular fed funds rate. Am Icorrect that we used to be in the market more than once a day and weused to be in on both sides?MR. KOHN. On occasion.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I don't know that we were in on bothsides in a single day, but certainly we had multiple entries on givendays when we were targeting the funds rate.SPEAKER(?). Well, in the same week.MR. KOHN. But we were focusing on [unintelligible] in theearly 1970s.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, I think even though it's certainlythe case that we are moving toward a federal funds target, we arestill quite a long way from that procedure because most of the actualactivity is determined by the borrowing requirement. I grant you thatyou could get the effect you're talking about but I'm not sure thatit--MR. ANGELL. Well, I'm saying that I prefer to have somearrangement to keep us from having explicit fed funds targets becomeapparent to the market and having some announcement effect whenever wechange a fed funds target.MR. BLACK. I certainly wouldn't favor targeting a particularfederal funds rate. I might want a band for the reason that Wayne hasindicated. But I would just note that the band associated with theborrowing target did not necessitate a borrowing target as long as wehad the band.MR. ANGELL. What I'd like to see are some alternatives. I'dlike to have Don present us with some alternatives that give us meansof accomplishing what we wish to accomplish in ways that might to someextent be more explainable between meetings without having to useexceptions quite as much.MR. BLACK. You know, when we were under the borrowed--nonborrowed reserve targeting procedure, we made banks borrow half ofany shortfall. There was an automatic corrective mechanism there, andwe made ad hoc adjustments every now and then as needed, and I'd liketo preserve that right. That's the kind of direction I would like.MR. ANGELL. Of course, you're getting a 45-degree slope[unintelligible] function in there. We do that in part.MR. BLACK. I'm not sure.-10-12/13-14/88MR. ANGELL. You're observing part of the variance in thefunds rate and part of the variance in total reserves.MR. BLACK. Yes, if the money supply spurted, we made banksin effect borrow half of the additional reserves that they needed.And that was an automatic brake on that.MR. ANGELL. Yes, and we could have whatever elasticity inthat function we choose to have.MR. BLACK. Well, that would appeal to me a whole lot morethan what we have now, but there's not going to be a consensus on thatat this point. I hope some day there will [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. If we want to abandon the current operatingprocedures it shouldn't be on the basis that you're confusing themarket because I think the market has pretty well got it straight.Analytically, we are on a modified or flexible federal funds rateapproach, and the market knows that. So, it seems to me that thediscussion ought to revolve around what is the best procedure; thatis, whether or not something more rigid as far as fed funds targetingis appropriate--which I wouldn't be very happy about or support--orwhether it should be a reserves target. But I think confusion is notthe issue.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. This might be too technical as an option, butwhat I always thought was a possibility would be--. You know, we havean estimated borrowing function; we go through quite a sophisticatedanalysis to know the econometric equation that estimates the long-termrelationship between the funds rate and borrowings, and it seems to methat could be the basis for establishing some sort of expected fundsrate range. It seems to me that we could still set a borrowingtarget; however, if the funds rate were to start to vary outside therange predicted by this estimated long-term relationship, and wedidn't really know why, then we ought to be more sensitive to thefunds rate versus trying to hit some borrowing number. That wouldallow us to pursue a borrowing procedure but be more sensitive to thefunds rate when we get outside that expected band. I mean, that's notmoney we are putting in--what Bob Black was saying--but at leastthere's some scientific reasoning, or rhyme, as to how we were to setthe expected range. And I think that actually that's about what we'vebeen doing.MR. PARRY. I was going to say, isn't that what we did?MR. JOHNSON. And I think that's okay; I'm not opposed to it.MR. HELLER. But if you wanted to formalize that--I mean allyour targets--in the directive, wouldn't you squeeze the fed fundsrate clause down to 50 basis points or something like that?MR. JOHNSON. Well, I don't know what the variants are.-11-12/13-14/88MR. KOHN. I was going to say, in terms of the standarddeviation of the borrowing equation, the federal funds band is muchlarger than we've been tolerating. It's more like 3/8ths of apercentage point.MR. JOHNSON. Plus or minus?MR. KOHN. [$100 million], plus or minus in terms of standarddeviations. Is that right, Dave?MR. LINDSEY. Yes, that's $500 [million]. Judgmentally, theDesk can come closer than that, but that doesn't [unintelligible] theequation.MR. JOHNSON. Well, something like that; we ought to at leastlook at what the standard deviation is and see if that's within ourtolerance.MR. BLACK. One thing we probably can agree on is that we'vebeen doing a pretty darn good job with what we've had; it's just aquestion of whether we can continue to do it with this procedure.MR. STERN. Well, I agree with those who've observed that weare some significant distance away even now from pure federal fundsrate targeting and I guess I would prefer to keep my distance fromsuch targeting. I see a couple of reasons for that. One is to someextent the grass is always greener phenomenon. Every time a problemcrops up we'd like to find a better way and I would too. I have ahunch that search is going to turn out to be long and arduous.Equally important, as you know we were pretty much committed to thefederal funds rate in the 1970s. I wouldn't attribute all theproblems with policy in the 1970s to the federal funds rate target,but I wouldn't say that it was helpful either. Based on thathistorical experience, I'd be very cautious about going back tosomething like that. Now, we may find a different way of implementingcloser control of the funds rate if that's what we want to do. Butagain I think despite the problems with the current procedure, thehistory of the 1970s doesn't make me sanguine about tighter control ofthe federal funds rate.MR. PARRY. But, Gary, isn't that because you had a rigid fedfunds target? What we now have is something that is more flexible,and it seems to have worked at least over this period.MR. STERN. I'm not complaining about current procedures, butas I said, it's a long way away from pure targeting of the funds rate.MR. BLACK. What I was advocating here is not what we hadbefore but a much wider band. I would be totally opposed to goingback to what we had before. That and the market--MR. STERN. I guess what I wonder about in that setting ishow to adjust the band, not where we are day-to-day within it.MR. HOSKINS. But isn't a risk of what we are doing now thatthe band implicitly is getting narrower and that we are heading backtoward the 1970s? If you did something like what Bob Black wants todo, and maybe Tom Melzer who would tie it probably to the base---12-12/13-14/88MR. JOHNSON. But you know the reality is a point, as long asyou move that point enough--that's what Bob is saying. You could havean explicit funds rate target, but if you moved it often enough todeal with the problem--. The whole issue really is whether you'rewilling to move the funds rate. And I guess Gary is saying that inthe 1970s when this body had explicit funds rate targeting, for somereason it wasn't willing to move the funds rate enough. It was alwaysbehind. I think the question is, if we went back to that, would we bewilling to move the funds rate more often? The only issue really iswhether we would or not.MR. BOEHNE. Well, there's a little more than just thewillingness of people to do it. It goes to Wayne's point, and that isthat a movement in the funds rate has much more than an announcementeffect. And our current procedure does allow some flexibility absentan announcement effect.MR. JOHNSON. True, but I tend to agree with Bob Parry: Themarket knows exactly; they scrutinize the funds rate hourly.MR BOEHNE. That's true, except if the market were totallylogical about it, a half point increase in the discount rate ought tobe just equal to a 50 basis point increase in the funds rate, and itisn't.MR. JOHNSON. I can see that there are certain announcementeffects that are similar to the announcement effects of a change inthe discount rate. I think that's only because a discount rate changeis viewed as an intention by the Fed to lock in the funds rate at thatlevel and put a floor under it. So, I think that's why it has thateffect--of being considered a Fed decision to make that funds rate apermanent rate and it's not going to be flexible down.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Temporarily.MR. JOHNSON. Temporarily.MR. HOSKINS. Well, it's not clear to me that the marketsknow where we are. I think the markets pick out the rate that theythink we are at, and then we allow ourselves to move to that rate;that's the way I read what's going on. We figure out where they are;they keep trading the rate in a certain way; and if we don't protestit sufficiently, we finally decide, if nothing bad happens, to let therate go to where the market sets it. That seems to me to be the waywe've been operating, and I don't find that exactly a comfortable wayto be setting policy. I think you ought to react to the markets, andyou ought to understand what they are trying to tell you.MR. PARRY. Well, you can turn that around a little. You gothrough an intermeeting period, and if things look like they arefirming up for good analytic reasons, and if you allow it to firm up alittle bit, what's wrong with that? If you didn't, you'd be goingback to what we had in the 1970s that Gary referred to.MR. HOSKINS. I don't understand it. We have a conditionaldirective, and if conditions work out that rates go up, and if themarket does it before we do it, so what?-13-12/13-14/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I hesitate to put this inthese terms, Wayne, but every time I listen to this discussion I thinkit does to come down to how many angels can we put on the head of apin.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How many can we?SPEAKER(?). Not very many.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But it is a little more complicatedthan that. Bob Heller, taking your point regarding problems in othercountries--I just glanced at this paper--my sense of it is thatvirtually every central bank in a major country in one way or anotheris having exactly the same kind of discussions we are having here,because the fact of the matter is that for a variety of reasons thereis no mechanism that is wholly satisfactory from all points of view.We see what's happened in other countries in recent years just interms of disparities and money growth rates versus money targets andso on. I think we are all frustrated and searching for the brassring, and I don't think it's there.Two or so months ago Ed Boehne put this is a useful context.If I remember, Ed, you suggested that if we thought of a scale of 1 to10 and on that 10 was a pure money target or reserve target and 1 wasa firm, even more firm perhaps than the 1970's version, federal fundsrate target, I think that you were suggesting at the time that youthought we were somewhere around 3 on that scale, and I think that'sabout right as to where we are. Frankly, I too am rather comfortablewith that. I continue to have very grave reservations about goingfrom 3 to 2 to 1 on that scale. And I say that from several points ofview. There has been some discussion here about the inertia factor;it is simply the inability of this Committee or any committee to movethe interest rate target enough. I think there's more to it than thatbecause I at least think there are some major league questions in theeconomics of the relationship between an interest rate target andmoney target and other things. And again, I think Gary made a goodpoint; there's a tendency to think, gee, we'll try that and all ourproblems are going to go away; quite the contrary, they won't. Wewill have a whole new bushel basket full of problems. And I guessit's partly in that spirit [that we find ourselves] today.Going back to Ed Boehne's comments, I actually think thatthis procedure has worked pretty darn well. I think it was GovernorJohnson who made the point that if anything we probably have gotten abit more flexible, maybe a lot more flexible, and that's all rightwith me, too. But the great advantage over and above those that havebeen cited by Governor Angell, and Ed, and Gary and others about thecurrent procedures is that it has a valuable form of give to it; itbreathes; it's not rigid. I think that that character of it isawfully good from a market point of view, and I think it's awfullygood from our point of view. I think that in some ways that is whatdistinguishes it from the extreme form of a federal funds rate target.It's the extreme form only that involves the question of inertia, butI think it inevitably can put you on a slippery slope into a regime offine tuning that I would find very, very difficult to support. So, Ikind of like what we are doing and I think we've got to be flexible-14-12/13-14/88when we need to be. I think there is a demonstrated capacity for thatflexibility to be brought to bear either with small things, wherePeter and Don and Chairman Greenspan do it, or for big things donethrough the Committee. But I sure wouldn't want to change it verymuch.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me suggest a couple of other thingsthat I think have been involved in the last year which we haven'treally raised today. One is the question that I think is implicit inwhether we move in incremental fashion or in discontinuous jumps. Theother is: How do we know our degree of pressure is right or wrong,and how do we know whether we are moving fast enough? I think thatimplicitly in coming to grips with those questions--granted that ourfundamental purpose is on the inflation front and granted that we havefelt inadequate with respect to the money supply targets--we reallyhave been looking essentially at the slope of interest rates. One ofthe reasons why I guess most members of this Committee have feltcomfortable with the degree of incremental tightening that we havebeen involved with is that essentially we have been stabilizinginflation expectations around a rather narrow range. And there is avery extraordinary value in having that if our basic purpose is toprevent a breakout of inflation on the upside. And I think the factthat we have been looking at a stable long-term interest rate hasgiven us a policy anchor which I suspect is not going to existindefinitely either into this or the next cycle because I think it isa very special case which has turned out to be exceptionally helpful.I think that has been useful in that it has enabled us to function ina rather systematic way. The thing which concerns me is that in thenext cycle that's unlikely to exist. I don't think there's anythinginvolved here other than in part pure luck.I remember that prior to the discount rate increase in 1987,in the summer of that year we did a historical appraisal of the extentto which short-term tightening either moved long-term rates up or downand the pretty convincing historical result was that when short-termrates moved up as a result of Federal Reserve tightening, long-termrates moved up. Now, one can argue that that may well have beenlargely the expectational factor; that is, if you're moving upincrementally, the next expectation is we will move up more and createa much higher long-term interest rate. But I do think that, inevaluating the current theory, it has turned out rather well; and, Ithink also our procedure has worked well but I suspect it's morebecause of the fact that we've had the long-term interest rate anchor.I'm a little concerned that we may overread the usefulness as ageneric tool for all times and all places. And I would be inclined tocome out more on the side that unless and until we can feelcomfortable with the specific procedures that would be involved inreserve targeting or money supply targeting, that we probably are bestsuited to develop in each cycle and each period something which theconcensus of the Committee feels comfortable with as an operationalvehicle without taking all that seriously that there's somethingsacrosanct about the particular function itself.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That is kind of what happened, ofcourse, if you look at it over a sweep of 30 years.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, and I'm not sure that that's wrong.President Guffey.-15-12/13-14/88MR. GUFFEY. I don't think I can add anything that hasn'talready been said other than to state my own position. I would opposemoving back to a rigid federal funds rate target. I think that whathas happened over the last two intermeeting periods particularly hasproven the worth of the procedures we've been following. And I'd alsonote that there is nothing new apparently in that world because thisidea of broadening the federal funds range and letting the market moveit within that range rather than us was a regime that we followed some10 or so years ago when we called that area in which the federal fundsrate could move on its own a "zone of indifference." I don't knowwhether that was a published term or not, but it was certainlyfeatured in discussions around this table. That zone of indifferencewould have been set within a federal funds rate range of 2 to 3percentage points, and no action would be taken so long as the fedfunds rate moved within that zone. My recollection, Bob Black mayremember, is that the zone of indifference was about one fullpercentage point. The point is that it has been done before. Itwasn't successful then I might add, and that is one of the reasons Iwould hate to go back to a rigid federal funds target even with thattype of caveat.MR. JOHNSON. I'd say we are more rigid than that right now,even with the full borrowing target, even if we'd be within that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I just had a couple of comments I wanted to add.Jerry said one of them, and that is that the econometrics aren'treally there to tie the funds rate to our goals, which I think is avery important point.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's not just the econometrics; theeconomics worry me.MR. MELZER. And secondly, nobody's really said thisexplicitly, I think Gary alluded to it, but the funds rate is aprocyclical target; and that's why I feel rather strongly that if weexplicitly use that target, we need some kind of a proviso that isreserve-based.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we've always had multipleprovisos. I just can't see us ever functioning [unintelligible].President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, while I completely agree with the procedureas you describe it, the only question I would have is how do weexplain to the markets what we are doing. I have in mind yourFebruary Humphrey-Hawkins testimony. Are we doing something differentthat you're going to have to explain in your testimony?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What we are doing is what we've beendoing, whether we defined it or not, for at least as long as I've beenhere. I don't know what difference we have to explain.MR. KEEHN. Well, I would think in your testimony theaggregate discussion tends to be on the heavy side in terms of rangesand performance relative to the ranges, etc.-16-12/13-14/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not in that sense.MR. KEEHN. I think what we are talking about is a quitedifferent procedure with which I agree. I think we may have aresponsibility to explain both to the Congress as well as to themarkets that we are doing something a little bit different here.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. On the other hand, we've stayed withinour [monetary] target ranges which we have defined to the Congress--right in the middle--and it's likely that we don't have anything toexplain.SPEAKER(?). Of course, the explanation isn't difficult.SPEAKER(?). We are here by accident, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'm afraid I have misstated myposition pretty badly. I think the excellent memo we had last timedemonstrates pretty clearly that there is a good relationship in thelong run between M2 and the price level. And I think the price levelought to be our ultimate target. I think that's all we really oughtto be targeting on. If we do that, then I think these other thingswill fall into place about as well as they can. That suggests to methat somehow or other we have to control the supply of money. In theshort run, which is what we are talking about here now, our proceduresregardless of whether we use a borrowed reserve target or a federalfunds rate [range that is] narrower or wider--and I had in mind awider one--necessitate our being able to estimate the short-run demandfor money. I think that's very difficult to do. All I was attemptingto say is that I think if you leave out the borrowed reserves stuffand work with the federal funds rate, we'll probably do better in theshort run in doing that. But I will not be satisfied until we get tothe point that we really pay a lot more attention over the long run towhat's happening to M2, or if some other variable is a betterpredictor of the rate of inflation then that's the way I want to move.I certainly don't have in mind any rigid pegging of the federal fundsrate. That to me would be nothing but a modern day version of thereal bills doctrine where the market would get everything it wanted inthe way of money at the particular rate we chose and all we could doto change that would be to raise the rate or lower it--which meanswe'll end up with a real bills doctrine, and I'm violently opposed tothat. I think that doctrine has long since been discredited. And sothe question really is what kind of mechanism in the short run can getus to what I think should be our long-run target or some control overprices over the long run through controlling the rate of growth insome aggregate or some reserve measure. I don't know what the answeris in the short run. We had a memo on that and it doesn't suggest theanswer is very easy. But there is the sense in which I offered thisrecommendation of mine. And I'm afraid I didn't make that very clear.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This has been a very unusual and veryuseful discussion. Does anyone want to add anything or correctanything?MR. ANGELL. Well, it seems to me that we should leave ourpresent procedure in place until we decide on a better one.-17-12/13-14/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I was about to say that. Whatstruck me about this discussion is something I had not been aware ofpreviously. That is the sense that even though we all have differentviews of the way the monetary system functions and have variouspreferences, there is not a strong feeling of unease within theCommittee about current procedures. And I guess, "if it ain't brokedon't fix it." What that means I guess is that we will proceed asbest we can and in the spirit of this conversation define our targetsand our goals hopefully in the way we have.MR. HELLER. Mr. Chairman, with due respect, I think thebetter way to describe it is that it was broke, it is broke, and weare continually fixing it.MR. ANGELL. But we have a system for fixing it.MR. BLACK. It's not quite complete yet.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm not sure it [unintelligible]. WhatI was saying [unintelligible] broke. If there is no furtherdiscussion on this, I think we can move on to Mike Prell's report onthe economic situation.MR. PRELL. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's getting a bit late and I think itprobably would be wise for us at this stage to terminate this meeting.There has been a request by several of you to move tomorrow morning'sschedule up from 9:30 to 9:00 a.m. Does anyone have any problem withthat?MR. HELLER. What's the snow forecast?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't know; let's get a Committeevote. If no one has a problem with it, why don't we reconvene at 9:00a.m. here tomorrow morning.[Meeting recessed]-18-12/13-14/88December 14, 1988--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ted Truman?MR. TRUMAN. Yes, sir.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do I understand that Larry Promisel'sgoing to do--MR. TRUMAN. No, I'll do it, for whatever it's worth.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But you do have it?MR. TRUMAN. Yes, I do have something to read from.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, why don't you start us off onthat?MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have had some softening in new ordersfor exports, but my recollection is that when we measure the unfilledorders that exports were rising quite substantially, which raises aninteresting question as to whether this is just a temporary slowdownfollowed by a negative acceleration or whether our data are quitewrong.MR. TRUMAN. Well, as you may remember the way we constructthe export orders from those series is to use the staff forecast. Soif the staff forecast is wrong, then export orders are wrong.Essentially, the division between domestic orders and exports ordersis derived from the staff forecast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's quite true, but the backlogis in fact independent, and at least the export orders series--whichis fully constructed from the National Association of PurchasingManagers survey--is not inconsistent with the pattern of new orders,which sort of suggests that they still have got to be of significantvalue.MR. TRUMAN. That's why I said that it seems to me thatalthough these data may well be used by those who think there's goingto be a stalling--if you want to put it that way--in the adjustmentprocess, it seems to me that it's a little premature to argue thatcase. I might add that shipments of large aircraft in October wereabout double last year's, and that is one factor that we are expectingthrough the forecast horizon to give us some boost to the overalllevel of exports; that's one area where orders have been strong andthey have long delivery-lead times and so in looking out it looks likeyou're going to have a continued boost to exports as a whole from thatsource.MR. BLACK. Ted, were the September figures on CIF basisrevised?MR. TRUMAN. No, they were both revised by about the sameamount.-19-12/13-14/88MR. BLACK. What is it for September? I didn't get thatsomehow.MR. TRUMAN. Well, revised from--MR. JOHNSON. $10.5 to $10.6 billion.MR. BLACK. $10.6 billion, is what it is now?MR. JOHNSON. $10.67 billion, something like that.MR. TRUMAN. $10.67 from $10.46 billion.MR. BLACK. Thank you.MR. TRUMAN. $10.6 billion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Perhaps it would be best if we firstdirected questions to Mr. Truman and then go back to the domesticmarket issues and Mr. Prell. So why don't we just stay with theinternational side and question Mr. Truman at this stage. Let meraise one question. In the forecast, there is an implication of afairly significant slowing down in the adjustment process. It's of adimension which suggests to me that it's got to be a month or two ofvery poor numbers, which is going to create the usual concerns. Iwould assume that in that type of an environment that the market willprobably be moving the exchange rates down to your forecast. I don'tknow whether or not that's sort of implicitly assumed in your forecastprocess, or whether or not your forecasts on the exchange rate haveessentially been straight lined down and you calculate it from there,whether you try to get a little more dynamic into it.MR. TRUMAN. The answer to the last part of your question iswe find it hard enough to try and come up with "forecasts" of anexchange rate that we don't try to put a dynamic in.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't know why you have difficulty.No one else seems to!MR. TRUMAN. I think there is a risk in that, since in thestaff forecast the trade balance improvement essentially levels off in1989. That is to some extent exaggerated by the impact of the somewhathigher oil prices that come in. So, there's a little bit moreimprovement ex-oil in the forecast. The market presumably will lookthrough that part of the forecast that we have in the total numbers.But as I think we mentioned in the Greenbook, it does strike me thatif you wanted to fine tune things you might feel that this stalling,if you want to put it that way, or partial stalling in process couldlead to pressures on the exchange markets in the short run as themarkets adjust to that. Factors behind this essentially are two. Oneis the strength of the dollar this year and the other is the factthat, at least in our forecast, we have a slowing of growth abroad in1989 which should give us less [impetus?] from that standpoint. In1990, the forecast gains from essentially the cumulative effects ofthe relatively small appreciation of the dollar that's in the forecastand a slowdown in U.S. demand.-20-12/13-14/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The reason I raised the issue is that Iwas looking for some [potential] shock to what is a remarkably smootheconometric forecast in the Greenbook, which of course of necessityhas always been good. This strikes me as an area where you can getsome destabilization from something cracking in the seams. And I wasjust curious to get a sense of the order of magnitude at which itwould be a problem. In other words, I assume that if anything were tohappen, we are looking at, say, a 10 yen adjustment as distinct fromthe 25 yen.MR. TRUMAN. Well, if I were to guess, I would guess thatway. I think it would also depend on what else is going on at thesame time. If you have a slowdown in the trade adjustment butprogress--whatever that means--or perceptible progress on the budgetdeficit, that might strengthen the dollar. If the U.S. economy seemsto be slowing down a bit, that might also tend to offset some of theeffects of an adjustment to somewhat disappointing trade numbers. ButI think a lot depends on what else is going on at the same time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. One thing that bothered me a little about theforecast when combining the international side with the domestic sideis that--I understand the point about the slowing of the tradeadjustment and the expectation of some dollar depreciation--but I'mhaving a little trouble understanding how that's consistent with ourinterest rate projections in the forecast. We've gotten into thisbefore, but we are talking about a fairly substantial increase inshort-term interest rates over the next year or year and a half, andyet there is dollar depreciation. My question would be that I don'tsee those as quite consistent, unless you're arguing that our foreigncounterparts move their interest rates in a parallel fashion. So, Ijust wonder what kind of assumption you've got in there.MR. TRUMAN. On that particular point, we have an increase inrates abroad, but not on the same order of magnitude--maybe half or alittle bit less than half of the increase we have for the U.S. So youdo have interest rate differentials moving in favor of the dollar.And as you know, there is I think in this area [a question of?] howmuch is enough, if you want to put it that way. I think it's a matteron which science doesn't provide us much guidance. One reason why wetended in this forecast to slow the rate of depreciation of the dollarrelative to the overall contour that we had in the previous Greenbookwas in fact the recognition that somewhat higher rates of interestthat occur in this forecast, at least in the short end and the samekind of stuff for the long end, tend to damp the tendency for thedollar to depreciate; the depreciation we would argue would be muchlarger in the absence of that. We have the effect in the forecast.The question is whether we have it calibrated right. Some wouldargue, as you know, that a forecast like this for interest rates wouldbring about even more in the way of stability of the dollar than wehave. [unintelligible]MR. JOHNSON. I can understand that scenario if foreign rateswere keeping up with U.S. rates, but I guess my next question would bethat if that's not the case, then I have some doubts about theexchange rate scenario in the Greenbook. But if it is the case, thenI was going to ask what we have built in for foreign demand?-21-12/13-14/88MR. TRUMAN. We have a fairly sharp decline in the rate ofincrease in demand abroad--down to something like 2-1/2 percent fromthe somewhat over 3 percent rate on average for the G-10 countriesthis year. That is one factor affecting things the other way. Now, Ithink you have two scenarios. You have the scenario of 1988 where youhad a relative increase in U.S. interest rates on balance through theyear and approximate dollar stability. On the other hand, you alsohad 1987, where you had a relative increase in U.S. interest rates anda fairly sharp dollar decline over the period. So, I don't thinkscience, if I can put it that way, [unintelligible].MR. JOHNSON. But I think part of the reason for the 1987decline was that rates were moving more sharply abroad than they werehere.MR. TRUMAN. No, there was a relative increase in U.S.interest rates over that period. But the issue I think really iswhere the market in some sense expects the equilibrium for theexternal accounts is, looking out to the long run. I don't thinkthere's a strong--; you have views all over the map, from some sayingthe current account has to go to zero to ones who say we can live witha current account of $100 billion or so. I guess what has driven thestaff forecast for exchange rates for a number of years now has beenthe view that it's not going to have to be one way or the other--thatthe current account while not necessarily having to go to zero is notgoing to be a deficit of $100 billion, which strikes us as a fairlybig number to finance, and so forth and so on. And I think then theissue is the tradeoff between how much of that comes through priceeffects and how much comes through income effects, and to what extentsomewhat higher interest rates in this country will work against thesort of underlying forces which are tending to drive some of thisadjustment through price effects. The best we can do is to providesome rough thinking on the matter without a lot of precision, becauseI don't think there's a lot of precision here. Now, what we basicallyhave built into this forecast is a 6 percent decline of the dollarfrom roughly where it is today at an annual rate. That translates tosomewhat less than 4 percent in real terms. That's a relativelymodest decline by the standards of recent years. The rationale forthe modest decline is the fact that we do have U.S. interest ratesmoving higher. And it may be that you'll get another 1988 in 1989 asa result of this kind of forecast. At least on our modest equations,or whatever you want to call them, you're going to get a somewhatdifferent outcome on the external account, and that is in fact wherethe [uncertainty?] is; you might as well call it that, too. I meanthere are some forces in the economy also coming from the decline ofthe dollar; perhaps you would have less impetus in 1989 and also in1990.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Ted, when you talked about sluggish exports, youdidn't mention anything about capacity constraints. My impressionfrom some work one of our people did is that in key export sectors weare still in pretty good shape on the capacity side--electricalmachinery, non-electrical. Is that your impression?MR. TRUMAN. Yes, that's certainly our impression of what wehave seen. There have been some stories at some point in some areas,-22-12/13-14/88but the few areas where there seem to have been capacity constraintsseem to have eased off a touch since last spring. I confess wehaven't been systematic in collecting information on that, but I'veseen some.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the steel industry is the onlysort of [unintelligible]. I assume that they could ask for a lot moreif they had the capacity and orders, real or imagined.MS. SEGER. Keep their import protection.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Ted, it seems to me that the export numbersreally are quite strikingly strong--$65 billion I believe in 1989 and$56 billion in 1990. My impression is that relative to what one wouldget in a model forecast like the MPS, it's a very strong number; and Iwas just wondering what kind of things would enter your judgmentalforecast to get that kind of strength, particularly given the slowdownin GNP that you're expecting among industrialized nations in 1990.MR. TRUMAN. Well, as I've said, 13 percent rates of growthin value terms are not anything to sneeze about. We don't actuallyuse the MPS model for this kind of relationship, so I'm not quite sureI can articulate--. And that model has for quite a long time tendedto give a different picture for the external accounts than useddirectly in this process. One big issue has to do with how you treatcomputers, and whether you sort out computers from your equations. Wehave recently found it necessary in our forecasting to do that andthen we sort of independently have to estimate what we think canhappen to computers. That is one area where we have trimmed back theforecast relative to where it was a couple of Greenbooks ago.Excluding computers from our model, given the kind of equations thatwe have, we would have in fact slightly stronger volumes of computerexports [implied] from equations that we are currently using. I mean,that difference--between 8, 8-1/2, or 9--that's the sort of thing,looking at the fourth-quarter changes. We are roughly consistent withthat. Some of the slowdown does come from the total--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I think your response to Governor Johnson'squestion is really a most interesting one. But as I understood yourresponse to the Chairman earlier, you did not indicate the dynamic ofthe exchange rate adjustment. And so I presume you believe that ifthe interest rate increases were to come somewhat earlier and ifpossibly the economic slowdown that you have in 1990 thereby mightoccur, that the exchange rate adjustment might possibly be moreinclined to occur during the period of slowdown than in a period inwhich we might have a disinflation or some commodity price deflationscenario. Would you agree that that's one possibility?MR. TRUMAN. That certainly is also a defensible scenario:that you will get less exchange rate adjustment in 1989 despite theslowdown in trade adjustment and more in 1990 if it appeared that theeconomy was itself slowing down and you were having some lessening ofprice pressures. That's one of the reasons why we end up straightlining it. If you get too fancy---23-12/13-14/88MR. ANGELL. So if the Committee, as the staff hasinterpreted it, is very serious in regard to inflation prospects andif that would then cause us to move interest rates somewhat more inthe earlier portion of the two-year period, then it would, it seems tome, be possible that the exchange rate adjustment might take place inan environment that would be much different than for an exchange rateadjustment to take place in the current environment in which inflationis such a potential.MR. TRUMAN. Yes, it's possible.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice ChairmanVICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll just take the other side ofthat for a minute. If you look out at 1990, I think the 'Catch-22'can be even sharper in the following sense. It is not at alldifficult to stipulate a set of conditions involving a stable exchangerate at current levels, rather than a modest decline and a combinationof relative U.S. and foreign economic growth. That would yield asituation in which the external adjustment not only stops, but itreverses by the end of 1990. I don't necessarily believe that, but ifyou went through a conventional exercise using conventional, andhistorical, estimates of the various elasticities, and so on, it's notimplausible.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's what the IMF and OECD[unintelligible].VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's not at all implausible to endup with a result in which, as I said, by the second half of 1990 youhave the current account and the trade account deficits actuallyincreasing. I have a great deal of difficulty accepting that view fora variety of reasons, but if you really want a Catch-22 tocontemplate, that's it.MR. TRUMAN. It's difficult to run these forecasts when youhave different assumptions, but based on our conversation over theweekend, we did run a forecast in which nothing changed except theexchange rate path. Now, just as you may ask how do you get theexchange rate change, you can also ask how you get nothing changingbut the rate. But for whatever it's worth, what we get on the currentaccount under that scenario would be essentially no change in thecurrent account, essentially flat at about a rate in the $110, $120billion range. However, we do continue to get improvement, but at asmaller rate, on the trade side. And you essentially are in thesituation in which the trade improvement just offsets thedeterioration coming from the interaction of the higher deficitsthemselves and the higher interest rates which tends to deterioratethe current account. So, you get some trade balance movement overthat period, but you would not get any current account movement.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm a little skeptical that the kindof historic relationships--which we implicitly assume--are going to bevalid for 1989 and 1990. And as a result, I look upon that type ofscenario with a lot of skepticism. But the fact remains that thereare a lot of serious people who look at it as a quite realisticpossibility.-24-12/13-14/88MR. TRUMAN. Well, as I said--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Most of the academics come out exactly[unintelligible].VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It gets pretty ugly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The question is you have to[unintelligible] to get elsewhere.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If they are right.MR. JOHNSON. I think it's more likely than not that thetrade balance is not really compatible with our inflation goals. Itwould not surprise me at all if we are left with a fairly large tradedeficit by doing the things we need to do to keep inflation down. Butthat means there's a big structural problem and that's really thecase. You have a big savings-investment imbalance worldwide andthat's basically it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll put it in its most graphicterms. If Marty Feldstein is right, what would ultimately happenunder those circumstances is that even with relatively high [interestrates, there] would be a major and possibly highly disruptive fall outof bed of the exchange rates.MR. JOHNSON. I don't want to focus on the dollar entirely,but the conditions under which you get that--; I don't think justrunning a large trade deficit is going to do it in and of itself if wemaintain a policy that keeps inflation down. But the other side ofthat is that the trade numbers aren't going to improve either.MR. TRUMAN. Well, maybe we might emphasize one of the basicrationales for much of the forecast, which is this view that we haveof the Committee's view about what it wants to do with inflation.Now, it also is true that we've done this with a modest exchange ratechange and some degree of continuing progress--as a result of that inthe real exchange rate change--in the trade and current accounts,obviously. Now, if you could change that equation a little bit sothat you didn't have an exchange rate change, it's also true that insome sense you'd have a more favorable inflation outlook over thisperiod because you wouldn't have quite the kind of [inflationary]pressure coming from the new exchange rate change over the forecastperiod. In that sense, there is a connection between the two parts ofthe forecast. Whether we got the balance right either on the domesticside or the domestic-external side I think we need to be humble about.But the exchange rate change in and of itself--the one that's built inhere--does bring you, if you want to put it that way, furtherimprovement on the external side and not runaway inflation. So, inthat sense you're not bumping capacity constraints. That's partlybecause the rest of the economy is squeezed to the extent that youallow the external economy adjustment to continue.MR. JOHNSON. Well, it may be possible to have a financeablecurrent account if it's consistent with keeping the inflation ratelevel. I'm not saying that's not possible, I'm just saying that's aclose call. But I don't know anybody that's saying we can get balancein a short period that's consistent with that.-25-12/13-14/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the next stage of financing if werun into trouble and we are [unintelligible] are "Bush bonds." Youknow, we've got a huge capacity to finance with foreign-currencysecurities. We can finance this deficit almost indefinitely, if wewant to create a huge exposure on the exchange account. We haven'teven started in that area.MR. JOHNSON. Well, I'm thinking about stable financing. Iagree that it's possible. Central banks can finance the whole thingfor a long, long time. It's just not consistent with a lot of otherstability.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That I imagine.MR. TRUMAN. Well, I guess you could look at this forecastthat we have and argue that you worry about how much of an adjustmentthere is in 1989 for various reasons, as the Chairman discussedearlier. But, actually, if you look at the total adjustment on theexternal side over the period where the trade balance essentiallydeclines by $45 billion and the current account declines by aboutanother $30 billion so that you're down to a $70--$80 billion dollarrange for those two by the end of 1990, that I think is not anunattractive situation.MR. JOHNSON. I agree with that.MR. TRUMAN. Among other things, you could even argue that atthat point the system could self-finance, if you want to put it thatway, without needing added inducements. Also, once you get the tradebalance down a bit, you don't have this great discrepancy betweenexports and imports. The growth differentials [unintelligible] butstill have it working there, but not on the same order of magnitude aswhen imports were over three times the size of exports for a while.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Ted?MS. SEGER. What are you assuming on the exchange ratesituation with regard to the NICs? You know they haven't necessarilyfollowed the weighted-average G-10 that we [unintelligible].MR. TRUMAN. Well, this year in fact they've done better--orworse if you wanted to put it that way.MS. SEGER. Starting in 1985?MR. TRUMAN. That's right. We are assuming that there willbe a continuing depreciation vis-a-vis those currencies but at abouthalf the 4 percent rate in real terms to more like 2 percent in realterms.MS. SEGER. And the second question I have is for thosepeople who argue that slowing our economy will help our trade deficit.Have you run a recession through your models to see what that does?If slowing is good, then recession must be terrific, right?MR. JOHNSON. Does wonders for the trade account but--MS. SEGER. Yes, that's what my question was.-26-12/13-14/88MR. JOHNSON. --bad for the budget.MS. SEGER. No, I'm talking about the trade [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It depends on what happens abroad.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, that's true.MR. TRUMAN. Well, I think one can distinguish betweenrunning a recession, which doesn't really buy you very much becauseyou come out of the recession [at a lower] level of income and latercome back to the same level of income as before, so you've just boughtus a lower financial cost of imports during that interval. I wouldthink between that case and essentially the case that's implicit inthe forecast here, which is that the slowdown in growth is essentiallya device that is consistent with slowing the rate of growth fromsomething like 3/4 to 1 percentage point above what we think is growthpotential to something more consistent with growth potential, and inthe meantime dipping down below [potential]. That is, I thinkdifferent, and you get something from essentially that percentagepoint, or a little bit more, lower growth than what you had with theeconomy running along at 1/2 percent [higher] growth.MS. SEGER. I wasn't talking about comparing recession towhat we have now, I'm just saying comparing a slow growth forecastwith an honest-to-goodness resession.MR. TRUMAN. Well, an honest-to-goodness recession would helpin the short run. But I think when you come out of the recession andyou get back to where you start from, it's not clear to me in terms ofthe external accounts themselves that you really have bought yourselfvery much. If you want to prolong the recession for an extendedperiod of time, then you might get something.MS. SEGER. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any questions for Mr. Prell?MR. PRELL. Thank you.MR. FORRESTAL. Not yet.MR. BOYKIN. Could I?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh, by all means. I thought you werepointing to your colleague.MR. BOYKIN. One thing back on the price of oil and the wayit's figuring in, you were saying that you are now looking at a $2 to$2.50 increase in the price of a barrel. At a recent meeting, I guessit was October, we were looking for a decline and it seemed thatenergy was a fairly significant factor in the inflation outlook--thatis, a better outlook for inflation. And now that has kind of comeback around to where we've been running $15+ a barrel. As Iunderstand what was said, it doesn't seem to have the same adverseeffect on inflation on the upside. Am I misunderstanding somethinghere?12/13-14/88MR. PRELL. Well, we went down on our oil price assumptionfor the November meeting. At that point we had consumer energy pricesfalling about a percentage point from the fourth quarter of this yearto the fourth quarter of next year. Now, we have consumer energyprices rising almost 2 percent from fourth quarter to fourth quarter.That largely reverses the change we made last time, puts us back inroughly the same territory as we were in the meeting before last.MR. ANGELL. But, Mike, you also have some adjustment on thefood side, though, that offsets that do you not?MR. PRELL. We have a little lower food price forecast thanwe did last time.MR. ANGELL. And that's why the change in oil doesn't thenshow as much worsening effect this time.MR. PRELL. The net is a plus on the inflation rate. We justhave a very slight slowing fourth quarter to fourth quarter from ourlast forecast in consumer food price inflation. We got a little bitbetter performance recently and so the fourth quarter of this year hasbeen knocked down a couple of percentage points on consumer food priceinflation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions? Mr. Melzer.MR. MELZER. I was afraid, when Bob was introducing me here,that I had better come up with a question. Mike, you mentioned thatin looking at the 1990 forecast you had not attempted to project anypotential shocks. The Chairman had mentioned one in terms of thecurrency shock. If you had to list the likely candidates, what kindsof shocks would you think about in that context?MR. PRELL. Well, there are shocks, if you want to call themthat, the nonsmoothness that might arise on the real side. Forexample, on the inventory side of this forecast we have a rathersmooth course--a little bit of a rise in inventory-sales ratios, butmild and very smooth. And in essence we have businessmen recognizingfairly promptly this slowing in the pace of sales and tapering downtheir inventory investment. Historically, things have not normallymoved with such precision, though in this cycle we've been impressedwith the rapidity of inventory adjustments through production adjust-ments when inventories might have piled up [unintelligible] in thatvery early stage in 1983, early 1984. So, there may be reason foroptimism, plus what seems to be a rather cautious attitude thatbusinessmen have looking ahead at this point. So, that would have tobe one possible disturbance.Now, there are things that could happen on the financialside; exchange market developments, bond markets, stock markets thatcould create gyrations in wealth and cost of funds that make a moreirregular path than consumption and other spending and then in turngive rise to inventory problems and so on that gives you a little moreirregular path. Then there are those risks that one has to recognizeas being associated with this kind of rise in interest rates anddecline in profits--that in the nonfinancial sector, business financescould deteriorate. We would expect in this forecast a substantialdeterioration in interest coverage. And everyone is mindful of the-28-12/13-14/88LBO situation and what that in turn could lead to, if there are firms[that] fall into some problem and lenders who might react to what theysee as the emerging risks in lending to nonfinancial customers. Thatcould have some effect beyond what we are anticipating. And of coursethe thrift industry situation deteriorates substantially in thispicture. The earnings will be deeply negative, will be even sizablynegative for the currently solvent institutions who have the smallerinterest rate gaps. For the insolvent ones, with their larger gaps,this just exacerbates their problems. So, whatever risks there mightbe of some liquidity problem arising from a wide loss of confidenceand [unintelligible] in thrift institutions, it's awfully hard tocalibrate what kinds of real side effects there would be to that kindof development.MR. JOHNSON. I'm just following up on what you said thereabout the thrifts and another possible shock, and this is probablymore for Ted, but this interest rate scenario raises questions aboutthe LDCs. How do we see that?MR. TRUMAN. [Unintelligible]. For those countries who haveIMF programs, the modification of the compensatory and contingencyfinancing facility, as it's now called, essentially allows them tobuild an adjustment factor into the size of financing they get fromthe Fund for rises in interest rates. It does provide more of acushion in this area than a year or so ago. But the rise in interestrates no doubt will be an excuse used by those who want to take anunorthodox approach to these matters. On the other hand, a number ofthe representatives of these countries have also argued that they wantto make sure that the North gets its house in order so that they can[not?] have it both ways.MR. JOHNSON. Well, what about this recent BA meeting? Whatdid you make of that?MR. TRUMAN. Well, I only know what I read in the newspapers,which suggested that they are exploring various options, none of whichstruck me as particularly novel in terms of the things that they liketo protect, facilities or various [unintelligible].MR. JOHNSON. The only things I saw there were things likethe headline that they agreed to work in unison this time more thanever in the past and that they [unintelligible].MR. TRUMAN. Well, my understanding of that meeting was that,although it is fair to say that these countries have been comparingnotes fairly actively over the last several years, they were even moreactively comparing notes [this time]. There is no desire on the partof each country to lock itself into the strategy of the other[unintelligible].MR. JOHNSON. I guess the question is, though, what happensunder this scenario. I'm just sort of asking.MR. TRUMAN. Well, on the other side, we have a rise in thetrade and current account deficits of the Baker 15 countries, if youwant to put it that way, and they were forecast largely because of therise in interest rates--though in some sense the interest rate rise isnot that much different from what we've had before. It has not been-29-12/13-14/88changed that much, and the issue is whether those larger deficits canbe financed. If they can be financed through official or privatechannels, then the rise in interest rates in and of itself is notenough, it seems to me, to spark a conflagration. Lots of thingscould spark a conflagration, and if one occurs there will be a numberof suspects, as Sam Cross said.MR. JOHNSON. What I'm trying to draw out of you is apossibility of a shock. If there's some sort of consortium in thissituation and either a moratorium or something like that, what couldbe the interbank market effects of that? That's a potential shock Ithink we ought to be aware of.MR. TRUMAN. Yes, it would be a shock but I would think thatthe implications are likely to be less than they were 3 years ago and6 years ago. Depending on how one classifies Brazil, for example, youhave 45 percent of these countries--assuming Brazil has not beenpaying interest in the sense that the banks have not been taking inincome for 2 years now but just now are able to do so. In that sense,you have for the Baker 15 countries about 40 percent of the bank debtof countries that have not been paying service in terms of interest.Taking Brazil out, it's more like 18 percent. But in some sense, theshock of giving up another 25 percent of that or 30 percent of that,if you want to put it that way, leaving just a handful of countrieslike Columbia and Uruguay etc., I think the shock would be there butit's not going to have a major impact. It's a risk, there's no doubtthat it's a risk, but if you're looking for things to change theclimate of opinion, as Mike was saying earlier, that certainly is oneof the ones that could do so.MR. PARRY. Mike, would some of the more recent numbers thatyou've gotten in the last week or so cause you to revise up the fourthquarter at all? Retail sales and I don't know if you have thebusiness inventory numbers or you will get that later--MR. PRELL. We don't have them yet; we get them later thismorning. But I think the main pieces of data we've had, which areboth very noisy series, are retail sales and the trade figures. As Inoted, retail sales were a shade stronger than we anticipated. Tednoted the trade data looked a shade weaker without knowing the pricesthat go with them and all of that. On balance, it doesn't look like asubstantial difference.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mike, in looking at the staff forecast in theGreenbook, it is difficult to know what you are projecting in terms ofinterest rate levels and when changes in those would take place. Itwould make quite a difference, it seems to me, as to what one mightthink would happen if, as I believe you said yesterday, you arelooking at a 2 percent rise over a 12- to 18-month horizon. Do youhave in this forecast much of that coming early on, or it is on out?MR. PRELL. The rise is pretty steady. But again, it'ssomewhat the same story as Ted described with the exchange rate. Wedon't have any particular impressions about what the optimal quarter-by-quarter movement would be nor what would be plausible to assume theCommittee would want to do at various stages. But we assume that the-30-12/13-14/88movement begins promptly and is significant over the next half-yearand fairly steady into early 1990.PARRY. Then it flattens out in 1990?MR. PRELL. Then it flattens out. All of the rate increasesoccur by early 1990. And you can perceive the hint of this in ourreal forecast in that the most interest-sensitive sector like housingis beginning to level out by the end of the year. Our notion is thatwe are not trying to drive the unemployment rate up toward 7 or 8percent in an effort to slow the inflation, that a more modestsoftening of the economy in terms of resource utilization levels isneeded, but our design is that you want to get there fairly promptlyso that you begin to turn the corner by 1990. Many different pathscould be described; and, as Governor Angell suggested, if you wentsooner with large interest rate increases, we presumably wouldanticipate, all other things equal, a slowing of the economy morequickly and an opening up of that degree of slack that we perceive tobe needed.MR. GUFFEY. Just to follow on, Mr. Chairman, I would like torequest that the staff, if they are going to build a forecast onprojecting interest rate levels in the period ahead, that those beexplicitly stated in the Greenbook so that we can have some feel whenwe run the model or make those judgmental changes, how we mightcompare with the Greenbook. It would be very helpful if there wereexplicit indications in the Greenbook of what those assumptions were.MR. ANGELL. I can understand the advantage of that, but itseems to me the disadvantage is that puts staff in a position ofalmost telling us what our job is. And I think being that explicithas its disadvantages for the work of this Committee, even though Ican understand why it would be helpful to Reserve Banks.MR. HELLER. Just on that point, that's why I would be infavor of having alternative forecasts. One with, let's say, theinterest rates going up and one with a different policy forecast. So,then you can really tell it apart, and I think that would fulfill whatyou wanted.MR. GUFFEY. Yes, indeed it would.MR. HELLER. And I think it would help a lot with making theproper policy judgments you want to make.MR. GUFFEY. As a matter of fact, I think that's the way itused to be done; [an assumption of] no change in policy.MR. PRELL. No, not in my decade of memory of this. And Ithink, Governor Heller, we have attempted on many occasions to presentthis at the Committee meeting. There are many questions that arise interms of what should be put in the Greenbook, in part recognizing thatthis document goes outside of the Federal Reserve. But you know it'sup to the Committee and the Chairman to tell us what--MR. HELLER. Well, I would think it's a lot less damaging ifyou've got three different forecasts out there rather than having one,because any outsider can say now that here is the Federal Reserve-31-12/13-14/88forecast. Otherwise, he just has the policy options, and he stilldoesn't know which one is the right one.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, if I were on the outside and I gothold of a book which had three forecasts in it and had interest ratenumbers projected against it, I wouldn't have any trouble figuring outwhat the Federal Reserve forecast was.MR. HELLER. Well, but not everybody is as smart.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Nobody's that dumb! Let's discuss thatinternally. There is another issue here: If we started to circulate[a document] with numbers on interest rates on them and it ever gotout to the public, the implications of that would be beyondcomprehension. This Greenbook is a confidential piece of paper. Ifthis got lost on a train and somebody read it, it would beembarrassing but it would not be damaging, certainly not beyond theimmediate FOMC meeting. But I would be very nervous about a piece ofpaper circulating outside the Federal Reserve with numbers on interestrates on it and "Federal Reserve Confidential" stamped on it. Thatwould create problems for us for months on end. But I'd like toaddress the concern that President Guffey raised, because I think it'squite a legitimate one and I think we'd better address it. But let'ssee if we can find a way to resolve this question without getting onthe edge of circulating pieces of paper outside which--MR. GUFFEY. It could be done orally, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I'm saying that may well be--MR. GUFFEY. Staff to staff.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The question really is, is thissomething you need prior to coming to FOMC meetings?MR. GUFFEY. At least--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's see if we can come to somesolution on it. It is not a simple issue, as we are well aware.President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Well, my comments are really along the linesthat have just developed here, which would be a notion of analternative forecast or two. It's not because there's anything wrongwith this forecast; I happen to think it's a very good presentation,particularly looking out to 1990 and trying to address inflationexpectations and the rest of the problems that I think all of us areconcerned with. So, I would be in favor of some kind of way to lookat alternative forecasts. I'd like to know, for example, if you'verun the model and you've looked at the 1990 inflation rate underalternative interest rate scenarios. We've got to know what the pricemight be to get a 1 percent reduction, say, in the inflation rate.MR. PRELL. Well, let me be slightly defensive on this,though I probably shouldn't be. We have presented alternativeforecasts--MR. HOSKINS. I know you have.-32-12/13-14/88MR. PRELL. --a number of times. And the message is the sameevery time, and I think you all know it and I communicated it in arough way yesterday. So, you are not going to get revelations eachtime we do this. And I have a feeling that the information we've beenproviding is being somewhat slighted in this discussion. We have onseveral occasions in the past year presented alternative forecasts,quantified the effects of different interest rate assumptions and soon, and you will [continue to] see the same thing unless our generalperception of how the economic system works changes each time we dothat. So, there are going to be very rapidly diminishing returns.MR. HOSKINS. I don't think you have any need to bedefensive. I think the Committee generally has complimented the staffon doing those. It's just that if you were to put out a new one, likefor 1990, I think it might be interesting just to refresh us as towhat that would be.MR. TRUMAN. If I may join Mike, one of the problems thistime is that this forecast normally would go to 1990 in February andwould be done in conjunction with a chart show. We thought we weredoing the Committee a favor, if I can put it that way, by adding 1990in December rather than waiting until February.MR. ANGELL. It's appreciated; it's appreciated.MR. TRUMAN. And the task of doing that and combiningalternatives with it would be more difficult than otherwise.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, we know.MR. TRUMAN. We would intend when we go to 1990 in February,as we've always have done in the 15 years that I have sat around thistable, to have alternatives in the chart show.MR. HOSKINS. Fine. And I don't think any offense should betaken at these comments. I think in general the staff has been verycandid about their interest rate projections. At least, we didn'tseem to have much trouble ferreting out--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know, there's also another problemwith this. Sure, you can say let's just re-run the model with thelower interest rates--MR. HOSKINS. Yes, that's the second [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The only problem with that is that thereis no such thing as re-running the model with one change. The realart of running a model, as I think we are all acutely aware, is whatyou do with the add-ons, how you play them. This presumption thatyou've got an econometric structure which is pristine and captures theeconomy--one that never changes--is terrific for something, but Ihaven't a clue as to what.MR. HOSKINS. Can I finish up with this one? After that, I'mnot sure I should venture back out here again! The model by itsnature, and I guess the Greenbook as well, works off of an issue Iraised before, which is kind of a [unintelligible] notion or a GNP gapnotion. There is an alternative way to look at this where we don't-33-12/13-14/88have to say that 2-1/2 percent is the historical real growth, andtherefore not an inflationary real growth rate, and therefore anythingother than that generates some inflation. We don't seem to be tryingto take account, or perhaps we don't have the ability to take account,of changes in expectations about Fed policy or the credibility of Fedpolicy. So, I'm a little disturbed when we look at resourceavailability as the only way to get at inflation. I think we don'thave a very good handle on that. Some of us might have tightened veryaggressively if we believed the actual [full employment] rate was 6percent, which many people believed a year or two ago. And it looksto me like we might have had a positive supply shock; we've got morelabor at the same wage rate than some of us would have anticipated.So, I'm just looking for ways to try to look at it without using thetraditional method.MR. PRELL. I guess we are questioning your interpretation ofthis year's events, so there is room for alternative interpretations.Basically, we've seen a substantial acceleration of compensation thisyear as the unemployment rate fell below 6 percent. Now, we are nottaking a rigid view that the NAIRU is 6 percent in this forecast; farfrom it. But I guess this is an issue that certainly comes to thefore as you look at the experience of the past year. As toalternative years, you're quite correct that fundamentally we aretaking a sort of short-run Phillips curve view of the world. One ofthe reasons that alternative forecasts got presented with diminishingfrequency over the last half dozen years or so was the fact that theCommittee frequently said that these are not very meaningful becausethey are based on this kind of wage-price structure, and we will getmuch better effects because there will be Fed credibility and so on.Now, what we find in actually looking back at the experience of thelast several years is that the sort of short-run Phillips curveformulation of expectations built into that works fairly well inexplaining the wage-price deceleration we've had without any obviousadd-on of credibility. We have experimented, and we are trying todevelop an econometric representation of more forward-lookingexpectations. Most of the rational expectations models have beenconstructed on very small non-structural models. We have tried towork with what resources we have to build a fuller model that has amore rational expectations sort of sense to it. At this point wereally don't have something we can implement. But there's always aproviso you would say in this: that this is how things would turn outif we had the structure right, and if there were credibility effectsyou could get a bigger payoff for monetary restraint without the realside damage.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Yes, I need help in the housing area, and thissort of ties into the issue of alternatives. You have housing starts,if I'm on the right line, going from 1.4 million this year to 1.43then down to 1.36 million in 1990 with a fairly significant amount ofmonetary tightening built into these numbers. I know when you talkedabout different scenarios before, you had housing as one of the moreinterest-sensitive industries and therefore one that would respondmost dramatically to tightening. So, when I looked at these, I reallywondered if you had enough of a decline; or looking at it another way,I wondered, if interest rates were to stay where they are now, ifhousing starts would rise?-34-12/13-14/88MR. PRELL. No, we don't think so. Not certainly from the1.55 million housing start level we saw in the most recent month'sdata. We have what we think is a reasonable decline in housing startsgiven our assumption that mortgage rates will be rising from thecurrent 10-1/2 percent area to something between 11-1/2 and 12 percentby early 1990. This is not an exotic movement in terms of the modelsthat exist. It's not just the mortgage rate that would be workingagainst housing starts in this forecast. By 1990, the slowing ofincome growth begins to become a significant factor, and so we do havea fairly substantial decline, particularly in the single-familysector. Basically, looking at the demographics and the damage that'salready been done in the multifamily area, we think that the single-family side is likely to be hit fairly substantially over this period.MS. SEGER. So, you don't think we are vulnerable here then?MR. PRELL. Well, there is a substantial range of uncertaintyaround every number in this forecast.MS. SEGER. Yes.MR. PRELL. This is not a very high number--in the area of1.35 million starts--that we have in 1990. It's not as low as we sawat the depths of the last housing downturn.MS. SEGER. I hoped that you remembered that.MR. PRELL. But you'll recall how high mortgage rates were atthat time.MS. SEGER. Yes.MR. PRELL. So this seems reasonable to us, obviously, or wewouldn't have written it down. But there has to be some confidenceinterval around it.MS. SEGER. Thank you.MR. ANGELL. What would happen in 1990, just taking theopposite view, if mortgage rates rose only 50 basis points whileshort-term rates were rising 200 basis points?MR. PRELL. That's a good question.MR. ANGELL. Well, what would that do to 1990's path?MR. PRELL. The question is why does the real rate only risethat much as the short rate is rising. If it is because of anexpectational effect wherein the marginal efficiency of investment ina sense shifts, people perceive there is weakness ahead, they pullback, and they don't want to sell bonds to finance investment andhousing construction or whatever; you might have in essence the samereal outcome for a downward sloping yield structure. So, I guess itreally depends what the circumstances are that produce that interestrate environment.12/13-14/88MR. ANGELL. Well, certainly, we wouldn't be in control ofthose rates. Now, I suppose the manner and the timing in which rateincreases might take place might affect [the outcome].MR. PRELL. The more you surprise the markets with restraintin the short run as you're suggesting, the greater, I would think,[the probability that] you are going to get some adverse effect on thebond market in the short run. But you're probably more likely togenerate in due course more of a downward-sloping yield structure aspeople's expectations of future economic strength and credit demandsare weakened.MR. ANGELL. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no other questions I thinkwe can start on our Committee roundtable. Ted.MR. TRUMAN. Can I just correct something which I saidbefore--and I'm sure no one on the Committee remembers what I said--but I have now looked at the trade numbers in a little more detail,and I want to correct one thing that I indicated. I think I said thatnon-agricultural exports had declined between September and October,and looking at the numbers a little more closely, I apparently had notadjusted for the fact that there was a rise in aircraft shipments.And if you include that, non-agricultural exports in fact rose or wereessentially unchanged between September and October.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Your concept of non-agricultural is nownonag and non-aircraft?MR. TRUMAN. And non-aircraft, right. Also, there is aslight rise in those exports from their average for the third quarter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to start us off onthe round robin on the Committee members' positions on the economy?MR. FORRESTAL. In the absence of anyone else volunteering--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I'm relieved. The silencecouldn't go on forever!MR. FORRESTAL. Looking at the Atlanta District first,economic activity in our part of the country I think reflects prettymuch what's going on in the nation as a whole. Export demand andimport substitution are really the driving force in the economy andare supporting many of the basic industries in the District, namelychemicals and paper and steel and so on. In many of these cases, thiskind of activity is generating pressure on wages, and it's showing upin the shortage of skilled workers, particularly in the chemicalindustry. In other industries, as I think the Chairman mentionedearlier, notably steel, the use of labor saving equipment hasprevented this kind of pressure from developing. The wage increasesthat we are hearing about are reported to be in the 4 to 6 percentrange, which is substantially higher than we had been hearing before.And I think it's interesting to point out that this kind of increasedoes not include benefits, some of which are being added to theemployee's costs but a lot of it is being assumed by the employer. Weare seeing export demand confirmed in other areas where we see-36-12/13-14/88industrial warehouses being built at several of the southeasternports, Savannah for example, and also some places in Florida.We have some weaknesses as I've reported before. We havehigh apartment vacancy rates and these have resulted in a number ofprojects being put on hold. Consumer demand has been fairly sluggishand this has led to softness in appliance production. Importcompetition is still affecting the apparel industry fairly adversely.In general, Mr. Chairman, if we exclude Florida, where growth remainspretty strong, activity in our other states in the District is onaverage moving at a rate that's somewhat slower than the nation as awhole with Louisiana, of course, continuing to be at the bottom of thelist.Looking at the national economy, our outlook is considerablystronger than the one shown in the Greenbook, but basically because wehave an unconditional forecast. And going back to the earlierdiscussion, I would hope that in any consideration of alternatives wemight consider an unconditional forecast at least as an alternative.We are a little surprised and we disagree with the Greenbook forecastin terms of consumption expenditures, which we think will be stronger.And also we think that spending on nonresidential structures will notdeteriorate quite as much as is indicated in the Greenbook. Thoseseem to us to be a little more consistent with actual recession or asubstantial downturn than with the projections that the Greenbookshows. Putting this together with our forecast and recent economicindicators, it seems to me that the economy is growing too quickly andI don't think we have sufficient monetary restraint in the economy atthe moment to avoid an uncontrollable level of inflation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the Twelfth District economycontinues to report healthy economic growth with only a few signs ofslowing. Manufacturing activity continues strong with particularstrength in aluminum production and the aerospace and aircraftindustry. However, we have seen some slowing in the lumber and paperindustries where there has been some slowing in demand. In general,real estate activity in the District is robust, but there are somenotable exceptions in Alaska and Arizona where commercial real estateis particularly weak and also in Utah. On balance, if we look at wageand price pressures, they clearly are upward and seem to haveincreased slightly in the intermeeting period. An exception to thisis the forest products industry where, as I mentioned, some slackeningis showing up and it is having an impact on prices that is quitedramatic. However, in general terms labor markets throughout theDistrict are really quite tight. And if you recall, at the lastmeeting I indicated there even were signs of firms that are trying tolocate in areas where there is greater slack--not in the built-upareas of Seattle or San Francisco or Los Angeles.With regard to the national scene, the economy remains at alevel above its long-run potential. As a result, there seems to be asignificant danger of more rapid inflation later in 1989 andespecially in 1990. Our forecast of real growth in 1989 is notgreatly different from that of the Greenbook. It seems to me that theimplications of both outlooks are the same and that is that nosignificant slack in the economy will emerge next year and that-37-12/13-14/88underlying inflationary problems are going to continue to worsen. Ifthe dollar declines in value, as seems likely, that will mean thatactual inflation rates will be subjected to further upward pressuresas well. It seems that projected economic growth and inflation in1990 argue strongly for policy tightening through the end of nextyear.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I guess this would be the first report in fourthat I've given where, for the latest three-month period and this onewould include the period through October, we've had some gains innonagricultural employment. But those were quite modest, really, andprimarily in the manufacturing sector. In the latest three-monthperiod, manufacturing employment is up about 1.4 percent over thepreceding period. In both residential and nonresidential constructionon a year-over-year basis year-to-date, activity is downsubstantially, not quite double-digit in residential and about 13percent in nonresidential. Christmas sales in major metropolitanareas I would say--and this doesn't include this last weekend--arerunning a little better than last year. In St. Louis and Memphis,that would mean a nominal gain of about 5 percent. Little Rock, andLouisville actually will have slight to moderate decreases on a year-to-year basis. The general sense is that retail inventories are ingood shape and there is not a lot of evidence of unplanned pricecutting. There have been price promotions, but they pretty much havebeen planned so far. Also, in the retail area, while [there is]difficulty finding help, we don't pick up a sense that there have beena lot of wage increases in the retailing area. One other anecdote Imight pass on, is a large manufacturer ofconsumer durables; his general sense is that cost increases may haveabated a little on the raw material side. They are very difficult topass on and are being absorbed in margins. His sense is thatbasically this will continue to keep a lid on wage pressures in thatparticular area. And I guess that's the general picture there,although it certainly is not surprising given what we see on a broaderbasis in that sector.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, in the Eleventh District I thinkwe are beginning to see a two-tier economy emerging. I think there isa little more optimism than we've had in the past. Those outside ofthe real estate construction and banking sectors are participating ina reasonably strong recovery now. Of course, energy is a swingfactor, and the apparent stabilization of energy prices--or at leastthe lesser likelihood of a precipitous decline--bodes well for ourpart of the country, although from the inflation side people mightwonder a little. This dichotomy kind of shows up in manufacturing,where industries related to foreign trade are doing well, whileactivities related to energy and construction are not doing all thatwell. Also, on the agricultural side, livestock producers are goingto be squeezed somewhat because of the higher drought-related feedcosts, yet the farmers with cash crops are doing pretty well. Wethink that employment growth in our three District states has beenabout 1-1/2 percent over the last year which is considerably betterthan the declines that we had in 1986 and 1987. Perceptionwise,anecdotally, and attitudinally, things really are improving. As I've-38-12/13-14/88reported earlier, in Houston the improved attitude started I'd say 6or 7 months ago. It's beginning to filter up from the coast to theDallas area. We've had some fairly visible announcements made such asGTE relocating their telephone operations into the Dallas area out ofConnecticut. They are talking 4,000 to 5,000 jobs and about 1,000,000square feet of office space; they are going to build a big campus-style facility. A Japanese firm just made an announcement that theyare going to build a manufacturing plant. They are talking about 1500jobs in telecommunications manufacturing out there north of Dallas.Of course, the announcement on the super collider just thrilledeverybody. It probably will never happen and won't get funded, buteverybody is really happy about it.MR. KEEHN. Not everybody.MR. BOYKIN. Everybody that counts.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I assume that it was announced that theyonly had one state participating, everyone else decided[unintelligible].MR. BOYKIN. That's the way a lot things can go out our way.Also, there's quite a bit of optimism given what appears to be afairly significant Texas influence coming into the Washington arenawith a new Administration.MR. BLACK. That may not be shared in other states.MR. BOYKIN. Yes, I'm not sure that's going to mean a wholelot, but it's being talked about as good for Texas maybe. On thenational side,SPEAKER(?). You're supposed to be quiet about that, Bob.MR. BOYKIN. Okay, tell all the secrets, right?MR. BLACK. We noticed.MR. BOYKIN. On the national side, we are pretty much inagreement on the staff forecast. I think there is obviously a chancethat the economy will be even stronger than the forecast. We are alittle more pessimistic on the inflation side. That being the case, Iwould be inclined for the reasons that have already been expressed toput in a little more restraint, and I'd be inclined to do it soonerrather than later.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. The regional economy continues to operategenerally at a high level and the current indicators are positive.There are some pockets with some problems, but generally labor marketsremain tight. Manufacturing continues to grow. The retailers seem tobe feeling better now than they did several months ago. Loan growthis running well above the national average. There is some slowing inthe nonresidential area, and I think there are early indications ofsome slowing in residential construction. There is some sense thatnext year at least the growth in the economy will not be as fast.It's hard to sort out whether this is supply constraints or lack of-39-12/13-14/88demand. I suspect it's a combination of both. But the outlook isstill for a high level of activity.As far as the national economy goes I think it does need somereining in. There are risks on the inflation side. But reaching thatconclusion is not a one-way street. There is a whole set of risksthat everybody around this table is familiar with--mostly in thefinancial area, thrifts, LDCs, LBOs, etc., etc. So, while we clearlyneed to rein the economy in, about the last thing we need is arecession and there is no sure way of reining in an economy without arecession. But even acknowledging all these risks, I don't think thatyou buy very much by ignoring the inflation side. I think these riskswill tend to get larger if we don't deal with inflation. So, I comedown on the side of reining in but doing it with some caution.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, we see the outlook just slightlydifferently from some of the comments so far; and again I would say.in the national context, our outlook for next year is a little moremodest than the staff forecast.In terms of the District, there are really very few changesto report from the last meeting. Certainly, the District economy hasmoved along at a good pace. I think everything is very solid andthere are no significant soft spots out there. But while the currentsituation does seem very solid, I must say I find the price inflationoutlook to be particularly difficult to assess, and I find this anunusually difficult period. The Greenbook and Mike's presentationyesterday clearly make a case that the economy is moving along veryrapidly. I think we've got some big price pressures out there, and Ido find some of the data to be compelling. Maybe we do have asomewhat overheated economy on our hands. Alternatively, no one thatI've talked to certainly is pessimistic; the attitudes with regard tonext year I find very positive. On the other hand, from our directorreports and our other contacts, I don't sense a particularly bigupsurge as folks look into the next year. There are some constructivesigns out there. Capital expenditures, particularly for equipment andmachinery, are moving ahead at a very good clip, and many of theseexpenditures are being directed to industries that are operating atpretty high capacity rates: chemicals, petrochemicals, paper and thelike. That ought to relieve some of the capacity constraints in thoseindustries. Also, I'm hearing that some products that have been soldwith long lead times or allocations are beginning to ease somewhat.Indeed, orders for communications equipment and electronic componentsclearly are showing signs of peaking. In autos, inventories as Mikereported yesterday are at higher levels. Therefore, I think it'sentirely possible that the production schedules will be reduced forthe first quarter of next year. And it's just possible that some ofthese prices that we have been hearing about are showing signs of somestabilization. An example I would give is a company I talked to thatkeeps a very good track of its expenditures for materials; this yeartheir expectation is that their material costs will have gone up about2.3 percent. Next year, they anticipate an increase of about 0.4percent. They are very careful about [their estimates] and they keepgood records. These numbers may not be typical of industry at large,but I think it's entirely possible that the trend is.-40-12/13-14/88In my mind the big question is on the labor side. As I goaround the District, everybody I've talked to reports a shortage ofskilled labor. Labor costs are rising, but this is frequently on thenon-wage side as opposed to the wage side. I think firms arecontinuing to get pretty good work rule changes, and therefore unitlabor costs are under reasonable check. In a pricing perspective, thequestion obviously, which we'll talk about later, is whether we havedone enough or should do more. Instinctively, I have the feeling thatwe've got a very strong economy on our hands. The price pressures arebuilding up. We may see some increases, particularly in the nearterm. But also as I said I think there are some signs ofstabilization. I continue to think that the risks are on the priceside and that an upward policy bias will certainly be appropriate.The point I'm making is that I'm not sure just how draconian we needto be at this point to deal with these pressures.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I've reported at a number of meetings now aboutthe generally positive, actually quite positive, economic conditionsin the District. I've been in a lot of meetings since the lastmeeting of this Committee and that general tenor certainly continues.In fact, one of the striking things about those series of meetings isa lack of discussion of problems that people are encountering. Oneexception to that deals with things that I think we are well aware oflike excess office space, hotel space, concerns about what peopleperceive to be some of the excesses on the financial side of thebusiness world. I hear a lot of talk about the shortages of labor,not just skilled but unskilled. But that does not seem to havetranslated into what I would call generalized acceleration of wagesfrom where they've been running. While you can find people who aretalking about having to raise wages 6 or 7 percent, that is by nomeans typical. And I get the sense that generalized pressures for avariety of reasons just have not built up, and I have not been hearinganything about a generalized acceleration in prices either.As far as the national circumstances are concerned, our modelforecast is somewhat stronger than the Greenbook especially going outover time. But that forecast has essentially flat interest rates.And, therefore, I take that forecast in some sense to be consistentwith the Greenbook. That is, if you want at some point to start toconstrain inflation more than we have and bend it down, it is going torequire higher rates. If not, you are likely to get something thatour model generates which is somewhat more rapid growth and nodiscernible progress on the inflation side. I think, as severalpeople have already commented, that the latest batch of nationalstatistics has removed a lot of uncertainty about the state of theeconomy and suggests that it just has a great deal of momentum to it.Even if we allow for the possibility that these statistics might berevised in the future, the gauges have been very high. And as I'vecommented before, it seems to me from some work that we've done at ourBank that we've got to start looking toward employment gains that arerunning more in the neighborhood of 200,000 workers a month or less ifwe are going to be on a sustainable path and if we are going to bringinflation down further over time. And I suspect that if and when thathappens, there is going to be a lot of comment and some concern aboutwhether the economy may be slowing excessively. And I would suggestthat that's more like what we need and more sustainable.-41-12/13-14/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. First Vice President Eisenmenger.MR. EISENMENGER. If I could start off with the exception,which would be the New England economy, we've had the tightest laborin the United States during the last two years, and we are beginningto see some of that soften. In the Connecticut area, they have movedoperations to the one remaining area which has some soft labormarkets--Maine. And as Bob Boykin just mentioned, GTE is going tomove to Texas. Our relative wages have moved up rapidly, and I thinkthat's one of the reasons we may still be the hottest labor market inthe United States, but the gap between us and the rest of the countryis diminishing. What's happening I think is that the tightness isspreading throughout the country; it's not getting any tighter in NewEngland. I would agree with Mike Prell's conditional forecast, whichI also think is consistent with Bob Forrestal's and Gary Stern'sforecasts, which are unconditional; and what we see if we move towardrestraint is more modest growth next year, which would appear to bedesirable. The only issue on which we might disagree with the Boardstaff is that even with that move toward restraint, we are a littlemore pessimistic about the inflation rate next year. We don't seemany indicators yet of price pressures; they aren't creeping up veryfast. But the compensation figures are increasing very rapidly; therehas been a big uptick in compensation. And that does pass through toprices with not too long a lag.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob, is this a recent pattern you aretalking about or--MR. EISENMENGER. Yes, we are talking about what has happenedduring this last year, and we are talking about three quarters--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What I'm trying to say, have you seenevidence of any significant acceleration in wages for the last, say,two or three months or is it just--MR. EISENMENGER. If you mean unionized wages, no. I wasreferring here to the figures on the employment cost indexes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. These figures apply to the year as awhole?MR. EISENMENGER. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay.MR. EISENMENGER. And then, no matter how you measure it--onetwo, or three quarters--it appears to be consistently greater thisyear than it was last year. I guess for the last two years many of ushave underestimated the growth rate of the economy. We've always beena little surprised that it has been a little faster than weanticipated. The latest figures suggest we are going to be a littlesurprised with the fourth quarter so that we always lag behind alittle on the real growth that has come through. So, I guess thatwould tend to bring about a little support for Mike Prell's assumptionon a move toward restraint, or else we won't have that slower growththat he has built into this conditional forecast. I sat in this roomon the outskirts with a lot of my former research colleagues duringthe late 1960s and the early 1970s; and in retrospect we saw, year-42-12/13-14/88after year, that we ran on the ragged edge of full employment--onoccasion a little overfull employment--and then gradually the uptickin prices got imbedded in an inflationary psychology in the economy.And we can only wipe that out at incredible expense in the labormarkets in the United States and throughout South America and theworld, and once that inflationary psychology gets embedded it's veryexpensive to get it out. I don't know if we'd ever do it again; themedicine for that is to take some prevention, and this way we don'tget the same kind of environment embedded in the economy that we didgradually during the late '60s and '70s.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman I've been following these Greenbooksfor a long time, and I think really in the last year or so they havebeen considerably better than they were before then although they havealways been good. And I found this one particularly helpful althoughit does make me darn nervous on the inflation side because it suggeststhat there's very little room for error. It projects a furthertightening of policy over this period and an appreciable rise ininterest rates, and this doesn't cause the underlying rate ofinflation to diminish very much, and then only well into 1990 when thedecline is modest at best. So, it seems to me that the risk of errorreally is that we are probably going to have more inflation than thestaff has in the Greenbook if in fact there is any risk of error inthis. Wage pressures, as several people have indicated, areincreasing--not rapidly in some cases--but certainly unmistakably; andif consumer prices increase at the rate of 4-1/2 to 5 percent thatthey are projecting for next year, it seems to me it's almostinevitable that we will begin to see some wage pressures then. So, Iwould not be surprised, in the absence of some action on our part, tosee, rather than declining inflation in 1990, some wage-price spiralfeeding on each other.andhe expected wage pressures there and elsewhere to be considerablystronger than most people seem to anticipate.Now, on the real side of the economy, my guess is that in thefirst part of next year anyway despite signs that the rapid upwardpace of some of the foreign economies may be slowing to some extent,we are still going to have perhaps a little more restraint in ourexport demand than the staff has suggested. And with the growth inemployment and income that we are having in the domestic economy thissuggests to me that probably domestic spending is also going to bestronger than the staff is projecting. So, I think we've got anincipient boom on our hands, but basically I'm in pretty closeagreement with the staff in what needs to be done to control that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Despite my carping remarks about using Phillipscurve analysis, we've tortured the data in a number of ways and comeup very close to what Mike does and we have no other way to do itexcept that. I still am caught with the notion that monetary policyaffects nominal variables over time and not real variables. And Iguess we can attribute this just to our short-term adjustment process.-43-12/13-14/88There's nothing that I can add to what's been said with respect toeither Mike's forecast or the strength of the economy overall.The District, as I've been reporting consistently for over ayear, is strong and we don't see any noticeable softening. We don'tsee any breakout, however, either. We have met with a number of smallbusiness groups and also with our directors and the stories there areprices increases in terms of product price increases ranging from 3 to7 percent, maybe a little higher in a few instances. Wage rates--ourhighest is probably around 6-1/2 percent in services areas in theColumbus market. There is somewhat of a skilled labor shortage; semi-skilled, there's no problem. Manufacturing people can attract thelatter without any real upward pressure on wages except for the entrylevel in manufacturing where there is pressure in the low-skilledjobs. So, it really hasn't changed much; it looks like a fairlyrobust Fourth District. The only concern that I have relates to thethe monetary base. We take the Greenbook forecast and then get animplied growth for the monetary base by using the Rasche model. Ithas a drop of about 1-1/2 to 2 percentage points from this year'sgrowth rate. I don't know whether that's significant or not any more.I used to think I knew. But it does cause me some concern. So, I'lladdress that issue in more detail when we get to Don's presentation.Overall, I think the costs of allowing inflation to become embedded inthe economy are very high, and I would skew policy and take the riskon the side of being overly tight.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There is not a greatdeal new or different with respect to the regional economy.Agriculture, for example, is very strong. There's a smile onproducers' faces simply because the harvest is in and grain commodityprices are high. Along with Bob Boykin, I think the red meatproducers probably will be squeezed in the period ahead because ofthose higher grain prices. Our manufacturing sector is fairly strong,particularly in the export-related types of products. In autos, allof the plants in our District with the exception of one are working atwo-shift arrangement. That one produces a car that apparently is notselling, so the workers have simply been given a holiday overChristmas, and just recently that has been extended another four days;so it's the product that they are producing rather than the overalldemand for automobiles. One other strong area is the high-tech areaalong the eastern slope of the Rockies and down into New Mexico.Those high-tech areas that were depressed a couple of years ago havecome back and are doing very well. On the weak side, the energysector in the District and construction, both residential andcommercial, are depressed. Retail sales I'm told generally aresluggish. There was a very big day or week after Thanksgiving, whichthere always is, but rather than continuing on through, sales havedropped off in the major cities in our area. Whether that will comeback with an additional weekend to shop before Christmas, ourretailers don't know; they are still optimistic. Inventories are ingood shape.With regard to the national economy, we are very, very closeto the Greenbook forecast, but we didn't build in any restraint whichmeans they are stronger than we would see the economy. But given thecomments from directors, businessmen, and others there is a very-44-12/13-14/88strong feeling that the Federal Reserve has a role to play and it willplay that role in restraining inflation. As a result everybody talksabout it. It is a concern and I think that I would come out on theside--even though our region trails the national rate of recovery--ofaddressing attention more closely to inflation than I would to thelevel of real output.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I've been somewhat surprised that the slowermoney growth hasn't shown through in auction markets, both foreignexchange and particularly in the commodity markets. M2 in the lastfour weeks over 24 months previously has grown I believe at a 4.7percent rate which is the slowest growth rate over a 24-month periodsince 1961. I'm somewhat surprised that that hasn't shown through inauction makets, both foreign exchange and particularly commoditymarkets. But it seems to me we clearly have had some upward shocks inthose commodity prices, some of them due to the more rapid moneygrowth that took place in 1985 and 1986, and I suppose the most recentround based somewhat on a weather-related condition. But the fact ofthe matter is that commodity prices have plateaued; there have beensome ups and some downs but there has not been a retrenchment fromthose levels that have given ample profit margins to induce we wouldhope further output. But it would seem to me that the real keyquestion here is whether we maintain a posture in which the profitmargins are expected to be obtained by maintaining restraint on costsand getting cost reductions through economic efficiencies by the useof some new capital and new techniques, or whether some of thesehigher commodity prices that have not yet passed through it seems tome to the entire consumer-price structure are going to be maintainedat this level long enough until that takes place. So, it seems to methat given the fact that inventories are not in a position yet wherethere has been any inventory holding based upon price expectations, atleast it doesn't seem to be clear there that we do have extremevulnerability at this time to foreign exchange rate adjustments thatmight I think translate immediately into an inability to bring thosecommodity prices into line as to where they ought to be. I don't meanto put too much emphasis upon gold, and yet it's just somewhatrepresentative of what I think happens here. As you know the price ofgold did move down from $500 to $400, but there certainly has beenample evidence that the price would have the tendency to move back tothe $420 range. It just seems to me that as the first of the yearmoves along for us and we get some return of growth in demanddeposits, Don, that the opportunity cost changes that are already inplace may not be sufficient to give us the further restraint onmonetary growth. I'm still going to continue to believe that if we doget that restraint on monetary growth that we will get a bettersolution than some anticipate. But it's far better for us to be intune to these problems at this point in time than to wait and getbehind the curve.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Partly because our meeting cyclesare a little out of synch, I don't have a lot to add on the anecdotalside at this point. My own general impressions in terms of theeconomy are that it is strong. In fact, I think it's too strong.Some of the very recent numbers, especially the labor market numbers,-45-12/13-14/88conjure up at least in my mind some of my worst fears as a matter offact. Insofar as the outlook is concerned, I think it is veryillustrative to look at the Board staff's forecast versus the New Yorkstaff's forecast because as I've mentioned before by the end of nextyear those respective forecasts have a difference in the inflationrate of 1.3 percentage points or 1.4 percentage points. That is avery, very dramatic difference. As usual, Mike Prell touched on acritical point concerning that result, or outcome, yesterday when hesaid that in the process of putting his own forecast together he wascontinuing to resist the temptation to build into his own priceforecast some of the types of behavior or results that might come outof historical experience. And indeed when you look at the New Yorkstaff's forecast versus the Board staff's forecast what you have inthe Board staff's forecast by the end of next year is a ratherdistinct negative spread between unit labor costs and the deflator.In the case of the New York forecast, you have a positive spreadbetween unit labor costs and the deflator. At least in an arithmeticway, that is what produces the sharp difference in the net result ofinflation at the end of the period. Both have a rather significantfurther buildup in the rate of increase in compensation per annum. Ithink in the eyes of the people that do these forecasts in New York,what they essentially or implicitly are saying is that the overalleconomic conditions, market conditions, and so on are such that youwill still maintain at least a small, positive spread between thosetwo variables. My own hunch, if I had to pick a point, which I try toavoid doing, I guess I'd pick a point somewhere between the staffforecast here and the staff forecast in New York. But as I see it,the risks, as I have said before, are really very asymmetric. When Iask myself, what if Mike is right--Mike being collective for the Boardstaff--I'd say that's pretty good; it's not ideal in that he's gotsome things in that forecast that give you a little chill, butcertainly I'd say "terrific." Then I say to myself, what if the NewYork staff is right? I'd say, holy mackerel, we've really gottrouble, big trouble. It's in that sense that I think the risksreally are quite asymmetric.Now, like a lot of other people, at this juncture I continueto draw some consolation as we were talking yesterday from what thingslike the long bond rate are telling us. Again, that's probably one ofthe reasons why I would be inclined to split the difference betweenthose two forecasts. But I would tend to be pretty cautious evenabout that. I reminded myself last night, and I think this isillustrated in one of these charts that I guess Don is going to talkabout later, if you go back to 1978 and despite the fact that therehad been several increases in the discount rate as well as a firmingof monetary policy over the course of 1978, by the end of the year wehad a federal funds rate in the area of 9-1/2 to 10 percent; one-yearTreasury notes at 10.60 percent; and the 30-year bond at 8.80 percentbecause we had a sharply inverted yield curve. We all know whathappened after that. Now, 1988 is not 1978 for a variety of reasons,not the least of which is the energy shock that came in 1979. But atleast to me it does illustrate that we have to be cautious in terms ofwhat we read into these things. And again, it just reinforces my viewthat the risks as I see them at the moment are asymmetric on the sideof the inflation rate being higher than the staff forecast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.-46-12/13-14/88MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, first of all I'd like to report toyou that, on behalf of the Board last night at dinner, I congratulatedPresident Hoskins for having achieved his first objective and that isgetting alternative "A" clear out of the Bluebook.MR. HOSKINS. Everybody wants it back in now, that's theproblem!MR. KELLEY. And he told me that he was working closely withthe staff to get back to a three-alternative Bluebook, and they willbe "B," "C", and "D"!MR. BLACK. He has succeeded where many of us who have triedbefore have failed!MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, first of all, I certainly concurthat the economy is very strong and certainly stronger than I hadexpected it to be. And I would anticipate being in favor of somefurther tightening. But I'd like to return for just a second to apoint that Ed Boehne made a little earlier, and maybe try to come downa little bit harder on it. That point is that I think we need to tryto be sure to maintain a very broad perspective on what is going on inthe economy and in our society more broadly and on how best we mightbe sure to achieve our long-term goal of price stability. Over theforeseeable horizon in the next year or two, I think it's in nobody'sinterest to allow--that's too strong a word--nobody's interest to havea recession occur. There are a lot of things that need to bestraightened out. We all know what they are: the budget deficit,buying our way out of the thrifts, working our way through the Texasbanks, chipping away at LDCs. Large money-center banks and maybe someothers are going to need to raise some capital for risk-based capital.It's probably not too irrelevant to look forward to the fact that theGATT issue is beginning to accelerate; we had some first shots hererecently on that, and if we wind up in an environment of protectionismas that heats up, I think it could be unfortunate. If we are in a badeconomy, I think banking structure reform might very well be a victimof that in the Congress. If we have a recession in the next year ortwo, I think it clearly is going to exacerbate our ability to makeprogress in just about all of those different areas. We could wind upkicking the deficit sky high which could bring a terrible dilemma, inmy view, to the FOMC because I don't know whether such an event wouldbe highly inflationary or deflationary or maybe one then the othersuccessively and both bad. Clearly, it could put both theAdministration and the Congress on the defensive across the board on alot of issues that could be serious. So, in short I can envision ascenario where if the economy were to go south too far too fast, wemight wind up spending many more years trying to get to pricestability than we would under some alternative scenarios. I wouldsimply like to say that it's my hope that as we do go forward here,we'd be very careful as to how aggressive we get. We don't want towind up with a Pyrrhic victory.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Well, I've always been convinced that inflationis the enemy of the people, and I think the inflationary pressures outthere that have been described so eloquently by several of youcertainly indicate that some [policy] snugging is necessary. I hope-47-12/13-14/88it's not too heretical to say that I think that the markets expect itand that a failure to do some snugging at this point would be sendinga very bad signal to the markets. And so I'm encouraged that we oughtto do that. Certainly, the economy continues strong. But I've got ametallic taste in my mouth when I start trying to quantify--and thisis the difficult part--the implications on these fragile elements inour financial system of a 200 basis point rise in interest rates, orsomething comparable. Ted has commented that that was not anattractive factor in connection with LDC debt. And whether we like itor not, there are still a lot of the biggest holders of this debt whoare under-reserved by any measure of the marketplace. We have thesevery fragile LBO deals where the cash flow coverage of their debtservice is so' tender that anything that might happen to the economywould create a downturn in revenues or an increase in the servicingcost of debt that could crash one or more of these big babies. Theripple effects on investors and on the confidence factors in theeconomy I think are kind of awesome to contemplate, plus the fact thatwe are just digging the hole for the thrifts at a much greater andfaster rate with this, and nobody has yet come up with the rightanswer to that one. More recently, we've had the question of realestate overhang, and a higher set of interest rates is obviously goingto at least prolong the resolution of that overhang. So, at the riskof sounding like a broken record I think as we apply the brakes here,if that is what we are going to do--snug up--we ought to do it verygently, and as Mike Kelley has said, keep our eye on all of theeffects that a snugging has on the economy and be ready to deal withthem quickly if we find the thing getting out of control. I think thecosts of getting back if we really dump this economy would beterrible.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I've been sitting here listening, then trying tomatch the comments with what I read in the Beigebook. Either someweeks have passed or else I just read the Beigebook wrong. But itsounds as though the views expressed were quite different; namely, theviews today are much more optimistic than what was presented as thoseobservations. Also, maybe Mr. Hoskins can help me out on this, itseems to me the NABE runs periodic surveys of members, and it seemsthat roughly half of the members expect a recession some time nextyear. And most of the remaining respondents expect one in 1990.MR. HOSKINS. I don't have the numbers, but I think themajority expect a recession within the next two years.MS. SEGER. It was 47 percent next year.MR. PARRY. Of course, two-thirds expected one in 1988.MR. HOSKINS. We tend to roll those things forward.MS. SEGER. But when I read these I'm trying to ask what theyknow that we don't know or what are they assuming that we are notassuming. Again, in talking with some business economists, I thinkthey are somewhat more pessimistic on the consumer side than our staffforecast. And in the housing area, at least, again I think some ofthem might be a little more pessimistic. A number are bringing outthese stories of real estate problems, even in the Northeast. I think-48-12/13-14/88there are some banks in the Northeast that are now actually indicatingthat they are going to have to take some losses on real estate loanswhich is quite a change from what people were telling us a few monthsago. I think this is also true in some other parts of the countrywhich have been doing extremely well and now are turning around alittle bit. I can't imagine that that's an environment in whichdevelopers are going to hustle out and start more condo projects andapartment buildings, etc. Also, in the capital spending arena some ofthe reports that I pick up--computer chips, those sorts of companies--it seems that again the situation has changed dramatically in the lastfew months. In fact, in some cases they've gone from a shortage ofchips to situations with almost an excess. Also, some of the autoeconomists I know are a little more pessimistic about the inventorysituation than I've heard expressed around the table here today. Infact, I heard yesterday that the days-supply for one of the very largeauto companies would be a little over a 100 at the end of January.That's high. Also, when you get that kind of inventory situation inautos, you do see them follow through with some production cutbacks.They have used incentives to a tremendous extent as you know, but the"bang for the buck" from incentives seems to be petering out. So, ifI had to come down on one side or the other, I would think they wouldfix this through some production changes rather than trying moreincentives.Also, in the export area I'm not sure that all the businesseconomists I've spoken with and some other contacts I've made expectthe strength in the exports to be as great. They would certainly liketo get it, but there is no real confidence that we will continue tomake these tremendous advances that we have. Also, in the area ofinflation and price stability, etc., one of the things that I thinkeconometric models haven't picked up or haven't captured is thechanged situation out in the real world, particularly inmanufacturing. I mean the changes that are going on, the emphasis onefficiency, productivity, cost controls, knocking off layers ofmanagement, etc., I think that has been going on the last couple ofyears and I think it is still going on. And frankly when you look atsome of these relationships back 10 or 15 years, it was a verydifferent America then. I think we've learned something and I can'timagine that these improved attitudes are just going to suddenlyevaporate. Also, I think on the labor side some of those people toowould rather be employed at $17 an hour than unemployed at $18.25.Ask your friend with the building trades why so much of the commercialbuilding is being done by non-union workers. Maybe that's had someimpact on the fact that unions haven't had those nice settlements thatthey used to drool over. They, too, may have to pay attention tomarkets, Bob. This is a shock to union people.MR. BLACK. I think they have.MS. SEGER. But it seems to be going on, and particularly ifconstruction isn't rocketing ahead, I would say that the bargainingpower of management might be even stronger now than it was a couple ofyears ago. And also, looking at some of the sources of the higherprices that we have seen, I'm not sure we are able to control them.For example, looking at copper prices, what are we supposed to doabout a strike some place? We are going to go down and pull thepeople back out? I mean, that has influenced the copper prices.Wayne's farmer friends have certainly suffered from bad weather-49-12/13-14/88conditions this year, and that has certainly put upward pressure onprices of agriculture commodities. I don't know what we are supposedto do about it. And also, looking at the prices of some the steelproducts, it seems to me that they have been influenced by these sillyquotas that we've put on the imports of steel. So, maybe we need somehelp from our pals down the street to fix some of these things.Now, I think the Federal Reserve ought to do its job. And Iknow Roger Guffey says everyone is looking to us to do it. Maybe weought to tell them that we can't solve all the problems, though we cando our share certainly. Picking up on one of Governor LaWare'scomments, I think the problems in the thrift area are very, verysevere. I met Monday with a person who is Ithink pretty expert on thriftsand he had some very negative things to say about thrifts.He indicated that even building into their costof funds the existing level of short-term interest rates would dotremendous damage, because it doesn't feed in immediately. You haveCDs that have fixed maturities and it takes a while for existinglevels to influence those. He's not a crackpot on this subject, so Itook his comments rather seriously. And also on the LDCs, I thinkthat that is something that really could give us and the banks thathave been involved with those things even bigger headaches. So, Ijust think it's a very difficult call. My own personal conclusionwould be that it's not certain that 1989 and 1990 would be excessivelystrong even without a 200 basis point advance in interest rates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I'd generally like to associate myself withwhat Governor LaWare and Governor Kelley said. I think everybody madea lot of useful comments, but they captured a lot of what I wanted tosay. I think generally that the economy is reasonably strong, alittle stronger than I probably would have expected at this stage aswell. But we've all acknowledged that we see some signs of slowingand I think that's probably in the works but at a fairly high level.I think we've done a good job in establishing the credibility ofmonetary policy during this period. I say that because I think it isillustrated in the way the financial markets have behaved with long-term rates remaining stable or even showing some signs of declining.Commodity prices, while they are at high levels, have plateaued andhave trended down some from their peaks if you take them all together.The dollar has been relatively stable except for this one speculativeperiod after the elections, but I think it's still about 5 or 6percent above where we started the year. So, in general I think we'vepursued a credible policy and haven't been behind the curve, althoughI agree with what John LaWare said--that part of what we see in thefinancial markets is the credibility that's based on what they expectus to do. And so I think that if you want to maintain the degree ofconfidence in the financial markets that you see right now, sometightening is probably necessary. I'm not opposed to that, but Ithink it's very important to consider the speed at which we undertakethese tightening actions. We have to do enough to be credible and toappear to be ahead of the situation, but at the same time we've got tobe very careful to consider all of those contingencies that werementioned by John LaWare, Mike Kelley, others here. I happen to havesome additional worry about a world-wide ratcheting up of interestrates because I do think Germany is about to move, and I think all of-50-12/13-14/88Europe will follow because of the EMS. I think that's already evidentout there if you look at the markets and what they are prepared to do.Europe is prepared to ratchet up rates right away. As a matter offact, one or two countries already have moved up their discount rate.Whether Japan follows or not, I don't know. But we are about to movethe world level of interest rates up in general and that obviously isgoing to have some effect on the LDCs. It's going to feed back on thethrifts here, equity markets, and all of those things. So, taking allthese things into consideration, I still think it's probably anecessary move, but we should be very careful about a sledge hammereffect. We need to be careful in the pace, that's all.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. Almost everything has been said, Mr. Chairman.Let me make three points briefly. First of all, I think we've got tocontinue to make progress on the inflation front. We have seen a 1/2percent increase in wages and a 3/4 percent increase in totalcompensation. That is unacceptable and will lead exactly to what BobEisenmenger was saying was happening in the 1970s, a continuation ofthe slow upward creep of inflation. What I find troublesome abouttightening policy, in particular, is the ill effect on investment; thestaff forecast has a 0 to 1 percent growth in investment for 1990. Ifwe are worried about capacity constraints and things of that sort,certainly we are not going to be building any additional capacity inthat environment. What makes me feel a little better about tighteningis that I think there is a lot of unexploited potential in the exportarea. A lot of American manufacturers really are not yet focusing onthat at all. And so I'm a bit more optimistic than the staff forecastas far as continuation of export growth is concerned at going exchangerates. A lot of speakers have mentioned that we have to be aware ofthe fragility in the financial system. I think that's certainly animportant point. But I would say that we can't design monetary policyto avoid any difficulties in various sectors. In the first place,we've got to focus on inflation and if something goes wrong then youcan address those problems very much in a manner in which we haveaddressed them in the past--for instance, after the stock market crashlast year, through a quick adjustment in policy. So, I'm also infavor of a tightening of policy. But just in case you feel too goodabout the whole thing and you haven't read Paul Erdman's "The Crash of1989", and you still haven't ordered your Christmas present, if Iremember correctly the opening sentence of that book is, "It was earlyDecember 1988; the Federal Reserve Open Market Committee was meetingin Washington and there was a chill in the air." The rest is history.MR. ANGELL. Bob, it seems amazingly warm to me.MR. HELLER. I think that was the sentence.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Didn't he also write a book the "Crashof 1979"?MR. ANGELL. Please don't [unintelligible] suggest outsidethis room.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I should hope not. Why don't we breakat this time and we'll resume with Don.12/13-14/88[Coffee break]MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, Mr. Kohn. Having listened toall of this, certain things seem to be coming forth fairly clearly.One starts off with the quite credible concerns of Governors Kelleyand LaWare about the dangers of a recession. I think that we mustmake certain that we focus policy in a manner which reduces theprobability that we will be confronted with that. And that strikes meas a requirement to make certain that imbalances don't emerge in amanner which tilts the economy over. As far as I can see, the onlyway we can do that with some degree of reasonableness is to movetoward a tighter policy at this particular stage. The open questionis when and how much. The issue was raised in the Bluebook about thealternative of the discount rate. I must say I have some problemswith that largely because the distinction between a discount rate andan open market operation is, or should be, largely the announcementeffect. I don't think at this stage that we have any need for anannouncement effect. I believe that judging from the structure of themarkets that what we are doing is perceived by the markets as beingsufficient to constrain inflationary imbalances. The markets may beright or wrong about our actions, but if you look at the extraordinarystability of the long-term rate that's what they believe. And so longas that is the case, I do think that does suppress the possibilitiesof the wage acceleration that I'm sure would occur otherwise. In anyevent, what I think we have to say to the market is pretty much whatthey've been expecting us to say and what they think is the rightthing to do. Under those conditions, I don't think it is necessaryfor us to make a big "gong" as would be the case if we fell behind thecurve, so to speak. If we found we were off center we would have tohit a gong and say we were back here or there. I don't think that isnecessary, and in fact I think it probably would have some secondarynegative [unintelligible].Having said that does not mean that I think we should shrinkfrom open market tightening--because at this stage, maybe at anystage, you really have to ask the question of what happens if youinstitute a policy and you're wrong. Well, from all the evidence thathas been introduced around this table this morning and yesterday, Ithink that with the contemplated tightening that we've been discussingthe risk of tilting this economy over at this stage is exceptionallysmall. Moving forward and finding that we made a mistake is apossibility, but I think the cost of such a mistake is really muchsmaller than the cost of doing nothing in the face of what basicallyis going on. As a consequence, the way I see it and I'd be curious toget responses is that (1) I think that we should tighten and I thinkat the end of the day, meaning certainly by the time we are back herethe next time, we should be up by $200 million in additionalborrowing. I would be disinclined, however, to do it immediately iffor no other reason than I think we are potentially caught in theratcheting in the EMS that's in the process of going on as GovernorJohnson indicated. I don't think it would be useful for us to beperceived in the markets as trying to ratchet up with them. And we'llget the type of results which I think we unfortunately obtained in thesummer of 1987. As a consequence of that, what I would think is apossibility, at least one that I'll throw on the table, is that wemove $100 million immediately with asymmetric language, with the-52-12/13-14/88understanding that unless something changes the very strong outlook inthe period immediately ahead sometime in early January we move another$100 million at the discretion of the Desk with regard to the questionof timing and the change in specific data or information. So, I wouldsuggest that as a beginning. I must say that I hope we don't have togo the 200 basis points that's implicit in the staff forecast becauseI think that's going to create a lot of problems for us. But I don'tthink there's any difficulty in moving roughly 1/4 to 1/2 a percentagepoint in here. Clearly, it does move LIBOR, and it will move theprime rate; it will have some negative effect on LDCs and on the S&Lcost problems. But in my judgment, the cost of not moving would befar greater. The real decision we are going to have to make relativeto these other issues is not this one. If in fact the staff forecastturns out to be relevant to the consideration here, the difficultythat we will have with the secondary effects in the markets will notbe the first 100 basis points. It will be the second 100 basispoints. And then I think we are going to have some very tough choicesto make. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I broadly agree withthat strategy as the right strategy. Where I may differ a little ison the tactics. Like you, I find it very encouraging that long-termrates have remained sort of stable. That has certainly been a verygood sign. When it comes to choosing between the alternatives "B" and"C," I think this time around we see quite a bit of a gap between thealternatives the way they are specified. Usually, they are almosttouching each other. This time there is a considerable gap. The wayI read it, the federal funds rate associated with "B" is about 8.4 -8.5 percent; with "C" it's about 8.9 -9 percent. And so there isthat considerable hole in between. I think the right policy is rightin between that. I'm very much in agreement with you that where wewant to get is to a funds rate of 8.7 -8.8 percent. Now, as far asthe tactics are concerned, I certainly think your--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're going to the metric system.That's an inside Board joke.MR. HELLER. Thank you for this--one small step at a time.The discount rate versus tightening by raising the level of borrowing:I think we all agree the announcement effect right now that we aretightening would be stronger with a discount rate move, and I think Iwould lean toward doing it with a stronger announcement effect just tomake it clear, to put the marker out there that says the Fed istightening. It's not a snugging exercise but a move to stay ahead ofthe curve. We'd also put ourselves in a position to be ahead of theEMS--I mean, all the European currencies--which we probably will notbe perceived as being if we do it in a gradual escalation of theborrowing requirement. It can be read much more that we know thedollar will be coming under pressure and the Fed is reacting to thosepressures in the exchange market. If you move with a discount rateright now when clearly there are no pressures, you forestall that kindof a constellation. And finally, the spread between the fed fundsrate and the discount rate is very large. It will become larger if wejust tighten, and then the market clamor will continue about when thediscount move finally is going to happen. So, we won't get over thatparticular psychological hurdle; we will still have that hangingbehind us. So, to sum up, I probably would go with a discount rateincrease right now of 50 basis points and then some additional-53-12/13-14/88tightening if it's necessary late in the period to come out exactlywhere you want to come out with the federal funds rate.MR. PARRY. Well, you mean, then reduce the borrowings?MR. HELLER. Well, I don't know what the borrowings--MR. PARRY. Well, I mean, that's the implication.MR. HELLER. I'd just do it in rates, right?MR. HOSKINS. You want short rates at 8.9 percent, orsomething like that?MR. HELLER. No, 8.7 to 8.8 percent.MR. HOSKINS. I just wanted to be clear on that. Can I justask a question about something several people have suggested alreadyand that I agree with? The market expects some tightening, but wedon't really have an estimate of what that is. Don may be able tohelp us with that. And a related second question is, to what extentis a rise in the discount rate expected in the market?MR. KOHN. Peter may have another view, but my reading of thestructure at the very short-term end of the market is that the markethas close to a 1/2 percentage point [increase] in the rate built in.Sometime in the first quarter market participants expect the fundsrate to be close to 8-7/8 -9 percent, or something like that.MR. STERNLIGHT. I would agree with that. I think a discountrate increase had been very imminently expected just after theemployment numbers. I think it's still kind of expected. It does notseem to be that much on the edge of the table as it was maybe a weekor so ago in the market.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I agree completely with the Chairman'sscenario. That's the one that I had in mind when I came into themeeting. I think it's certainly worth discussing the discount rate,and maybe I can be convinced, but I still feel the best option is theone the Chairman outlined. In part, I think if you move on thediscount rate, you will run the risk of its seeming to be part of acoordinated world-wide upward ratchet in rates about which I havealready expressed some concern. But I also have a little concern thatif the [new rate] is considered to be sort of the peak [in rates]--Irealize that may not be the case for a lot of you--but if it isexpected, given the yield curve, that we really have made the finalmove and the next move will be to lower rates, I think that's going toput some pressure on the dollar. Moreover, I don't think it's a badidea to leave the discount rate hanging in peoples' mind as a means ofsupport for the dollar. And so, I see the scenario the Chairmanpainted as the best one.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I saved my policy comments until now, and Idiscovered at the end of the other discussion that I may be the only-54-12/13-14/88one who hasn't commented on policy. My view, basically, is that I'mconcerned about inflation. I think it's too high and I think it willprobably go somewhat higher in the coming year, so I don't disagreewith that view. But I also feel, given the restraint that we'veexercised over the last two years in general, that inflation is notgoing to get away from us. I take some comfort from what's going onwith long bond yields, as some people have mentioned. And I think wehave to put the inflation in a longer-term perspective in a sense andsay that to some extent the seeds for the inflation we are looking atnow were sown in 1985 and 1986 when we had 12 -15 percent growthrates in money. And I think to attempt to wring it out all at once--and this is consistent with some other views that have been expressedhere--to try to deal with that too aggressively is just going to takeus off the track as I mentioned at the last meeting of really makinglong-term progress on the inflation front. And if you take a reserveor aggregate base view of what Don was expressing earlier in terms ofreal interest rates, I think the course we've been on particularly inthe last 6 months or in the last 3 months, and particularly wherewe've had virtually no reserve growth, incremental tightening at leastviewed from that perspective could lead to negative reserve growththat is going to hit the economy a lot harder than people mayappreciate.So, what I'm saying is that in general I've been quitesatisfied with the course we've been on, and I wouldn't advocatesubstantial additional tightening at this time. I would certainlybuild into what we are doing what is in effect discounted in themarket. In other words, I would definitely support being in aposition where our degree of reserve restraint, however defined, wouldresult in a funds rate of somewhere around 8-1/2 to 8-5/8 percent atthis time. And I wouldn't object to steps that might lead thatmodestly higher. But basically I've been satisfied with the degree ofrestraint and, I think Bob Heller said it right, our primary concernhas to be inflation. So, I'm not reacting to what we might set off inthis area or that area [of the economy] and we ought to worry aboutthat and that should hold us back. What I really worry about is avery volatile path of policy that in effect makes our long-term jobharder. We are coming off a very difficult period. I think every-body here appreciates that in the 1980s and maybe the experience in1985 and 1986 was sort of the last chapter and that to the extent thatwe can stay on a relatively steady sustained growth of monetarystimulus, I think that would be most constructive. I'd hate to seeactions that would disrupt that. So, implicitly I would not favor adiscount rate increase at this time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I think that an increase of $100million in the borrowing is woefully inadequate. It seems to me thatwe've spent two days talking about projections for the economy thatall come up to the same conclusion; that is, that actual inflationrates stand a good chance of rising next year; that underlyinginflationary pressures are building; and that the economy, ifanything, has been surprising us on the upside. I think a move ofabout 1/8 percent in the federal funds rate is just nothing at all.It seems to me that a bare minimum would be alternative "C". And Iwould think as well that the best way to implement that would besomething that would be more public in nature and would catch the-55-12/13-14/88attention of those in the financial markets. With regard to the pointthat was made several times before about risks to the financialsector, I think that history would suggest that the risks are quitedifferent from what has been described. It seems to me that thegreatest risk is for us to get behind the curve, and I think we are ingreat danger of getting behind that curve at this point because inthat event what will happen is that interest rates are going to go toeven higher levels at a later point; and the burden on the financialsector would be even greater than if we were to move in what I wouldconsider to be a convincing way at this point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The suggestion on the table iseffectively that [result] by early January--MR. PARRY. I think if you had asked me what myrecommendation was, I would have said something stronger than "C".CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Then you want "C+"?MR. PARRY. Well, "C-"MR. HOSKINS. Alternative "gong."MR. JOHNSON. "C-"CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a "C-".MR. PARRY. What seems appropriate to me would be $300million or $400 million and an increase in the discount rate. And Ithink that a bare minimum acceptable to me would be a $200 millionincrease today.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think if we've learnedanything this morning, it's that we don't live in a riskless societyor riskless world. But I think the central question before us--andit's going to continue to confront us as these risks continue--iswhether or not those risks should constrain or inhibit monetarypolicy. I come out feeling as Governor Heller expressed it earlierthat we should not be so constrained in the absence of some emergencywhich we can deal with at the time. Like you, Mr. Chairman, I thinkthe risks of recession are fairly slight. I think what we are facedwith is a very strong economy, one that has not really moderated asmuch as we had hoped. The economy is growing at a rate above itspotential, and I think the job before us is to contain the inflationand to slow this economy down. Now, I think that the danger is thatwe don't do enough at this time to send the signal to the market andconfirm the credibility that we already have. In implementing thatkind of strategy, my preference would be for a discount rate increase.But if that is not the action of the Board, then I certainly think weneed to move now on open market operations. Moving $100 million nowand $100 million in January would be acceptable to me because I don'tfeel that that time differential will be all that great. But I dothink that we need to move in that direction. So, I would supportyour prescription.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.-56-12/13-14/88MR. BOEHNE. I think your prescription is right on target. Ithink it appropriately balances what we need to balance. I think thatopen market operations are much preferable over the discount rate; adiscount rate hike would be too much at this point. So, I agree withyou. I'd like to just comment on this business of the discount rateand the spread between it and the funds rate. That has been a classicreason given for adjusting the discount rate. But I think, given thetechnique that we use to operate open market operations with thisborrowing, that we simply have to live with ever widening spreadsunless we want to raise the discount rate at the same time we want toease open market operations. I think that sends conflicting signals.To the extent that the widening spread does raise expectations of anincrease in the discount rate, I think we ought to do away with that.And it might be well, Mr. Chairman, at an appropriate time either in aspeech or at testimony simply to indicate that the spread no longermeans what it once did in terms of considerations of whether we changethe discount rate or not. In my point of view, the reason you changethe discount rate in today's world is that you want an announcementeffect either domestically or internationally. And whether the spreadis 100 basis points or 500 basis points doesn't seem to me to beterribly relevant.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I won't use all my arguments about a discountrate increase now because I've already made them to the Board. Andthe Board members understand my view very well on that. I wouldcomment, Ed, that it seems to me in the environment that we are in nowthat there is a substantial difference between a discount rateincrease and an increase in the federal funds rate through open marketoperations.MR. BOEHNE. I agree with that.MR. ANGELL. And the difference is that you are indicatingyou want rates to be higher and one reason to have a higher discountrate is that you would encounter I think increasing difficulty ofmanaging borrowing at the discount window at $600 million, given Don'ssurveys of where banks' reluctance to come to the window may be. Ithink that we have a somewhat more stable borrowing target at $300million or $400 million than I think we would have at $600 million or$700 million. And I would want the discount rate to be high enoughnot to have to have what I would call a more unpredictable borrowingtarget. Now, my view is that whatever we do is going to have someannouncement effect. We are not going to make a move after thismeeting and have everyone say they didn't understand what the FederalReserve did. By next Tuesday or Wednesday, no one will ask whether wehave moved or haven't moved. In this scenario we are talking about,everyone is going to know that we moved. So, there is going to be anannouncement effect. And the discount rate is not ringing the gong;the discount rate is a regular procedure that you use when you want totighten policy, when you want higher interest rates. And those higherrates will be consistent with slower money growth. So, I'm clearly incamp "C". Now, I'm in camp "C" because I believe very strongly thatthe chances of our getting into recession are much less by taking theaction that needs to be taken to give us some chance to have somescarcity of money which will show up in some commodity prices and inexchange rates and show up to give some expectations. The thrift-57-12/13-14/88industry is going to be much [unintelligible] for us to deal with thisas the Board dealt with it in 1984, and it's more difficult to dealwith it now than in 1984 because the economy is further along. But ifwe wait until the end of 1989 or the middle of 1989 to get into thisand if Jerry's staff is right in their inflation forecast and ifinflation gets away from us, that's the recession scenario, that's howyou're going to buy the recession. I'm convinced that there's noimmediate danger to the real economy at this stage. And I think it'sa little more above board and will be clear in everyone's mind as towhere we are if we do it in a very solid manner. So, I favor "C" andI, of course, would prefer to do it with a discount rate increaserather than doing it with a $600 million borrowing target.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I like the scenario that you have outlined. Iguess the only part of it that concerns me a little is allowing anhistorically broader range between the discount rate and the fundsrate. It would not bother me to see the funds rate go to 9 percent.So that's 250 basis points. By doing that are we muting the announce-ment potential of future discount rate changes? In other words, arewe heralding our "gong," are we wrapping it in swaddling clothes orsomething like that?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Make sure that is recorded for therecord!MR. LAWARE. Not to be too precious about it, let me justsuggest that instead of ringing the gong, that in connection with thismove we might just "jingle" the bell--that's a seasonal pun!--andperhaps not move the discount rate a full half point but rather moveit a quarter point, which says something to the marketplace. It saysthat we are still using the discount rate with some announcementvalue, but it doesn't ring the gong quite as loudly as a full halfpoint might. But I like the gradual approach to the borrowing target.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I agree with those who think that we need somefurther tightening and that we need it right away. I came in herefavoring something between "B" and "C," which I interpret to be prettyclose to what you've proposed, Mr. Chairman. One way we mightapproach that--a little elaboration on that--something we used to dowould be to just put a range on borrowings, $500 to $600 million. Notonly does that have the value of getting us in the direction we wantto go, but given the uncertainty between interest rates and borrowingsthese days, it gives us a little more explicit flexibility it seems tome in terms of how policy is implemented. The only thing I would addto all of that, this is certainly for more serious consideration inFebruary rather than immediately, is that I do think we should keep aneye on the long-term situation. I would admit that I take somecomfort in the modest growth we've had in M2 over the last year ortwo, though I wouldn't bet the farm on it. But in light of thatmodest growth, I wonder if a 7 percent upper limit on the M2 range in1989 is really appropriate. And it strikes me to be on the high sidegiven M2's performance in the last year or two.-58-12/13-14/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we will revisit that at the nextmeeting.MR. STERN. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In terms of the Bluebookalternatives I would favor alternative "C," but I certainly would notwildly object to the approach you suggested, Mr. Chairman, whichessentially involves sneaking up a little bit on alternative "C".There is an interesting question that I think we can now call the"gong show," a variety of both strategic and tactical questions herethat arise in the context of a discount rate change. Indeed, I guessif I step back from everything, which one never has the liberty ofdoing, and I said to myself that I thought it was unlikely that therewould be an increase in interest rates in Europe and I made a varietyof other assumptions, I could easily talk myself into the view thatthe absolutely ideal policy would be the combination of a discountrate increase and, say, $500 million in borrowings. That probablywould mean that federal funds rates would end up somewhere on thenorth side of 9 percent rather than the south side of 9 percent.Then, I'd bring myself back a little bit from the ideal and start tosuperimpose on the way things are in terms of the gong show. And Iguess where I would come out is to do alternative "C," but--and thismay surprise some people--I probably would leave the discount rate onthe bench for at least a moment or two. I worry as does GovernorJohnson about the symbolism of getting caught up in what appears to bea worldwide ratcheting up of interest rates especially if there is theappearance that we are in effect getting forced into that posture tostay in lock step with the Germans. What I'm not sure about as apractical matter is whether there is a way to avoid that at thispoint, since the expectation is widespread in the marketplace thatthey are going to raise their rates in the very near term anyway. Idon't like that at all. And that does influence my thinking in termsof the tactics of the situation. The other thing that keeps rollingaround in my mind is the question that Bob Parry raised ratherdirectly and I guess I flirted with in my earlier comments. Supposethat despite the varying degrees of comfort that we draw from long-term interest rates that we are wrong or the markets are wrong orboth? What is the kind of thing that will most graphically signalthat to us in the near term? And I think there are two[unintelligible] the inflation statistics themselves start to showthrough. And the second is that, for example, we could get anotherhuge increase in employment in December. Now, Gary was talking beforeabout a 200,000 increase; that sounds high to me. If anything, Ithink that employment increases may have to be smaller than that. Butsuppose we get another 350,000 or 400,000 increase in employment rightnow, which I don't rule out as a possibility. That kind ofcontingency is another reason why I have a slight preference to keepthe discount rate in abeyance at this moment. But I certainly thinkthat at the very least we should get to something as described in theBluebook as alternative "C" and I think as you've described it asquickly as possible.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.-59-12/13-14/88MR. HOSKINS. Well, as Governor Kelley indicated earlier Ihave been an advocate of alternative "D" on various occasions. We nowhave alternative "gong" which I interpret to be a discount rate moveas opposed to "C". Not wanting to be the Paul Erdman of thisCommittee, I do have concerns along the lines Tom Melzer indicated.But I think that Governor Angell's summation on the discount rate isthe appropriate one. So, my preference would be to do a discount ratemove and adjust the borrowing targets to ensure that rates are where Ithink the market expects them which is someplace around 9 percent.Your proposal, Mr. Chairman, if I read it correctly if we do $100million now and are sure of doing $100 million later I think islivable. I have a comment on the riskless society. Bob Forrestalindicated the fact that there are risks every place out there.There's one exception, however, and that's deposit insurance. I hadto get that clear. And, secondly, with respect to the point that BobParry made, I think that's an accurate observation. I would suggestthat if this Committee had acted differently in the late 1970s, wemight not have avoided an LDC debt crisis but the magnitudes wouldhave been a lot lower in terms of the outstanding debt, the problemthat we are facing right now. I would link that to the currentcontext of the LBOs, that we may be building the same kinds of thingsright now with respect to LBOs. And I think a signal by thisCommittee that rates are moving upward and we are concerned would bethe appropriate signal to give.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, while the risks clearly are on theside of inflation as we've said, not economic growth, it does seem tome as we've gone through the year and particularly starting in thelate spring we've been responsive to that concern. And I just don'thave quite the feeling that others may have that we've fallen behindthe curve on this one. Certainly, at this time I think furthertightening is appropriate. And the scenario that you outlined is justright. I would not raise the discount rate now. I would simply raisethe borrowing level and initially the fed funds rate to 8-3/4 percentand maybe moving up to 9 percent as we get into the new year would beappropriate. But I'd hold the discount rate for something a littlebit more overt than we see now to make that move more appropriate fromthe point of view of the market.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I'm on the side of the gentleman from St. Louis,President Melzer.MR. MELZER. There's no gentleman here!MS. SEGER. The young boy from St. Louis!MR. BLACK. He just retracted his comment!MS. SEGER. I was trying to flatter him. It didn't work.MR. BOEHNE. Stand up, Tommy.MS. SEGER. Anyway, I would be opposed to a discount ratehike now. I would remind you of what the announcement effect did in-60-12/13-14/88the summer, or actually September, of 1987 when the discount rate washiked and the idea was that long-rates would decline as a result andshort rates would rise. Instead, all rates rose as I recall. And theonly thing that didn't rise was Wall Street in October when we had aslight problem with the stock market. Again, their "gong" was done inorder to sweep up the heavy pile of paper, and the blood on the floor.But anyway I think it would be bad now in that sense. Also, we areright in the middle of the Christmas selling season. And again if youwant the announcement effect, I can't think of a worse time unless youreally want to cause retail sales to go into a tailspin at a time whenfor many merchants, a third, 40 percent of their annual sales takeplace around the Christmas holidays. And, frankly, I just don't thinkit's needed. The monetary aggregate growth has I think looked prettygood, pretty responsible. Si Keehn said we've had a number oftightening moves since last spring. And I'm not convinced that we'veseen all of those impact the economy yet. So, as I said, I'm on TomMelzer's side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. ANGELL. That's "B" without any change in borrowing?MS. SEGER. Yes.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I would favor "C". I have neverdiffered with you since you've been here, and I do so with greattrepidation today because I have such respect for your judgment. ButI think the market has expected a discount rate increase, and I thinkif we don't get one it might be interpreted as some lessening of ourresolve to deal with this problem we see developing. And I thinkthere's also a lot of substance to the point that Governor Angell madethat if we are concerned about the lack of a firm relationship betweenthe level of borrowed reserves and the federal funds rate, I thinkthat would be exacerbated by letting that [rate spread widen] stillfurther. But at the same time I want to be reasonable on this, and Ican see the merits to what you've said. I can certainly see themerits to what Tom Melzer has said because the aggregates do concernme a great deal. I would not be willing to go this far if I didn'tsee a sign that they were beginning to move. I would like to bargainwith you a little bit on that $100 million and make it a little higherthan that. But I don't think it's an important enough difference thatI'd want to go to the mat on it or anything of that sort. I'd reallylike the discount rate to be a part of it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I fully support your suggestion.I would only add that as I have listened to the comments around thetable about the gong-ringing possibility, it has been expressed asmerely a matter of timing. We may very well indeed need to ring thegong. I don't think we need to do so now, because I think that thereis at least some possibility that we may not need to ring it at all.So, I just would like to have that possibility on the table.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, my position would be to move onthe discount rate. I think that would be the much preferable way to-61-12/13-14/88go. If the Board doesn't see it that way, then certainly alternative"C". And I'd move pretty fast on the borrowing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, when I came to the meeting Ipreferred "B-C", someplace in between those two. But I have noproblem with the proposal that you've laid on the table with theexception of the potential need for the second $100 million sometimeearly in January. If it becomes evident that that's an appropriatemove, then I think the Board should again look at the use of thediscount rate at that time rather than today. I'd hold it inabeyance. You may find it helpful in supporting the dollar after theturn of the year. I would not want to do it now because as hasalready been mentioned at least it's my impression that other ratesaround the world probably are going to increase, and I wouldn't wantus to be a leader in that parade. So, I would hope that we couldaccept the proposal that you have laid on the table, $100 million now,and a very careful look whether to do the second $100 million orwhether to do a discount rate increase sometime in January.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, could I ask for some clarification?The $100 million, would you anticipate this would move the federalfunds rate to 8-7/8 initially from 8-5/8 percent?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The first $100 million?MR. BLACK. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it's 8-5/8 to 8-3/4 percent; thesecond $100 million is 8-7/8 to 9 percent.MR. PARRY. The Bluebook alternatives are posed in terms of8-3/8 percent as being alternative "B," is that correct?MR. KOHN. 8-3/8 to 8-1/2 percent.MR. PARRY. Okay, so you're adding an 1/8 to that.MR. KOHN. Well, adding a 1/4 to that for $100 million andthen 1/2 for $200 million.MR. PARRY. Okay.MR. STERNLIGHT. But be aware too that we are coming into theyear-end period and seasonal factors could add on something to thatfirst 1/4.MR. HOSKINS. Well, one more clarification. Your proposal isto.do $100 million now and then take a look at whether we need to doanother $100 million?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me clarify later. I think we shouldget around to everybody who wants to talk. Bob Eisenmenger, I don'tthink you have indicated your preference, if you want to give one.MR. EISENMENGER Well, I think I would prefer to move alittle faster than you have proposed, but it's a mild preference. As-62-12/13-14/88far as the discount rate is concerned, that is a determination for theBoard anyway. They might wish to do it, but not do it immediately--doit toward the end of the year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think Roger Guffey has captured asbest it can be done the [consensus] as it has been stipulated by thevarious members of the Committee. I would propose that we goimmediately with $100 million and asymmetric language, with theunderstanding that unless something significant that is not nowperceived occurs that we go the second $200 million in January.MR. KOHN. Second $100 million.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I beg your pardon; I meant to say asecond $100 million in January. But should the Board of Governors atany time between now and then decide to move the discount rate, wewould then have a telephone conference call to readjust the borrowingrequirements to calibrate them in the context of either fullyoffsetting the $100 million, or the $200 million, or perhaps only oneof the [$100 million steps]. This means in effect that it ispossible, depending on the telephone conference should it appear thatway, that we could go to shy of 9 percent or north of 9 percent on thefederal funds rate, as Jerry Corrigan says.MR. PARRY. I don't want to nitpick, but would you envisionyourself visiting that issue two weeks from now or six weeks from now?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would say three weeks.MR. ANGELL. It would seem to me the Chairman said eitherthen or before then as I heard it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, the discount rate is reviewed oncea week.MR. ANGELL. The Board meets regularly.MR. PARRY. No, I meant this second $100 million; I'm sorry.MR. ANGELL. Oh, okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, basically it really is the secondmaintenance period.MR. PARRY. Two weeks from today?MR. JOHNSON. The third or fourth week.MR. PARRY. Two weeks from today?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. BOEHNE. Well, you can't be that precise. You've got allthat year-end churning, and if the year-end churning takes you up to ahigh level, you might not want to jerk the rate back down.MR. JOHNSON. That's a good point because that might be thetime.-63-12/13-14/88MR. BOEHNE. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The point being, if you were asking meif was I contemplating or talking about the end of the intermeetingperiod, the answer is that I was not. This is an issue which, as Ioriginally stipulated and I think is right, is to be consideredsometime early in January. That to me is three weeks from now.MR. HOSKINS. And that means that unless something of majorsignificance happens in the economy or financial markets that we willdo roughly 50 basis points either through a combination of discountrate or--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me be very specific. If nothingmaterial happens, then I think the Desk will automatically add $100million to the borrowing requirement. If, however, in the periodprior to then, or subsequent to then, the Board decides to move thediscount rate, we'll have a telephone conference to adjust theborrowing requirement in line with the instructions of the Committee.MR. ANGELL. I think that's a satisfactory solution.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The official directive under that wouldbe to go $100 million with asymmetric language. I'm not certain thatany further language is required in the directive.MR. BERNARD. [The operational paragraph would read asfollows:] "In the implementation of policy for the immediate futurethe Committee seeks to increase somewhat the existing degree ofpressure on reserve positions. Taking account of indications ofinflationary pressures, the strength of the business expansion, thebehavior of the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreignexchange and domestic financial markets, somewhat greater reserverestraint would or slightly lesser reserve restraint might beacceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserveconditions are expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 overthe period from November through March at annual rates of about 3 and6-1/2 percent, respectively. The Chairman may call for Committeeconsultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations thatreserve conditions during the period before the next meeting arelikely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outsidea range of 6 to 10 percent."MR. BLACK. 6 to 10? I thought it would be 7 to 11.SPEAKER(?). Well, it should be 7 to 11.MR. ANGELL. It should be 7 to 11.SPEAKER(?). We are going to be up 50 basis points.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We will increase the funds rate up to 50basis points.MR. HELLER. 6-1/2 to 10-1/2.MR. JOHNSON. 6-1/2 to 10-1/2.-64-12/13-14/88MR. ANGELL. Well, we've never done that. We've hadsuccessive moves.MR. HELLER. How about 7 to 10?MR. ANGELL. Why narrow the range?MR. HELLER. Well, (a) a lot of us thought that would be agood thing to do; (b) it gets us to that midpoint that you want to getto, a midpoint of 8-1/2 percent.MR. ANGELL. Well then, we are going to have to do that everytime we have a move,CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It isn't worth arguing about thisparticular issue; this is an inoperative instruction anyway.MR. ANGELL. Well, I know it, that's why--MR. JOHNSON. I certainly don't care.MR. BLACK. If we leave it at 6 to 10, we've got the midpointbelow where we are now. I'm not sure where we are. Are we at 8-1/2or 8-5/8? I think we are at 8-5/8.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We will go to 7 to 11 now.SPEAKER(?). 7 to 11 is okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. 7 to 11.MR. BLACK. It shows the gamble we are taking!MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesGovernor Heller YesPresident Hoskins YesGovernor Johnson YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesPresident Parry YesGovernor Seger NoCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next meeting is on February 7th and8th. Lunch is served.END OF MEETING