Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 1, 1988A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, November 1, 1988, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBlackForrestalHellerHoskinsJohnsonKelleyLaWareParrySegerMessrs. Guffey, Keehn, Melzer, and Morris, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, andMinneapolis, respectivelyKohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryBradfield, General CounselPatrikis, Deputy General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. Broaddus, J. Davis, R. Davis,Siegman, Simpson, and Ms. Tschinkel,Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMs. Zickler, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Porter,1 Assistant Director, Division of MonetaryAffairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Hallman1 and Small,1 Economists, Division ofMonetary AffairsMr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Wajid, Assistant to Governor Heller, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Gillum, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Divisionof Monetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Lang, Ms. Munnell,Messrs. Rolnick, Rosenblum, and Scheld, Senior VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis,Kansas City, Philadelphia, Boston, Minneapolis,Dallas, and Chicago, respectivelyMr. Judd, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank ofSan FranciscoMs. Meulendyke, Manager, Open Market Operations,Federal Reserve Bank of New York1. Attended portion of the meeting relating to long-run relationshipbetween money and prices.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meetingof November 1, 1988CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. Shall we startoff by approving the minutes of the meeting of September 20th? Isthere a motion?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So move.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We have before us aproposal for a change to a calendar-year basis for terms of presidentsas members of the Committee. You may remember that the Vice Chairmanraised this issue a meeting or so earlier and we postponed it untilthis meeting. I thought it might be worthwhile to go over it at thistime. Vice Chairman, would you like to repeat your proposal of thattime?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think of the issue as quasi-housekeeping but with some substance. The point I raised, of course,was that under current arrangements the four rotating Reserve Bankpresidents on the Committee who are responsible for the vote toestablish the targets for each calendar year at the February meetingrotate off the Committee a couple of weeks later. It seemed to methat as a matter of good procedure there was something to be said forchanging those dates so that the four rotating Reserve Bank presidentswho vote for the annual targets remain on the Committee throughout thecalendar year [to which those targets apply]. The Committee'sGeneral Counsel [Mr. Bradfield] has advised that he thinks that such achange can be made within the framework of the statute, and it seemsto me, Mr. Chairman, that simply as a quasi-housekeeping matter--or toput it differently, a matter of good procedure--that there is somelogic to trying to structure things to have that consistency over thecalendar year and with the establishment of the annual targets.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You stipulated at the time, if Iremember, that the members who vote for the ranges should beresponsible for implementing them.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, that is the argument.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it can be stated a bit morefirmly in the sense that you can't really ask individuals to implementa policy with which they are in disagreement. So, it's a little morethan strictly to simplify the structure. It's an eminently sensiblemotion, and I am wondering what other members of the Committee have tosay on this issue.MR. BOEHNE. I don't think this is a very important issue, sowhat I'm about to say should be kept in that context. I don't thinkit makes much difference one way or the other. I think the reasonsthat have just been expressed are logical and have some merit. Butthe argument on the other side is that permanent members constitutetwo-thirds of the FOMC. I've always thought of the FOMC as acontinuing body. The press tends to make an issue, whenever we havethis rotation, that the Committee is going to change or is not going11/1/88to change, but it seems to me it really has not. Our deliberationshave tended to be collegial, and there has been something permanentabout the monetary policy of the Federal Reserve. If you have achange from the Philadelphia District to the Richmond District on theFOMC, that in itself should not lead to expectations that there mightbe a significant change in policy. There is more stability to theFederal Reserve than that, and even though not all of us vote, we doall participate in these decisions. While the vote is clearlyimportant and of legal significance, it has always seemed to me thatthe collegial spirit of the discussion has been more important, and99.999 percent of the meetings that I've ever been a part of [havebeen of this nature]. I think this kind of change tends to emphasizethe individual members of the Committee over the Committee as a whole,and the System as a whole, and the collegial spirit. While I don'tthink this is a very big issue, on the whole I would prefer not tomake a change.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, Ed Boehne has expressed myviews very, very well. I would put it perhaps just a littledifferently. It seems to me that the actions on the Humphrey-Hawkinstargets are basically actions of the Committee itself, and the changein rotation shouldn't affect the ability of the Committee to carry outthe targets. I think that the voting members who come on after March1st are in a sense obliged, really, to accept and to enforce if youwill the targets that have been established by the Committee. But,like Ed, I don't think that this is a very big issue. Were it thewill of the Committee, I certainly wouldn't object. I say that as onewho would be affected by the change in the sense that my term wouldend ordinarily on March 1st. As I understand it, if we adopt thischange, my term would end earlier, but it's not all that significantas far as I'm concerned. On the legal issue, our counsel also lookedat it and agreed with the views expressed by Mr. Bradfield.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I support the change for two reasons. One, Icame on at the time when targets had already been established, andwhile I didn't have major disagreements with the targets I feel that I[didn't have] much infuence over them. Now, that's a small point.The larger point is one to which you alluded. There's a sense ofaccountability that gets attached to the targets when you do it. Ithink people will feel more responsible, and the public will have amuch better record [by which] to measure people and their performance.So, there's some accountability with this proposed change that I wouldsupport.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I want to make a different point, because I don'tknow how presidents feel, not being a president. But I can tell you,if this were done right now, the media would pick this up and say theGovernors are trying to get rid of Bob Forrestal because he's a"meanie" from Atlanta. And we're changing this arrangement to get ridof certain people. I can just see it.MR. BOEHNE. It's true, too!MS. SEGER. I didn't say whether that was true or not.11/1/88MR. BLACK. I think you take it the wrong way. It's theother three of us!MS. SEGER. Seriously, the media would just love to pick upthis us-versus-them routine, and while I haven't seen the us-versus-them at work [on the Committee], this would be something else thatthey would seize on--on top of whatever other considerations theremight be. So I'm sure you can't keep this quiet.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I think Ed and Bob make a very good point, butnonetheless I come down in favor of the change. I wasn't aware of thebackground of the March 1st vote until I read the memorandum. Ialways thought it was a very awkward date coming in the middle of theHumphrey-Hawkins testimony. I just feel there's a little bit ofconfusion there for the reasons that we've said: namely, that bysetting the ranges we have some accountability for them. I think forthe rotation to be on that basis, it will be a cleaner way to do it,and I'd be in favor of the change.MR. PARRY. I support the change as well. If the change wereannounced, say, at the end of the year and the reasons explained, Idon't think there would be much press pressure to it. The other thingis that it probably would be wise to emphasize one of the points thatEd has made--that the FOMC is a continuing body. But it does makesome sense. If we were starting off today having no precedent, weclearly would probably opt for something more like what you areproposing than what we have. So I would support it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That I am sure is correct. PresidentGuffey.MR. GUFFEY. I, Mr. Chairman, would also support the changeon the basis of the continuity and accountability issues alreadydiscussed.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I would favor it as well. I don't have anythingto add to the comments that have been made.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody else who's got views on this?Let me say that this is not something that we should bring to a voteand get a count. Unless we are unanimous, I don't see how we can moveforward on this in an appropriate fashion. So I really want to put itto those who feel uncomfortable with it: Is your degree of discomfortat a level where you think it is inappropriate for us to do this? Oris it marginal? I do think that unless we do it by acclamation, it'san inappropriate action to be taking at this stage.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, I certainly would not object, Mr.Chairman. I just wanted to make the point, as Ed did, that this is acontinuing body. We need to stress the collegial atmosphere of thisgroup and the fact that actions taken are actions taken by theCommittee. But I have no objection and I would certainly join--11/1/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Suppose that in the public statementmade with respect to this that that particular point is emphasized.MR. FORRESTAL. I would agree to that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would that solve your problem?MR. FORRESTAL. Sure.MR. BOEHNE. Looking at me?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I have a higher level of discomfort forthe change. If it comes down to 18 people around the table who wantto do it, I'm not going to stand in the way. But if I were going todo it, I would not make it effective at the end of this year. I woulddo it down the road, to get away from the point that Martha makes.There is, unfortunately, this business in the press about presidentsversus governors--which is a lot of nonsense, but it's there. In thatcontext--that's not my main reason--but I think that it is supportiveto my concern. If I were going to do it, I would make it effective ayear from now, or something, just to get away from any immediateconcern about policy.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There is a way you can do that, ofcourse, and that is make it effective a year from now and just mentionit almost in passing in your testimony in February that beginning nextyear we're going to have this procedural change. I don't think itmatters all that much in terms of--MR. BOEHNE. The other thing is, if we made it effective thisyear, we'd have to go back to all of our Boards of Directors and getthem to change those resolutions of elections because I think it saysin there that the terms run from March 1st to February 28th, orwhatever it is. It might be better to do it on a pro forma basisrather than go back and change the terms that are already inexistence.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That strikes me as not a bad way to comeat this. Would you amend your resolution to do that?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Sure.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no objections then, I wouldpresume it's the will of this Committee that the change occur not onJanuary 1st, 1989, but on January 1st, 1990, and without objection Iwill assume that that is the will of the Committee.MR. ANGELL. So, in effect, we're making this new termbeginning next March run until December 31.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is correct, yes.MR. ANGELL. Which seems to me is the appropriate way to do11/1/88MR. BERNARD. What the Committee is doing is amending itsRules of Organization.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In effect, yes. The next item on theagenda is an interesting analytical work which will be evaluated byRichard Porter and later by Don Kohn who wants to, as usual, have thelast say on this issue.MR. PORTER. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Messrs. Porter andKohn?MR. HOSKINS. I don't have a question, I have a comment. Icommend the staff on the research. It is cast in very familiar termsfor me, and therefore I'm quite comfortable with it. I see lots ofP's, Q's, and M's, and V's. I think it couches the debate, or theanalysis, in the appropriate form for the long term, which is pricestability. If we simply look at our long-term targets that weinternally set for next year, 3 to 7 percent, we can be at zeropercent inflation with this approach by 1993 by moving targets down byone percentage point each year. To make the test a little better, youtook a look at actual M2?MR. PORTER. True.MR. KOHN. Yes.MR. HOSKINS. And the forecast didn't have that. So what youtried to do is to make the test a little clearer. You used themidpoints of the target range, since that's the information theCommittee had at the time, and it hardly did any damage to yourresults. The root mean square goes up because of 1987.MR. PARRY. I have a question about the approach. It's asingle-equation approach, and there is an assumption therefore thatmoney is exogenous. Yet, we know that throughout this period forwhich you got your statistical results that at times money wasendogenous--that you were reacting to what was happening to prices.It seems to me that that is a point which has some bearing on theusefulness [of these results]. The second point is that for some ofthese [periods] velocity is more stable. If you look at Chart II, itlooks to me that if you were at different points of history, you mighthave concluded as you drew a line most recently that you were goingoff the long-run velocity line. We know that potential real GNPchanges over time. I don't know how much that would lead us astray,but it seems to me that assumptions about both of those beingunchanged over time are potentially dangerous with respect to--MR. PORTER. Well, it is true that M2 has an endogenouscomponent over time. It is strictly one equation, but one periodahead forecasts are okay with a lag. So, clearly, over some period oftime the FOMC could potentially control M2 to a pretty goodapproximation.MR. PARRY.Sure.11/1/88MR. PORTER. And if this equation seems to have worked in avariety of periods--I guess that's what President Hoskins said--maybethe approach would work in other situations. But that is a weaknessof the approach and you're--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I propose that the endogeneity is ashort-term issue if one can demonstrate--and indeed the data dodemonstrate--that carrying these out another 50 years that in fact M2velocity is trendless or without any really perceptible change [intrend]. Once you have stipulated that, the endogeneity problemdisappears over the long run because clearly the trend of velocity cannot be a function of anything other than structural aspects of thefinancial system over the long run. If that's the case, then theissue of the two-year or three-year or five-year projections ceases tohave that mathematical property. While I certainly would agree thatin the short run there is a great deal of endogeneity in it, I wouldsuspect that that property decays very rapidly and probably is eveninsignificant over two- and three-year horizons.MR. KOHN. We ought to be clear in response to PresidentParry's second question that when the staff made those one-, two-, orthree-year ahead projections, we assumed we didn't know anything aboutvelocity except what had occurred up to that time. So all thoseprojections were made with the average velocity up to that period; andimplicitly it was assumed that velocity would remain stable. But itturns out that the projections are pretty good--amazingly good in myview--on that assumption that the dynamics of the model apparentlycapture some of the changes in velocity. The question really is, ifwe [unintelligible] the so-called Lucas critique and started targetingP*, would people change their behavior? If I can reinterpret theChairman's point, if we can show the behavior hasn't changed over manydifferent monetary policy regimes stretching back into the early partof the 20th century, it is probably a pretty good bet that somethingpretty fundamental is going on there. You could change the regimewithout changing something fundamental in the way people handle theirliquid assets.MR. PARRY. What about potential real GNP? That can changefor other reasons, and it does change for reasons that sometimes arevery difficult to anticipate.MR. KOHN. Right. We did estimates using various ways oflooking at that. Most of the results are in the Board [staff study].MR. PARRY. I see.MR. KOHN. When we have used other measures of potential GNP,P* is not that sensitive to that unless those changes are much largerthan the kinds of changes that we have experienced in the past.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I just have a question; I hope it's a fair one.What if you had done this project 40 years ago, and ran it andestablished your equations, and so forth, would that have given usgood guidance going forward?11/1/88MR. KOHN. The only way I can answer that is to refer you toExhibit 5, because this exhibit in effect reports on the experimentyou just proposed. That is, suppose the equation was fitted up to acertain point, say 1980, and then projected, and then '81 is aslightly [unintelligible].MR. PORTER. This chart here fits up to the end of one year,and then forecasts it three years on the bottom.MR. KOHN. Right. So that this [unintelligible].MS. SEGER. So this relationship would pick that up? Becauseoften I see econometric models that cheat. They have the advantage ofwhat has happened, and they go back and say, well, this really wouldhave worked. Whereas in fact if you had done it earlier, it wouldn'thave worked. But this doesn't--MR. PORTER. This isn't subject to that other than the factthat these forecasts do embody the M2 revisions made after the period.But other than that, those estimates of real GNP might have beenslightly different at the time but that varies, and possibly there'snothing there at all. I think that would be very slight. Otherwise,the parameters and the assumptions about what long-run velocity wascould have been known at the time.MS. SEGER. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Just a follow-up comment on the comments youmade in that I have a concern about it and that is we haven't reallyformally and aggressively targeted M2 so that the market believed it.In that sense, over time you can say we had lots of differentstructural regimes and all that, but we never tested Goodhart's law.We never said this is what we're going to do, and I have concerns thatonce we tell the market that this is what we're going to do, would M2function as it has in the past? That's a concern I have.MR. JOHNSON. What he means is, if you take it out farenough, you could probably wash all that out. But the point I'm justmaking about this is that some people think it is a shorter period oftime to [get full] adjustment and smoothness, but I have to think thatin the short run it could be a very, very tumultuous situation. Thisis very good in terms of the long-run picture, but in the long run,we're all dead.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, Lee, I think the issue you areraising does wash out over a three-year horizon, because so long asit's a type of trend like the one we are going through now--I mean,are we targeting M2? In a certain sense, we are or we are not,depending on how rigidly--MR. HOSKINS. I agree.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The question of rigidity.MR. HOSKINS. But if the markets see something in ourdirective, six variables that we're looking at, one of which happens11/1/88to be M2 and which we're not as aggressively targeting as we perhapstargeted the Ms in the early '80s, would we get the same result overtime? I don't know the answer. If we move forward with four or fivethings that we have listed in the directive as important to us, themarket would say that M2 is one of them. And you may not get thateffect, but I have no way of knowing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, it seems to me that thisapproach, in contrast to what I will call a naive monetarist model,does say something that is both very intuitive and very important.What it says is that some given M2 target has different inflationaryimplications depending upon the amount of slack in the economy, andthat is both important and intuitive. What's good about this is thatit does confirm that intuitive notion in a fairly robust way, to useyour term. In that sense, it has a great deal of appeal, and it alsosays something I think rather compelling about what's wrong with thenaive monetarist perception of things. Now having said that, I guessmy judgment as to its utility in a policy context is somewhere alongthe following lines: I would not be willing to go so far as to adoptwhat I think you're calling a rigid M2 targeting approach simply onthe basis of what we see here. On the other hand, I do think that itcan be useful to the Committee internally in terms of trying to frameour thinking more systematically as to what might constitutereasonable targets over time. In that sense, it has some real utilitybecause I'm not ready to jump on the M2 bandwagon to the exclusion ofeverything else, which will come as no surprise to you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It will come as no surprise to you thatI agree with what you just said about [unintelligible] explanation.Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Well, I'm delighted of course to see thisimpetus to the monetary aggregates because certainly I think all of ushave known that our job in regard to long-run price stability has tobe related to what we do in regard to facilitating money and avoidinggetting too much money in the system. The record of this year is ofhaving M2 clearly appear to be running against our upper limits in thefirst quarter and our taking offsetting actions, and it seems to methat that was indeed appropriate. We now have M2 below 5 percent onan annual growth rate basis over a 24-month period for the first time,I think, since 1962. And it seems to me that this does bolster that[unintelligible] and that view. I would caution, however, that what Ithink Manley Johnson has been suggesting in regard to the short run,and that is if we make short-run mistakes and get the economy in asevere recession the problem with that is that you end up then notbehaving well in regard to monetary aggregates. So, I think this isindeed a very extraordinary development which bolsters those of us whowant to see M2 raised [in importance]. We just need one more step andthat is to be sure to use commodity prices as some signal as to whento tighten the screws.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess like you are notsurprised by what Jerry Corrigan said, you probably won't be surprisedby what I say either. I like this paper very much because I think it11/1/88has very important implications about how we ought to conduct ourlong-run policy. The main thing the evidence says to me is the samething I think it said to all of you--namely, that we can controlprices over the long run by controlling M2. It also suggests thatthere has not been in the last 30 years or so enough of a permanentshift in demand for money that that would have been troublesome. Now,of course, it does point out that we might have shifts in money overtime for which we'd have to allow, but I don't think that reallynegates the basic conclusion that we can control the price level overthe long run while targeting the M2. The idea of controllinginflation in this manner obviously is not a new one, but the evidencegiven in this paper I think makes it pretty dramatic and gives itadded support.I think all of this really raises some fundamental questionsabout our current long-run strategy. Obtaining long-run pricestability is clearly one of the preeminent goals of monetary policy; Iwould say it is the goal of monetary policy. We frequently state thisin our public statements, and yet there's nothing really in ourcurrent set of procedures that ensures that we are really going totarget M2 or any other aggregate over the long run. It's true that weannounce that we have targets for these aggregates, but we don't hitthose targets a lot of time. And we allow base drift to come in, andso there's no assurance in our present procedures that M2 is going togrow at a rate that will be compatible over the long run with pricestability--over 2, 3, 4, 5 years, or whatever you want to target on.I've been dissatisfied with this procedure for a long time, and Ithink there are some other members who have been somewhatuncomfortable with it, too. The staff paper provides impressiveevidence that we really can control price stability in the long run bycontrolling M2, if we just change our procedures to ensure that wekeep our long-run M2 [unintelligible]. And I'd like to make onefurther observation about section 6 of the staff paper which exploresthe long-run dynamic characteristics of the price gap equation. Theanalysis in this section suggests that if we fix the M2 growth at aconstant rate, the price level [fluctuation] would remain pretty widearound the equilibrium level for many years before stabilizing the--MR. JOHNSON. 100 years.MR. BLACK. Yes, that's right! And this is very discouragingmore so to me than to you, Manley, because I'm an old man. I'm goingto be on a fixed income in four years. We have to wait until ourgrandchildren to see this price stability.MR. JOHNSON. Our great grandchildren!MR. BLACK. Yes, our great grandchildren. I haven't evengotten my first grandchild yet, but do have one coming in January incase any of you are interested! I think it needs to be emphasizedthat this particular analysis deals only with the special case wherethere is a stable rate of growth in the money supply. I think it'sreasonable to suppose that we could have some kind of reactivemechanism that would bring this under better control and damp theseoscillations. We had one of a sort when we were targeting nonborrowedreserves. If there was an overshoot in the aggregates [under thatsort of targeting] we made the banks borrow half of that overshoot.And that was an automatic mechanism. There are others that obviously11/1/88could be used. I would also draw the opposite conclusion from theLucas critique on this and say that intuitively I think if you had astable rate of growth in money supply over this 30 years, that youwould not have changed the structure of the models. So, if youtargeted a stable rate of growth after that you would have had less inthe way of oscillations this produced because these are two verydifferent regimes and that is the issue to which I think the Lucascritique was addressed. I've said too much, Mr. Chairman, but Isurely like what the staff is doing. I would not go quite so far asone of my colleagues and say the first eight pages represent the bestwork the staff has ever done because I think it has done a lot ofother awfully good work, too.MR. HOSKINS. Should we suggest a name for your grandchild?M2 or Base?MR. BLACK. There's a problem with that!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, like many, I guess I found this to be avaluable and stimulating paper. In a way it formalizes a bit some ofthe back of the envelope kinds of calculations that a lot of us gothrough from time to time. But a reservation that I do have about itall is that this is a rather specialized model with lots of specialrestrictions in it at least implicitly. If one runs some more generalmodels and tries to identify a significant impact of M2 on prices, itcan be very, very hard to find that. And so I'm a little at a loss atthis stage to know exactly what to make of these results in a policysense or in a more general sense. I have some sympathy with them andI would like to think that M2 is important and significant and can bea valuable guide; but I must say I think we may have here only the tipof the iceberg as far as some of the evidence that we ought to beconsidering is concerned.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But there is a simple relationship herewhich is algebraically necessary once you stipulate that velocity istrendless. If velocity is trendless, then it is an algebraicnecessity that the price level be proportional to unit money supply.And that's a [link] which can only be broken if we can argue thatvelocity has no constancy to it. All the rest of this is justinteresting additions, but the essential tie between prices and M2 isdefined by that relationship. If the remarkably stable trend in M2velocity since the turn of the century, and maybe earlier, is anaccident, then I think one can argue that the relationship between M2and the price level is an accident. But if you can't argue that,you're required to stipulate that unit money supply is governing thelevel of prices over the longer run.MR. STERN. Yes, I would accept that as far as the longer runis concerned.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But I don't think much more is beingmade of this. It's very interesting that the R squares risesignificantly as they do over the long run because in most models it'sin exactly the reverse order. President Morris.-10-11/1/88MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, most things have alreadybeen said, and I certainly agree and I think most economists agreethat in the long run the price level is a function of the long-runrate of growth in the money supply. I think for that reason it wouldbe useful every six months for this Committee to take another look atthe last chart [in the staff study]. On the other hand, if you lookat chart 2, exhibit 2, you see that in the third month M2 velocity isextremely unfavorable and therefore we've got to think in terms of thelong-run trend of M2 while at the same time recognizing that any rigidtargeting of M2 is not going to produce a desirable outcome withrespect to nominal GNP. So, I think it has a value but not a value insetting monetary policy in the short run.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the real value [occurs] when weget to a position where policy has to be eased and we want to induceas a consequence an acceleration [in the growth] of the monetaryaggregates. If we had out there what a noninflationary level of M2should be, say, three years out, I think it would give us a littlebetter insight as to what our M2 range should be in a period of ease.In other words, when do we get into dangerous levels [of inflation]where the degree of retrenchment to get back to a stationarynoninflationary environment [is substantial, we can better gauge] whatwould be the consequences of various different types of policies we[might] implement at that time.MR. MORRIS. I just wonder, though, whether it's safe to sayin retrospect, [given] the very large rate of growth in M2 since 1986,that a much tighter policy would have been desirable in 1986. I don'thave that sense. I think that in certain contexts that may well betrue, but it seems to me that this exhibit 2 dominates, and I'd hateto see us think if we had had a slow rate of growth in M2 for a coupleof years that this would give us the feeling that we can be a littlelooser now because we don't have to worry about inflation in 1989. Ithink that would be a completely wrong--MR. ANGELL. But, Frank, the model doesn't say that.MR. MORRIS. I know, I know.MR. ANGELL. The model says the gap is still the other way.MR. MORRIS. I'm just saying that it's very tough to tightenmonetary policy, and I wonder whether just occasionally the model maynot give us a rationale for not doing what we ought to be doing;that's the only concern I have. Two years of slow M2 growth I thinkshould not under this set of conditions lead us to conclude that weneed to be a little less alert to inflation than we otherwise wouldbe; I think that would be a wrong conclusion. I'm not saying you aredrawing that [conclusion], but I think there's a danger in beingtougher. I remember back in 1975 we had this slow rate of growth ofM1 and this was the [period when] monetarism was [gaining prominence];the broader aggregates were growing very rapidly; M1 was not. Andthis Committee took a little comfort from the fact that M1 was growingfairly modestly and that comfort turned out to be costly. So I justwonder whether in the short run such a model might lead us as much toerror as to success.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.-11-11/1/88MR. PARRY. The example you cited about how [the model may]be useful in the long run really depends upon the actual coefficientsthat are estimated. In effect, that's how you determine at what rateM2 should grow to get the growth and prices that you find acceptable.The only point I was trying to make--I think this is a correctstatistical point--is that to the extent that money is not exogenous,those statistical results can be biased. I don't know if that is amajor factor. I don't think you ought to assume that thosecoefficients are unbiased coefficients because the model starts outwith an assumption of the exogeneity which is not there. This may notbe a big factor, but I think it is a factor.MR. KOHN. All the coefficients do is give you the dynamicpath by which you reach the long-run [unintelligible].MR. PARRY. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I had a question that I guess would follow whatGary Stern was saying. Some of the work done prior to the early1980's would have indicated greater explanatory powers in some of thenarrower aggregates. I gather they are not candidates for this typeof approach because of the instability in their velocity over time.Is that the assumption?MR. KOHN. Well, that's what made M2 attractive from thisperspective. In theory there's no reason why you couldn't specify along-run path for M1 velocity and feed that into the model in terms ofits long-run path. I think it [would have] been more effective[before] deregulation. It's not clear to me that M2 hasn't, but M1certainly has. and that path is certainly not flat. So it loses thiswith the simplicity or elegance perhaps of this model. But in theoryif you knew the long-run path for M1 velocity, there is no reason whyyou couldn't put that in for P* over time.MR. PORTER. We ran the base and M1 and we didn't get thekind of result that they got with that model.MR. MELZER. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions or comments onthis before we go further? If not, I'll call on Mr. Cross. Thank youvery much, Mr. Porter.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Cross?MR. HELLER. Can I make a comment?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure.MR. HELLER. You know the dollar is falling, and it's now[blamed] on the weak U.S. economy. Late last year, the dollar wasfalling and it was blamed on the strong U.S. economy because it meantthat more imports were being sucked into the country and therefore the-12-11/1/88dollar had to go down. I'm getting a little confused, not by what Mr.Cross was saying but by the way the world is reacting. One dayundoubtedly the dollar will be falling, and we will be called upon totighten policy which undoubtedly will send the economy a little bitfurther down, and presumably the dollar will go up.MR. BLACK. But not necessarily.MR. CROSS. I don't think the expectation in the market isthat the economy is very weak. I think that they had been expectingand thinking that it was growing a lot more robustly and that that wasgoing to lead to higher interest rates and was yielding some upwardpressure on the dollar. That was the prevailing attitude in which thevarious statistical releases [came out] all suggesting that the growthis not so robust. And so they are reassessing that.MR. HELLER. It's probably the differential between the twolarger--MR. CROSS. Different things prevail in these markets atdifferent times, but that seems to be a very important factor.MR. HELLER. Probably it's the differential between the twothat counts, right?MR. CROSS. That's right, as much of this is based on whatthey had been expecting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. My concern is not a new one to this Committee,but I think it has been portrayed rather well in this last month. Wehave been in on both sides of the market which gives an impressionthat we know what the right exchange rate is. I don't feelcomfortable that I know what the right exchange rate is, and I'm notsure anyone around this table does. If Peter Sternlight were to go inon both sides of the market we might have trouble with that, althoughhe does that on occasion when we ask him to. I think we run the riskof setting up the public and ourselves for a nice fall in the dollarsimply based on expectations. If the belief is we're going tostabilize the dollar until the election is over with and[unintelligible] tell you about market reaction after the election.My concern is broader than just that particular issue. It's that bydoing this I think we continue to confuse the public as to what ourpolicy is all about and divert attention from our long-term objectiveof stable prices. And secondly, I think we run the risk of confusingourselves as to our abilities to influence exchange rates in aninappropriate fashion.MR. CROSS. Well, as you know, we've been trying to introducesome stability, and I think it's understandable in a period when thedollar is falling about 10 percent that we could be on both sides of[the market with] that sort of exchange rate movements. It's notsurprising in a number of European countries [to see intervention on]opposite sides of the exchange markets within a matter of[unintelligible]. We attempt this, it seems to me, not to try to saywith a great degree of precision what is the right exchange rate butto say that we are trying to introduce a greater measure of stability.11/1/88I think if you look back over the period since the Louvre Accord,there has been somewhat more stability in these exchange rates. Andit is of some value, some importance, when you think of the problemsthat arise if, for example, the dollar should start to fall veryrapidly against the yen and trigger responses by all of the presentholders of the dollars to try to protect themselves. We have to walkthis narrow line between trying to encourage a certain degree ofstability and to keep the financing for this deficit occurring untilwe can move further toward other financing. It seems to me that's thebasic policy.MR. TRUMAN. I think the international understandings--whether the authorities will consider intervention--in fact are partof the framework for international economic cooperation that isdesigned to deal with common international problems. And there is aconsiderable [range of] views about how large those problems are andwhat the price [unintelligible] to be and how effective some various[approaches] are in doing so. But as the major industrial countries[unintelligible] of the growth-driven process try to deal with largeimbalances [unintelligible] this process of intervention that we'vebeen involved in will be as noticed as [unintelligible] to theexchange rates over the various parts of that. But the price to thisCommittee seems to be the more risky case in saying you don't knowbetter, or if you don't know then you can't concentrate or think aboutit, is the risk that comes along with the accusations of [benignneglect] about U.S. policy in the past. And you're just watchful. Infact, you'd probably argue that if we are going to solve our financialproblems, we're going to have to do so on our own.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I just want to make sure I heard you right. Thisis the first time I believe I've heard the election introduced intothis analysis of what's going on.MR. CROSS. Well, not really. I think I said earlier thatas we moved up toward the election there has been a feeling on thepart of a lot of people in the market that the authorities would beparticularly careful not to let exchange rates change very wildly, andthey succeeded in doing that.MS. SEGER. But I haven't heard us discuss that here in termsof what, in fact, it would be.MR. CROSS. All I'm suggesting is that that is what is in themarket.MS. SEGER. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's not our fault.MR. CROSS. I'm a reporter.MS. SEGER. Yes, but I'm just saying that this is the firsttime I've heard this even.MR. CROSS. It certainly has been a factor in the foreignexchange market for some time.-14-11/1/88VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It works.MS. SEGER. That they expect some tremendous change after theNovember.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, it's not so much necessarilythat they expect a change after November 8th.MS. SEGER. Well, that's the day of the election.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But I do think that there has been alarge gut feeling in the market for months that authorities would goto rather extraordinary lengths to prevent the dollar from falling onits face.MS. SEGER. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I was just going to make a comment on whatGovernor Heller said earlier. It's interesting that last year we hadthe weakness in the dollar, and it appears we had a strong economicsituation, stronger than some people saw at the time. I think thatled to feelings that the trade deficit wasn't going to improve--imports were going to be strong--and that policy was going to begeared toward further dollar depreciation to the point ofprotectionist pressures. So, there was a definite fear, I think, inthe market of an orchestrated decline in the dollar and that tended tofeed on itself. But this year we have seen something different. Thedeficit has improved, and the dollar started turning about the time westarted seeing trade improvement. And it has improved consistently upto recently. On top of that were the expectations of rising interestrates because the economy remained strong and everybody anticipated atightening monetary policy action. Now, you've got a bit of adifferent perception. I think the markets see the economy as not asstrong as expected earlier and believe that rates may not have to goas high as anticipated earlier and that's taking the pressures off theexchange market. And I think they've seen some slowing in the tradeimprovement. It may be just an aberration, but all of that I think issort of leading up to a weaker trend in the dollar. I don't knowwhere that takes you exactly, but that is how I would characterize theway things have developed.MR. CROSS. You know, a stronger economy or a weaker economycan lead to all kinds of other things which sometimes lead tostrengthening and sometimes to weakness.MR. JOHNSON. There may be some of that [unintelligible]feeling, but there also was a strong feeling that aside from that we'ddo anything necessary, or the perception was that we want to maintaindollar stability. It also was a perception that the central bankmight be a source of the political cycle, too. I don't know how youweigh those two out. And they could balance each other.MR. HELLER. I think the only thing I meant to say was thatwe shouldn't overdo it. It's all that Mr. Cross and Mr. Truman weresaying earlier also in response to Lee Hoskins. I really agree withthe way you present the case. We shouldn't overdo it as far as the-15-11/1/88strength of the economy and the dollar are concerned. And I think onevery important factor in the current dollar slide clearly was thedisappointing trade numbers released a month ago. I'm not surewhether the slide started on that day or roughly a week or--. I thinkit started a day or two earlier because there were some reports thatthe numbers were going to be bad.MR. JOHNSON. Well, I think it's a combination of theperception of things; they're all intertwined, with the perceivedrelatively weaker situation in the economy and the trade numbers arealll tied up together. Although it's hard for me to--. What do themodels show when you have a relatively weaker economic situation? Ithought you'd get more on the import side than you'd lose on theexport side.MR. TRUMAN. You do, but both arguments are indivisible, whenput that way in terms of economics. It is true that if the economy isweaker, interest rates go down or may go down and lower theattractiveness of the dollar. But it also is true that if the economyis weaker, then the economy can absorb more aggregate demand [stemmingfrom a] depreciation. So if it were economists who were trading [inthe exchange markets], let me put it that way, then [unintelligible]and it may not even be convincing or have anything to do with whatwe're doing. But at the same time, it would tend to be a motivatingforce in correcting the trade balance.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I expected the decline in thedollar after the [unintelligible] Treasury issued in the past threemonths which suggested the improvement in our trade position wasfizzling out. We've really been stagnating with respect to anyimprovement in our trade position in the last three months.Furthermore, we've had an exchange rate in the third quarter whichproduced a net decline in import prices. Even if you take out thedecline in oil prices you have a decline in import prices. Now, Idon't see how we're going to make much further progress on the tradedeficit unless we have a further decline in the dollar. I think weshould intervene to make sure that it's an orderly decline. But itseems to me the evidence is pretty strong that with exchange rates attheir third-quarter level we are not going to make much progress inreducing the trade deficit.MR. JOHNSON. How does that fit into your view aboutinflation?MR. MORRIS. It accentuates it. That's one of the reasonswhy I have to classify the staff inflation forecast as the bestpossible scenario. I think the inflation rate in 1989 has got to behigher, but I was going to talk about that later.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Sam, given the dollar-yen pressure we'reexperiencing and [unintelligible], are there any changes in theattitudes of the Japanese [investors] over the dollar as an overallissue?-16-11/1/88MR. CROSS. Well, as the dollar has tended to slide againstthe yen, we've been hearing more reports of hedging. As they get lessconfident they tend to hedge more; that's the form it takes, but ithas the same exchange rate effect.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But also there are comments you getfrom [unintelligible] that suggest that at least in the market therehas been a somewhat marked shift in diversifying assets without[unintelligible] at this point.MR. CROSS. We get reports on this. And certainly duringsome periods this year when the exchange rates appeared to berelatively safe and stable, there was a tendency to shift into thehigh interest rate currencies by Japanese investors--into theAustralian, Canadian, sterling currencies--MR. MORRIS. I was talking with a visitor fromabout countries diversifying their reserve assets, and he saidthat keeps asking why they keep alltheir reserves in dollars. So we are beginning to hear the kinds ofthings we heard in 1978-1979.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's precisely for those reasonsthat you've got a mess in these circumstances and huge balances outthere that have got to be financed. [Unintelligible.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Sam, I wanted to try to get an idea. Youmentioned the negative sentiment. Is that backed up at this point bylarge speculation or not? In other words, I would think if there isthis expectation out there that you've described about trying to holdthings stable until the election that shorts would be covered ratherquickly and we could be in the situation where despite the declinewe've had, or maybe because of it, that there is not a big short bidin the market. Do you have any sense of that?MR. CROSS. It's very hard to be very precise. You hear whatone person says; then you hear three other people. But certainlythere is this prevailing concern that as we look forward a few monthsthere are those big problems, and we are going to have a new Adminis-tration. That in itself brings a little uncertainty to the situation.Are they going to be able to and will they take actions to deal withthese problems? So as you look ahead a few months this is very muchon their minds.MR. MELZER. So there's a good deal of short-termvulnerablity?MR. CROSS. I assume that they are acting on the basis ofthat concern. But it's hard to have any precise numbers.MR. MELZER. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I have a lot of sympathy with theview that Lee Hoskins expressed. I have had some reservations about-17-11/1/88these swaps ever since we entered into them. It's not that I'm allthat opposed to smoothing operations but I felt that they might delayour dealing with some fundamental problems by covering them up for awhile. I think it is important to note that foreign affairs arebasically an Administration function and the Treasury has primacy inthis area. And even if we philosophically don't agree with the kindof intervention we've done--and I think we pretty well [have expressedthat] disagreement--we would have to yield to the Treasury on this,just as monetary policy is a function that Congress has delegated theFederal Reserve and the Treasury shouldn't be telling us what to do inthose areas.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mr. Cross? Ifnot, can I have a motion to ratify the transactions since theSeptember meeting?MS. SEGER. I'll move it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. I also need a motionto approve one-year extensions of the swap line agreements.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So moved.MS. SEGER. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. I think it would beuseful to have Ted Truman bring us up to date on the Mexicansituation.MR. TRUMAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll try to be brief.Basically, I have three points. The first is about developments inthe last two weeks or so. Over the 11 business days since theannouncement of the willingness of the Federal Reserve and theTreasury to develop a short-term bridge loan for Mexico's economicpolicies, Now,that compares with over the previous two weeks.In the first week, in fact,oil prices remained relatively firm, and short-term interest rateswere pushed up by 200 basis points to 45-1/2 percent. Last week oilprices eased, interest rates were left unchanged, and so indeedand I guess we would not be surprised ifinterest rates rose after today's auction.The second point has to do with where we stand on thedocumentation for this proposed bridge loan. It is assumed in ourreview with the Bank of Mexico and the Mexican government that it willinvolve, as we now envisage the situation, a new special System swaparrangement for $1-1/4 billion on which various amounts would be drawnsuccessively. I would describe successive [drawings] as bridging tovarious IMF drawings in advance of payments for oil for the strategicpetroleum reserve and World Bank loans. Those drawings would [not] bemade until the sources of repayment were reasonably assured. And eachwould go on to--, be made on a new swap line with the Exchange-18-11/1/88Stabilization Fund of the same size. The remaining $1 billion of thearrangement would use the existing Federal Reserve and ESF swap linesandWe expect to have the technical details fully agreed in a coupleof weeks at which time we would ask the Committee for its formalconcurrence of those arrangements.The last point would be that Normand Bernard sent out to theCommittee a paper by Ives Maroni on Mexico's economic situation andprospects. I hope it was informative, and I'd be glad to respond toany questions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I just want to point out that I will besoliciting by telegram your views on the agreement--in a couple ofweeks, Ted, did you say?MR. TRUMAN. Well, I'm trying to be optimistic about it.It's a guess. The General Counsel is nodding 'yes' and he's--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I will be soliciting your viewsimmediately upon completion of the negotiations, whenever that mayturn out to be the case. Questions for Mr. Truman?MS. SEGER. This is just a fundamental question. The daythat this bridge loan was announced in the newspaper, I happened tohave breakfast with a Congressman from the House Banking Committee andhe said, "What in the world is the Federal Reserve doing in that? Whywould they be involved with the bridge loan?" And I didn't know howto answer, I'll be honest with you. And then, secondly, there were acouple of articles in the newspaper shortly thereafter that indicatedthe conditions surrounding this loan were so much different from thebridge loans in the past. I would like comments on both of those.MR. TRUMAN. On the first point, there was some activity inadvance; and we, the Federal Reserve, have had a swap line with theBank of Mexico since 1967. In fact, over that 20-year period the Bankof Mexico frequently has turned to us for short-term bridges and swapdrawings, whatever you want to call them. The reasons for that swapline have something to do with the financial, political, and economicinteraction between our two countries.MS. SEGER. Well, I guess he thought the Treasury would beinvolved; I don't think he thought it was inappropriate for thecountry.MR. TRUMAN. No. Well, traditionally the swap network was aFederal Reserve operation. It is true that the Treasury has a swapline too, but in every case going back at least as long as I've beenhere these operations have been joint and/or the Federal Reserve hashas been in there alone in some smaller, less dramatic circumstances,We have increased the swap line to show support, to allow them toborrow over an election period, whatever it might be, to provide somedegree of financial support. On the second point, I think it'sparticularly difficult to generalize about bridge loans. At thebroadest level, this operation is not any different from any of theother ones that we've been involved in over the last six years. Wehave identified a means of repayment of our swap; and once that'sidentified, we are reasonably sure that we are going to get repaid.-19--20-The issue which I think is found in the press was more in thecontext of loans that Mexico may receive from the World Bank than afull-fledged IMF program. That issue really turns on a judgment as tohow serious Mexico's current economic problems are, which I wouldargue in turn depends on one's forecast for oil prices. If oil pricesgo down a lot, Mexico is going to have to take another strong dose ofadjustment to another terms-of-trade shock. And that necessarily isgoing to involve a full-fledged IMF program. If oil prices stay wherethey are or go up some from where they are, it's less clear that theywill need the kind of international financial support that isassociated with IMF programs, and they more appropriately can look tofurther longer-term, development-oriented financing that comes out ofWorld Bank loans. So, it's a question of how you see Mexico and itseconomic situation with regard to the extent to which the particularfinancing or bridging is oriented more toward the Fund or more towardthe World Bank.MS. SEGER. Thank you.MR. MORRIS. The term "bridge loan" has taken on connota-tions that it didn't use to have.MS. SEGER. Yes.MR. MORRIS. It seems to me it ought to be a term that weavoid because it now means in the financial press highly speculativeloans undertaken in connection with leveraged buyouts.MS. SEGER. Well, maybe this is what we're talking about!SPEAKER(?). It doesn't look too great, like the economycertainly--MR. MORRIS. Certainly not too great any more.SPEAKER(?). Real estate gets it, too.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I hope President Morris isn'tsuggesting that we buy Mexico.SPEAKER(?). We've bought it!MR. FORRESTAL. Ted, in the memorandum there's a discussionof capital movements. Has there been any change in that situation?Has there been more capital flight in the last few days?MR. TRUMAN. I think it probably has been less. Capitalflight is very difficult to identify even ex post, much less whileit's going on. As far as we can tell,some private sector entities in Mexicohave various kinds of arrangements by which as of certain dates theycan obtain dollars from the Bank of Mexico and they have the option todo so. And they have opted in the last couple of weeks, especiallylast week. to make use of those options. In a number of cases theyhave been using them either to go out and retire some of their owndebt at a discount, which you may want to call capital flight, or toinvest in something, or to buy Mexican public-sector internationaldebt which they are using themselves for their participation in some11/1/88of the privatization efforts that have been going on in associationwith this general effort. Those are part of the debt-equity swap--ifyou want to put it that way--mechanism. And as far as we can tell,most of the [official] sales of dollars over this period--the lastweek--seem to be associated with those kinds of operations rather thana sort of a run on the peso. The general financial market conditionshave been quite calm. That has been confirmed byand the Treasury attache.Nevertheless,MR. FORRESTAL. The other thing about Mexico, as I supposeeverybody is aware, is that there has been a series of advertisementsplaced in major newspapers by a committee, I forget what they callthemselves, which in effect forecasts civil disobedience, civildisorder in Mexico following, or at the time of, the inauguration ofthe new president on December 1st. I don't know how widespread thosehave been circulated, but I've had a lot of questions from peopleincluding my directors about that situation and its effect on thebridge loan and the repayment of the bridge loan and the World Bankloan. I don't know, Ted, whether this is giving pause for any concernin Mexico or not.MR. TRUMAN. Well, I've seen it.MR. FORRESTAL. It's essentially a pretty destabilizing kindof--.MR. TRUMAN. I think the answer is that one can't completelytell, and I'm not sure exactly how that would modify our behaviorunder that. You were speaking of the behavior of the U.S. governmentin general. The behavior under these circumstances--, all I can sayis that what I have read and picked up in the last month or sosuggests that (a) there was certainly a high level of uncertainty;clearly, that was one of the things, along with declining oil prices,contributing to the problems that they first approached us on. But(b) my sense is that the efforts to, or the probability attached to,sort of destabilization has lessened somewhat. Basically, I'm basingthat on an assessment that the [unintelligible] has said the immediatecandidate for president seems to be having difficulty organizing acoalition because essentially his opposition has combined a group onthe left and a group on the right against a [unintelligible] centertreaty faction. And despite his efforts and obvious popular appeal,the efforts can carry through the kinds of demonstrations that wereheld during the summer [and] immediately after that seemed to havedied down somewhat. That's not to say that I wouldn't expect someattempt to disrupt or show dissatisfaction at the time of theinauguration on the 1st of December. In fact, I would beflabbergasted if that did not happen, but I don't think anybody feelsthat this is life threatening, if I can put it that way, at thisstage.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.-21-11/1/88MR. HOSKINS. I have a longer-term concern with this arrange-ment other than just the current bridge loan, although I have someconcerns about that. The Fed has swap lines with what, the G-10, BIS,Switzerland, and Mexico.MR. TRUMAN. And Denmark.MR. HOSKINS. Denmark. Okay. Then, I would say thereprobably are two outliers in that group--Mexico being a clear one.The concern I have over time is that we're going in on these arrange-ments with an Administration--whether it's this one or the next onedown the road--that is, through Treasury. And it seems to me thatover time, given I think what the paper pointed out that Mexico needs$3 to $5 billion per year for the next several years, with the dryingup of private resources I think we could expect more of this kind ofactivity. The concern is that we would be subject to being viewed asperhaps circumventing Congress by working more closely withAdministrations down the road on this kind of activity. In thatsense, I don't think it's appropriate to continue those kinds ofrelationships because I think it risks the political independence ofthis body to some extent. That's my longer-term concern. As for theshorter ones, I'll wait until I see what you are going to put in yourtelegram.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mr. Truman?If not, let's move on to the Domestic Desk. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I think all those criteria for primary dealer-ships sound good except for two that Mr. Sternlight mentioned--thenumber limitation and the geographical. I assume that's just politi-cal reasoning on your part, but I can't see any other reason why youhave those. Maybe that's the right thing to do but that seems toinvite criticism from parties that are perfectly qualified except forthe fact that you've hit the number limit and the fact that they maybe concentrated in some geographical region. I'm not sure why you'dargue you are excluding by the limit basis.MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think it's a question of excludingany particular firms from a particular country that meet our criteria.I think the political concerns that arose probably sharpened oursensitivity to the issue, but I think speaking from my own view of itanyway I do have a concern at least about the rapidity of the growthin representation from some particular corners of the globe.MR. JOHNSON. But I'm saying if you can insure these othercriteria, which I think are good criteria, why would you use thoseother factors? If they are perfectly qualified by those criteria, whywould you impose these quotas?MR. STERNLIGHT. Just because I have a concern about therelatively aggressive pace of entry, and this is a way of slowing downthat relatively aggressive pace of entry from a particular foreignsector in my mind.-22-11/1/88VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me respond to that, Manley.MR. JOHNSON. Sure.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think, first of all, the twothings shouldn't be written together. To some extent, the flexiblelimit of 50 is a straight-forward business decision in terms of howmany people the Desk can with some efficiency do business with.There's simply no need from a straight-forward business point of viewfor a group even as large as 50. So, to some extent the 50, flexible50 if you will, is dictated on straight-forward business groundsrather than any other grounds.MR. JOHNSON. It seems like a way to do that would be just totighten your criteria further.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Now, the problem is that you willhave situations, I think, in which unless you had some notion of somekind of a cap where there is no conceivable set of criteria thatwouldn't end up looking overtly discriminatory toward somebody. Idon't see how you can get from here to there. And this point ongeographic concentration is not new. We have articulated that invarious [unintelligible] or another some time ago. And what we'rereally trying to say, at least what I'm trying to say, is that we havea situation right now where in round numbers 15 percent of the marketis in effect controlled by foreign firms. I have no problem withthat. In otherwords, I do think that there is a special point--I don't know where itis and I hope we never get to the point where we have to worryseriously about it--but I think there is a threshold point in themarket for U.S. government securities within which one would haveproblems in substanceAnd I think that all we're trying to do isto send a signal that says conditions could arise in which we mightwell conclude that enough is enough. As I just said, I don't thinkwe're anywhere near that, but having that principle established is Ithink a very cautious approach. But it's one that we should dobecause again I can't think of a series of criteria that could beadministered even-handedly that could in and of themselves guaranteethat that condition might not arise in the future.MR. HELLER. But your 1 percent market limit must limit it tosome extent, even to less than 50.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, that may have a very similar impact.MR. JOHNSON. That's what I was getting at.MR. HELLER. Do you have an idea where that--MR. STERNLIGHT. Right now we have 46 on the list including acouple that would be just on the edge of 1 percent. But they meet it,and over the past few years there has tended to be some giving ofground by firms that had the biggest share. Theoretically, you couldhave 99 firms doing 1 percent. It won't work that way, but it mightwork out that it would be very hard to get over 1 percent.-23-11/1/88MR. JOHNSON. But I'm saying that's the maximum number youcan have.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You still have to worry aboutacquisitions, though.MR. HELLER. Well, that's different.MR. BLACK. The last two firms would meet all these tests?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.SPEAKER(?). What's the biggest share?MR. STERNLIGHT. I guess about 8 or 9 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mr.Sternlight? If not, can I have a motion to ratify the transactionssince the September meeting?MR. KELLEY. So move.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Also, we need amotion to increase the Desk's intermeeting leeway as requested by Mr.Sternlight.SPEAKER(?). I'll move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We'll now move on tothe economic situation. Mr. Prell and Mr. Truman.MR. PRELL. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for either gentleman?MR. JOHNSON. I just have one question that bothers me alittle. Those were good explanations, but one basic thing bothers meabout the Greenbook forecast. I've mentioned it before. I'll referto it again. What bothers me is the fact that we put short-term ratesup about 1-1/2 percent--the federal funds rate. Yet long-rates arelower today than when we started that tightening move. The Greenbookassumes sort of a parallel shift in rates. And yet the economic datathat we've seen, even though I think close to the Greenbook forecast,are definitely slower than what I would have anticipated at this levelof interest rates, especially long rates. I'm having troubleaccounting for that. How would you reconcile that kind of situation--the fact that your interest rate forecast had one thing in it and yetthe economic performance has been even more modest than you may haveanticipated because you would have assumed the higher level of long-24-11/1/88rates and maybe even a higher level of short rates? I have a lot oftrouble reconciling this.MR. PRELL. We wouldn't have expected the lower long ratesthat we've had to have any significant influence on recent economicperformance. So, I wouldn't want to connect those things quite theway I think you were suggesting. It does appear to us that thedecline in long rates reflects some reduced concerns about how robustaggregate demand will be and thus what the future pressures will be incredit markets. Our assumption is that if things unfold as we aresuggesting they will, there will be an element of surprise for themarket. They will, therefore, tend to raise their expectationssomewhat about the future course of interest rates. And with suchexpectations, we will get somewhat parallel increases in long rates asshort rates move up. We have trimmed a small fraction off our long-rate increase over the coming year, in part expecting that the betterprice performance will be extrapolated to some degree. But basicallywe don't perceive that the real rate movements that have been impliedby the recent nominal rate behavior are going to be imposingsufficient restraint over the coming year to keep the economy in checkin the way that the markets may now be anticipating.MR. JOHNSON. I guess what you still haven't quite dealtwith--I'm trying to look backwards at where we've come. I agree thatall those things could happen going forward; that's just prospective;it's something we don't know about. But looking backwards we haven'thad a move upward; as a matter of fact we've had a slight move down-ward in long rates at the same time the funds rate moved up. You saythat the long-rate effect may involve a longer lag than I'm givingcredit for, but what's going to be the effect of that?MR. PRELL. Well, we don't expect housing to be as weak overthe next quarter as we previously thought it would be. But that'sgoing to be the most visible effect.MR. JOHNSON. Now, you're getting into something. I thinkyou're saying that because the yield curve has flattened out and longrates haven't gone up that that's going to have a longer stimulus witha lag?MR. PRELL. We think it will in the housing area and nominalrates may have some greater role there than they might in some otherareas as opposed to real rates alone. That's a possibility.MR. JOHNSON. So you're saying real rates have actuallyfallen on the long end?MR. PRELL. Well, I think it's debatable what's happened toreal rates. We don't think real rates have changed a great dealbasically, even over a lengthier period of time than the last fewmonths. We don't see that there has been a tremendous movement inreal rates.MR. JOHNSON. So you'd have to agree though that if that'sthe case, there has been some decline in inflationary expectations.MR. PRELL. Indeed.-25--26-MR. JOHNSON. And you're just saying it's temporary and illconceived?MR. PRELL. No, not necessarily. What the norm is in themarket here is hard to assess, but I guess we may be a bit lessoptimistic about what would happen with inflation if we maintainedcurrent levels of resource utilization in some markets. There is alsoa considerable view in the market that we're going to have a recessionin 1989-1990, that we will see rates coming down significantly. Manyof those people don't anticipate that it will occur with a furtherrate increase but just somehow will happen spontaneously. Othersthink that small temporary further rate increases will trigger this.Our view is that there is more underlying strength in the economy andthat a small, further increase in rates would not have the effect oftipping the economy into recession. It's a very difficult process offiguring out what various segments of the market population arethinking, and what they're thinking we will do, which is anotherelement that affects the term structure. If we devote more attentionto the term structure and if that's our policy-making [tool], thiswould go back to the Lucas critique. It changes the structure ofexpectations formation of the markets to mean that the term structurehas different implications in terms of reflecting market expectationsof the economy than it did previously. So, we're in a very difficultexpectations assessment.MR. JOHNSON. I agree that all those expectations are quite[unintelligible], but we've had almost a year in which those longrates have had a chance to wash out or adjust expectations and theyreally have held.MR. PRELL. But if you look at a very long period though, youwould see that long rates are [quite close to] cyclical lows, [while]short rates have moved up relative to their cyclical lows. I thinkthere is this recent phenomenon which probably has been exacerbated--maybe more in my view than in Peter's and Don's--by questions aboutTreasury bond authority and the flight to quality from the recent LBOdevelopments that may have proved somewhat more depressing for theTreasury bond rates than otherwise would have been the case.MR. JOHNSON. That may have occurred earlier; I don't knowabout now. The tax bill is passed. I think that's [not affecting thelong] end of the yield curve now. Anyway, I don't want to address toomuch of this. It's just that we've had this event over the last yearand clearly it either has to be a decline in inflationary expectationsor a decline in the real rate of interest. And since we don't thinkit's the decline in the real rate since we've been tighter, then ithas to be a change in inflationary expectations. I know that can allchange going forward, but at least I think you have to say at thispoint that's what the market thinks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier I thinkthe inflation projections look much too optimistic. I would use themas a best case projection. There are a lot of very optimisticassumptions embodied in the projections. One is what will happen tounit labor costs--because it has been in a rising trend since themiddle of 1987. The projection assumes that they will level out at 411/1/88percent throughout 1989. I would think this would certainly be thebest case projection. I can't imagine anyone coming up with a lowernumber. I would say that more probably we will continue to see somecontinued rise in unit labor costs.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is that productivity or compensation?MR. MORRIS. Compensation.MR. JOHNSON. You don't mean unit labor costs, you mean--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. He means unit labor costs.MR. MORRIS. I mean labor costs.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. 4 percent all through compensation?MR. MORRIS. That's what the projection shows through 1989and leveling off around 4 percent unit labor costs.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. With productivity up .8?MR. MORRIS. Yes. And I hope that's the outcome, but I thinkin the seventh year of an expansion with very tight labor markets andgrowing tighter that could well be off on the low side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think you have to explain why thetightened labor markets to date haven't had any really measurableeffect on the acceleration of wage patterns. That third-quarterunemployment cost index was something of a surprise, a deviation fromhistoric experience. How do you explain that?MR. MORRIS. I really don't know. I think we've been blessedin this situation with the remarkable behavior in wages. I think youcan attribute some of it to the decline in organized labor, some toconcern about being competitive with foreigners which we didn't havein the 1970s. But I'm not confident that it's going to continue.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is supposed to be questions fromyou to our colleagues. I don't know why I'm asking you, Frank.MR. MORRIS. No, it's all right. I would like to think thatit will level out at 4 percent. But I think that the odds are thatit's going to start to get higher. I think we're more vulnerable nextyear since I believe that the dollar has started another leg down.The value of the dollar is likely to average significantly lower nextyear than this year, and therefore import prices are likely to risemore in 1989 than they did in 1988. And the third thing is that theyare projecting lower oil prices and they may well be right. Iwouldn't know how to forecast oil prices, but I think there is apossibility they may not be as low as they are talking about.MR. PRELL. President Morris, can I just clarify? We're notprojecting lower oil prices but we are no longer projecting an updriftin oil prices. We're essentially saying they aren't going anywherefrom the current level.-27-11/1/88MR. MORRIS. Okay. The fact, nevertheless, is it reflectsback from the projection for greater growth.MR. PRELL. Relative to greater--MR. MORRIS. And you're also forecasting, I take it, a normalagricultural year which again I hope turns out to be the case. But ifwe have a second bad crop year, then I think we can see some very bigincrease [in food prices]. I'd prefer to [be optimistic] on this buttwo [poor crop] years back to back could mean very big food priceincreases. Now, that's more reason why I look upon this as the bestcase projection because everything has to go right to keep theinflation rate down in the range that we're talking about. I haven'tbeen accustomed to everything turning out right that often. So, itseems to me it's important if we're thinking about monetary policy fornext year to hope that we get this result but have in the back of ourminds that maybe the "best case" projection is not going to be the onethat's realized.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I suggest we stay with questions sowe can break after the questions and come back for general commentsafter that? President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mike, the level of nonfarm business investment ininventories has been averaging about $31, $32 billion for the last twoquarters. You've got quite a pickup in the fourth quarter--that meansa source of strength in the fourth quarter--and then it remains atthat high level throughout most of 1989. The level at around $40billion is just a little bit high traditionally. You commented thatyou thought inventories were lean. Could you talk about that a littlebit because clearly it could be a source of weakness if it doesn'tcontain those.MR. PRELL. Well, we do have a pickup in the fourth quarterwhich is largely the expectation that automobile stocks will increasesomewhat with these higher assemblies. Looking ahead, we're expectingto see some moderate accumulation in manufacturing and whereinventories still look to be on hold very little. We would expect tosee some significant accumulation, not very large though, in the tradesector. This, given the scale of the economy now, is not atremendously high rate of inventory accumulation and it doesn't reallyresult in any substantial change in inventory-sales relationships. Sowe think this is easily consistent with the kind of overall growth andfinal demand we have, so long as it's perceived to be in anenvironment of sustained growth and businessmen don't begin to get ascomforted by it. So certainly there's always a risk on the inventoryside from our current assessment where some bumping could go on, butit doesn't look like a very aggressive forecast and there are quite afew forecasts out there that would be higher and others that would beabout $20 to $22 billion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Just two quick questions. On the assumptionabout where we'll have to put interest rates over next year, you saidplus one percent on fed funds between now and the end of next year, isthat right?-28-11/1/88MR. PRELL. Early next year. Yes.MS. SEGER. Okay, how about the long rate?MR. PRELL. We have them going up about the same amount.MS. SEGER. Also the same, whether it's long governments ormortgages?MR. PRELL. The events of recent days have pushed theTreasury bond rate to its current low, but if that rate isrepresentative of the lower constellation of all rates or what'shappened to other dealers on that track--and that I guess is whatGovernor Johnson was referring to--we have an essentially parallelmovement of the rates.MS. SEGER. Run this by me again. I think I asked thisquestion last time; I'm getting more dense by the minute. What arethe underlying demand forces now that we're really trying to dampen,knock in the head?MR. PRELL. Well, we still think that business fixedinvestment, has a certain head of steam--not quite as [much] asearlier this year but still providing some forward thrust. On theassumption that we will continue to see a softer dollar than we'veseen earlier this year, we see some stimulus to domestic productionfrom the trade side. A basic point that I was trying to make was thatthere's no reason for an economy to gravitate to rates below normal inessence unless something is there to restrain it. And while we seefiscal policy as mildly restrictive, it is not a big powerful force asyou look out at the year ahead. We don't see the inventory situationas being one that suggests there is going to be a retrenchment inorders and production imminently. And so in this kind of environment,unless we assume that there was still some monetary restraint at workgoing out over the next few quarters to further damp things down, thetendency would be for the economy to tend to grow at or abovepotential. And in this projection, if you want to turn the inflationtrend back down again, you need to tip below that for a while and openup a little more slack in the economy. All of that is conditioned onsome assessment of what this level of resource utilization means forinflation pressures. Basically, a crude reading of the experienceover the past year would be that as capacity utilization rates haverisen to their recent range and unemployment dropped below 6 andtoward 5-1/2 percent, there was a general acceleration in wages andprices. Basically, we're saying you've got to try to reverse that ifyou really do want by 1990 to be moving back down on the basicinflation rate trend.MS. SEGER. I guess I just have a slightly different view oflife in the streets. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mike, would you go back and reread that sentencewhere you said something to the effect that we've stretched out theacceleration of inflation. It's back close to the very beginning.You think we've stretched out the period of acceleration of inflation.11/1/88MR. PRELL. No, I talked about interest rates and I said--MR. ANGELL. No, no, I'm talking about stretched out--MR. PRELL. I don't remember such a sentence. But we have asomewhat lower rate of inflation in the near term overall because ofthe change in energy prices.MR. ANGELL. Well, that's why I didn't understand why youwould have said [what you did] when the Greenbook clearly shows--wouldyou read it please?MR. PRELL. I'm sorry, would you repeat it, please?MR. ANGELL. Did you find it, Ted?MR. PRELL. Well, I have a sentence here that says becauseenergy prices will be damping inflation in the short run, we built amore gradual interest rate increase into our current forecast.MR. ANGELL. No, you were talking about price increases.I'll go back and read through it.MR. PRELL. You're welcome to. I'm not--MR. ANGELL. Do you agree that you said that you stretchedout the rate of inflation in your forecast?MR. PRELL. I didn't say that, but the fact is that ourinflation rate is lower than it was previously.MR. ANGELL. Yes, that's what I saw in the Greenbook andthat's why you have the rate of inflation going down in the Greenbook.In 1989 the fixed weight inflation index was down to 4.2 from 4.5percent in 1988, which is lower by 3/10ths of a percentage point. Andthe CPI fourth quarter over fourth quarter is 4.3 percent in 1989versus 4.4 percent in 1988, and that's why I was surprised to hear yousay that you've stretched out the acceleration of inflation.MR. PRELL. I'm surprised, too. Certainly, the fact is thatbecause of the energy price change we have a lower rate of inflationin this forecast than we did previously. What I suggested was if youstripped away that energy price effect, which presumably will belargely transitory [though] it could develop some momentum as it feedsthrough, but if it does it would serve to lower wages and so on. Butif you look excluding energy, prices rise more rapidly next year thanthis year. And so in that sense, and looking at the compensationnumbers as was noted earlier, there is a sense of a slight upwardtrend going through 1989 with a slight tightening and the economygrowing at a slower pace.MR. ANGELL. Even though your numbers show inflation goingdown, you said it's going up, that's all.SPEAKER(?). What about 1990?MR. PRELL. It changes and there's two rarts of the sentence.-30-11/1/88SPEAKER(?). Maybe you can help solve the problem by tellingus what 1990 looks like; that way he'll have a trend.MR. PRELL. Well, for 1990 one needs to make some policyconjectures and so on. We will present 1990 next time and basicallywe would at this point expect to show a forecast with rather slowgrowth in 1990, possibly some slight further edging up inunemployment. [unintelligible] utilization, and some indication of adownward movement in excluding energy prices and compensation. So,we're looking toward 1990 really in our thinking here about theinterest rate path at this point of projecting.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Truman, the oil projection is a veryimportant part of this whole forecast and I heard you as you weregoing through your conjectures about OPEC talking about I think threedifferent levels of projections and prices. Could you replay that forme just so I'm sure I understand what you said.MR. TRUMAN. Yes. First, let me say this is an area where wefeel so nervous we call it an assumption and try to have somerationale behind the assumption. The assumption that they'll stayaround the current level or maybe rebound after [the OPEC meeting to]$13 a barrel is based upon an assumption that they will be able torestrain production of crude petroleum to slightly under 20 millionbarrels per day.MR. LAWARE. From the 21 million?MR. TRUMAN. From the current 21 million plus that they're atnow. If indeed they fail to do that, and say they were at or above 21plus, then you could have a drop in oil prices down below $10 abarrel, roughly that order of magnitude.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can we get started? Who would like toopen up on Committee discussion?MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think there is an element of Santa Clausin the outlook, but I don't think that's something that we ought tosnicker at. Some of it is luck, but some of it is our own doing. Wedid anticipate an economy that was overheating. We took a series ofgradual steps over a period of months. And I think that we ought notto be all that unhappy that it's bringing forth the results that weset out to achieve. So, while I think we have to be watchful andmaybe a little skeptical, I don't think that just because something isfalling our way that we ought to say that it isn't a realisticoutlook. I'm reasonably pleased with the outlook. My own sense isthat the risks are still on the side of inflation, but I think thatthere's nothing in the immediate scene that would require us to takeany significant action. So I'm prepared to say hello to Santa Claus alittle early.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, growth in the Twelfth District hasslowed somewhat but we think the outlook is rather optimistic. Theslowing really appears to reflect the tightening of labor markets and-31-11/1/88the lack of unused resources rather than just weakness in demand. Tooffset these impediments to expansion, we're beginning to see thatsome employment growth is shifting through areas of the District whichhave characteristically been weaker. For example, Boeing is openingup a plant in Spokane in eastern Washington where there is a lot oflabor available, and it has been traditionally weak. We've seen, forexample, that Carnation is going to open its largest production plantin Bakersfield. As you know, Bakersfield is about 110 miles north ofL.A. and costs are quite a bit lower there. So, that does seem to begoing on a bit. As far as durable goods manufacturing is concerned,it remains strong because of the dominance of aircraft and electronicsindustries. And you perhaps saw the article today in the paper aboutBoeing indicating the strength of their sales and profits. We arealso seeing the shortages that have been characteristic of the woodproducts and paper industries fading a bit. This probably is a resultof the fact that housing has weakened a bit, at least new housing.And the generally slower pace of the economy may be having some impacton packaging. Prospects for agriculture in the District--and I'lljust underline the point that it is the single largest industry in theDistrict--prospects there depend very importantly on rainfall thiswinter. We have had two years of drought, but it really hasn'taffected agriculture. Most of our agriculture in the District,especially in California, depends on irrigation; but if we have athird straight year of drought this winter it would cause problems.Also in 1988 the District continued to excel in the production ofchampionship professional sports teams!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think you've got a surplus withinventory adjustment!MR. PARRY. With regard to the national economy, I wouldagree that [some} slowing of economic growth may be underway. Afterwe abstract from the effects of the drought, our forecast is thatgrowth will average about 2 percent next year with the slowing ingrowth centered in the areas that have been mentioned in the Greenbookforecast: net exports, business spending on plant and equipment, andconsumer spending on durables. And although inflation certainly couldbe less next year, I think the underlying rate of inflation probablywill not improve. And it seems to me, therefore, that furthertightening action may be required sometime in 1989.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, our outlook is broadly, in the nationalcontext, very consistent with the Board's forecast; certainly in anumerical sense that would be true, but it is perhaps a little bitdifferent in tone. From many indicators certainly, it would appearthat we are experiencing some moderation in the growth rate, albeitfrom very high levels. I think really the major question is whetheror not this moderation is and will continue to flow through to prices.And on this front there are just a couple of what I would view assigns, and therefore the second part of the question would be do weneed to take additional steps at this point to accelerate the process.We'll talk about that later.With regard to the District and consistent with the overalleconomy, manufacturing activity in our District as we measure it doesseem to be moderating. On the price front, contacts within the-32-11/1/88District and certainly our directors suggest that there is adiscernible leveling in price trends with regard to certain rawmaterials and commodities. The paper industry for example where therehave been very significant increases in pulp prices, weight paper, and[unintelligible] prices seem to be hitting a peak. Indeed,expects to see something of a decline in those prices overthe next five or six months. Aluminum prices are down; even steel isshowing some signs of leveling. And there are many products that havebeen in very short supply where the backlogs have been filling up withthese distinct signs of easing.A comment about housing: We would expect 1989 to be notunlike 1988 with regard to housing starts, say 1.4 or 1.45 million.But in the past, production and housing starts have been attributableto interest rates. who are very close to thisindustry, are suggesting that in fact we may be getting into anenvironment of some market saturation and that if new home sales don'tcontinue at a fairly high level, we could see a buildup of inventoryof unsold homes. If this is true, if we're getting into some marketsaturation with regard to housing, I've always had a question on theauto side of how far we can continue with these very big auto years.And then we could also get some market saturation in that sector.Finally, a comment on the agricultural sector: I hate tomention it, but I'm going to say just one thing about aflatoxin, whichis an issue that has been very badly we think blown out of proportion;it's really not as big an issue as you might expect from reading thepress. But the FDA's standards of aflatoxin were really very, verytight. It's one of these issues where you have to eat a ton of cornflakes forever before you get into trouble. Those standards have beenreduced a bit, but when this first hit the exchanges corn prices tooka big dive; and beans, in sympathy, also went down. They've come backand I think the markets are looking through this as kind of a non-issue. From a [statistically] measurable perspective, we would expectthat the aflatoxin effect would have stopped, but admittedly [theprice of corn] is down because the drought would only have an effectof, say, 5 to 10 percent. Given this year's drought, the earlyanticipation is that the next year's planting will be very heavy. Andof course we're a million miles away from that event. But theexpectation is that the acreage will be up by about 35 million acres,some 12 to 14 percent. And if we get some reasonable growing season[weather], production could be pretty heavy. Meanwhile, land valuesare continuing to increase--3 percent in this most recent quarter and4 percent over the year. So, I must say net at least in our District,the agricultural sector has come through much better than one mighthave expected given the kind of circumstances that we were dealingwith.I think from a national perspective as well as from theDistrict's, things are in pretty good balance. And I would agree thatno doubt some of the moderation that we are experiencing is areflection of the monetary policy actions that we've taken so far.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to theDistrict not very much has changed since the last meeting and so Iwon't spend very much time on that. I will observe that the Sixth-33-11/1/88District economic activity continues somewhat sluggish on average, andthis reflects in part at least the softening seen in the nationaleconomy. Weaknesses are basically in apparel, which has weakenedsomewhat since out last meeting. That's also having an effect ontextile output as you would expect. Retail sales are fairly sluggishthroughout the District with some exceptions in some of the largermetropolitan areas. But the retailers are expecting some pickup andtheir strategy seems to be to have pretty heavy discounts andpromotions at the holiday season. Housing is also soft. All of theseweaknesses are leading to some uptick in the unemployment rategenerally around the District. We're getting fairly good strength inautomobile sales where inventories have been very low. I spoke to aChevrolet dealer yesterday, and he said that as of the middle ofSeptember he had no 1988 cars at all, absolutely none. And he'slooking for a good 1989. The service sector continues to be strong inthe Sixth District, and agriculture in spite of the drought has pickedup and the prospects for farm income have improved considerablybecause we've had some late rain which has brought yields on severalcrops to above average levels. And these prices, of course, arehelping farmers.Two other things that I would mention: In going around theDistrict and talking to business people, bankers, and our directors,we see very little evidence of price increases. There are some priceincreases coming for raw materials, but apparently many industries arenot able--at this point at least in our District--to pass thesethrough. We keep asking about wage pressures and, in spite of somelabor shortages, we don't see very much in the way of evidence ofincreased wages either in the services sector or in organizedindustries.On the national economy, our forecast is a bit stronger thanthe one shown in the Greenbook. I think this is partly because wehave not assumed that further restraint is put in place in 1989, asthe Greenbook obviously has. As a result of that, we also see higherinflation, and I would tend to agree with Frank Morris that the[Greenbook] inflation forecast is probably the best that one couldcome up with. On the real economy side, we think consumerexpenditures are going to be somewhat stronger. We also think thatthe improvement in net exports is going to be somewhat smaller thanthe Board staff is forecasting. Now, I think that Mike Prell put hisfinger on something that has been very apparent to me over the pastseveral months and that is there seems to be a psychological mindseton the part of many people that 5 percent inflation is an acceptablelevel for prices. I think associated with that is the feeling that isperhaps growing that the Federal Reserve in fact is satisfied andcontent with that level of inflation. Now, I have a concern certainlyabout that, but I have a further concern that this LBO activity thatwe've seen recently--and all of us I suppose are concerned about thisgreater leverage throughout the economy--I hope is not being driven byassumptions that inflation will ease this debt burden in the future.There have been people saying to me that they think theFederal Reserve is going to have a very inflexible kind of policybecause we can't afford to allow a recession to appear in the economy.We've had the thrift industry problem; we've had the LDC problem; thedeficit problem; and now we overlay this LBO situation. And I thinkthere is a feeling in the market that maybe the Fed's hands are tied-34-11/1/88and we have to maintain an inflation rate to keep [the economy] frommoving into a recession. I hope that that's not true and I hope thatsomehow we can get the message across that we are not content to allowinflation to remain at its present level. We'll get into the monetaryprescription in just a moment. I'm not arguing for a tightening ofpolicy now, but I think in some ways we need to construct, however wecan, the mechanism to get the word out that we are not going to be inthe business of perpetuating inflation for the LBOs or other reasons.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. With regard to the national economy and theGreenbook forecast and the [unintelligible] that are underlying that,it seems to me that the risk of falling considerably short of what'sin the Greenbook is low. And I think Mike Prell outlined a number ofpoints with which I agree that account for that. Orders backlogsremain substantial; inventories remain relatively low. I do thinkthere will be further improvement over time in the trade situation.And I would add to that that I don't know how much fiscal restraint isassumed in the Greenbook, but I must say I'm a little concerned aboutthe course of fiscal policy and the [impact of] Gramm-Rudman and soforth as we go forward. So, as I look at that particular forecast Idon't see a lot of conditional downside risk aside from thepossibility of some exogenous shock. I don't know if the economy isgoing to do a lot better than that; I'm not saying that, but I don'tsee that there's a lot of risk in it. I think that kind of forecastas several people have commented is welcome, in part because I thinkwe are in for a period of rather modest growth in the labor forcebecause of demographics and other factors. We probably shouldn't gettoo enthusiastic about what we might do on the productivity side, andso I think that does limit things from the production or supply sideof the equation.As far as the District economy is concerned in thisenvironment, the District economy continues to perform very well.There are a few pockets where the drought has had a significant andadverse effect on agriculture. But as I've commented before, in thelarge diversified metropolitan areas, the District economy has beenquite strong for some time. And one thing that's now very, very clearas far as much of the rest of the rural part of the District isconcerned, is that the paper and forest products industry and themining industry are sufficiently large and are expanding sufficientlystrongly that they are taking the rest of the rural economy up withthem. And so in this District at least a substantial economicexpansion is continuing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. In the Eleventh District, Mr. Chairman, thingsare pretty much as they were in September. We are continuing to seesome modest growth. Manufacturing is leading the improvement that wehave. The unemployment rates in our three states have been movingdownward but only Texas is making any progress compared to thenational rate in closing the gap. In Texas we've got unemployment of6.8 percent; in New Mexico it's 8-1/2 percent; in Louisiana it's 10percent. The lower oil prices are a real source of concern and couldundermine the modest recovery that we've been experiencing. I thinkfurther declines would probably cause us to look for zero growth in11/1/881989 compared with the 1-1/2 percent or so rate of growth that we'vebeen forecasting over the last several months. Other sources ofconcern for us include a noticeable slowdown of orders in theelectronics industry. And there continue to be a few pockets on theforeign side and [some] that tend to be drought-related. Of course,we continue to worry about and try to deal with the financial situa-tion in our District, both on the thrift side and the banking side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. In our District, I've been reporting the lastcouple of times on a relative gap in employment growth vis-a-vis thenational averages which has been somewhat surprising because ourDistrict is tracking [the national economy] pretty well. In fact, inthe second quarter we had the largest gap ever in the 30 years thatthis number has been looked at. That trend seems to be perhapsreversing itself now, and we did have modest manufacturing employmentgrowth and relatively flat nonag employment in the recent period. Inmanufacturing, the areas where growth was noted are electricalequipment, nonelectric machinery, and chemicals. In any case, inlooking at this peculiar behavior, because as Bob Forrestal has beenreporting and I have as well our activity really doesn't seem to be asstrong as the national averages, we tried to figure out what was goingon and some of it may be explained by a greater concentration inmanufacturing in the District than nationally and services have beengrowing more rapidly nationally. And secondly, there may be someseasonal adjustment problems. But basically we haven't been able toexplain or understand this fully.Reflecting some of the comments that others have made, theagricultural picture is a lot rosier than might have been anticipatedat one time. Corn crops came in better than expected; soybeans werehigher than last year; the cotton crop was a 25-year record; the ricecrop was good; the tobacco crop was the best in 4 years, so I'd saythat generally the picture there is pretty rosy in the District.Finally, in terms of credit demand bank lending has been relativelysluggish although we've noted a pickup in the third quarter. Growthin commercial lending both in the most recent three-month period andover the year as a whole has been about 11 percent, and that's quite ashift on the commercial lending side over the last year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to thenational economy we would agree with the Greenbook on growth in 1988.For 1989 we project a bit slower growth than the Greenbook, and that'swithout the assumption that interest rates would rise in 1989. Iguess you could conclude, therefore, that we are [projecting] morethan just modestly slower growth than the Greenbook. Nonetheless,it's so close that it has no real relevance for this purpose.With regard to the District economy, in the agriculturalsector as already has been noted the picture is very bright; it hasalmost turned upside down from what we were looking at earlier in theyear. The net farm income for the nation, for example, will be asgreat as it was last year and last year was a record. Having saidthat, there are some pockets within the District where the drought hashad a substantial impact, particularly northern Missouri, northeastern-36-11/1/88Kansas, and on up into Si's area. On the other hand, agriculturalfarmland sales have picked up rather dramatically because of theliquidity that seems to be in that area. And prices have begun toaccelerate in those sales. With regard to the manufacturing sector,it's roughly flat. Retail sales are flat. It's interesting that wealso have found little evidence of price increases showing up in theDistrict. However, without exception when you talk with businesspeople in the District, inflation is still on their minds. There's aninteresting activity going on in the energy sector because of the dropin the [price of] oil. OPEC oil prices have created the uncertaintythat quite likely will almost close down the new exploration activitywithin our District. It's a fairly sizable part of the economy andlargely will affect Oklahoma, Colorado, and Wyoming. Those are theareas that were depressed earlier because of agriculture and energyand it won't help their outlook.There is no new information with respect to commercialconstruction which is a problem in Denver, Oklahoma City, and Tulsa.It's going to take a long time to work its way out. Overall, I thinkthe Tenth District will continue to trail the national recovery.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I read the Beigebook this time with greatinterest and all the comments about signs of slowing business. Icertainly agree with that. I also think it will slow next year evenwithout additional tightening. I have been checking a great deal withall kinds of firms that actually deal with consumers, and the story isconsistent that consumers need tremendous inducements to buy, a lot ofcoaxing; competition is fierce all over. Also, if you look at theinventories expressed as inventories-to-sales ratios and do it inconstant dollar terms--I'm thinking of the chart that I get fromGoldman-Sachs all the time--it shows inventories are not in quite suchgood shape as I think we're assuming they are. Also, if the salespart of the ratio weakens much, then what look like acceptable ratioscan quickly become a touch high. Also, with regard to businessspending .on equipment, I'm again hearing more and more decision makerscomment on the uncertainties they have over future tax policy as wehear more and more talk about fixing the deficit and I think that thatin and of itself is going to put a damper on this kind of activity.Also, questions [they have] about sales prospects in their ownbusinesses I think will tend to support that sluggishness. On thehousing side, I agree that sales of existing homes have been strong,but I also know that many realtors have been out beating the bushestelling their customers to buy now because home prices are going torise and buy now because mortgage rates are going up. And I thinkthat there's some of that in these good results for the last three orfour months.Also, I'd just like to take a minute to report on aninteresting meeting I had yesterday with some Fortune 500 kinds ofbusiness people. They had an interesting main topic of conversation,because they chose the subject of corporate takeovers. That was theirbig interest, and I guess I shouldn't be surprised that one of theinteresting things that came up was the notion that there are almostcon-man types who are out running around and will actually go andapproach management at very big companies and tell them if they go forone of these deals we will guarantee you so many millions of dollars,-37-11/1/88etc. And so these people are actually trying to play, I guess I'dalmost call it matchmaker, before there is any action of another typetaking place. But there is great concern and the more thoughtful onesI believe were also talking about these two recent heavily publicizeddeals and saying that, sure, the debt can probably be serviced butthat would mean that the cash that they thought they were going tohave for R&D expenditures, privatization, etc., would be drained offfrom those good projects and would have to be used for debt service.I think they were quite concerned about that. The second big topic ofconversation was this new National Economic Commission and they werevery eager I'd say for that group to get its deliberations done andannounce the results on December 15th. And I think their expectationis very high, in fact so high that afterwards a fellow who works forand has been attending these NEC meetings with him came up tome and said "I just want to warn you, don't be too optimistic becausefirst of all they're not going to have the report by December 15th;secondly, there's no guarantee they'll even agree among themselves onhow to do it." And, therefore, he thought that there might be somedisappointment with the results. And then finally, some of them didexpress some concern about the outlook for next year and whether ornot the economy would make it through a seventh year of recovery. Butoverall it was very, very illuminating.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Given the national slowdown that we've beenhearing about and also the third-quarter numbers, we tortured theanecdotal data as best we could and failed to confirm any reasonableslowing in the District. The best we could find was a steel companythat had gone off allocations to customers. In other words, it wasback to price and bargaining at that time.MS. SEGER. Did you talk to your retailers?MR. HOSKINS. Pardon me?MS. SEGER. Did you talk to your retailers?MR. HOSKINS. Yes, I'm on manufacturing right now.MS. SEGER. Oh, okay.MR. HOSKINS. I'll go to retail.MS. SEGER. Okay.MR. HOSKINS. Steel production in the State of Ohio is upabout 9 percent in the last three months over a year ago.Manufacturers are optimistic. In terms of new orders they're stillreally quite strong. Again, the District may not be typical of thenation as a whole. Inventories are relatively low and the orders arestrong. In terms of hiring plans, there has been a survey that wascompleted recently within the District. We have 19 out of 25 of thelarger cities where we expect increases in employment. Four citiesthat are strongest are the four largest, Cincinnati, Columbus,Pittsburgh, and Cleveland. Retail sales [are up] probably about 5percent over a year ago, but inflation in the 3 to 4 or 5 percentrange leaves a very small real gain. But that's not much different-38-11/1/88from the way it has been the whole time. So, really not much haschanged in the District from what I've been reporting in the past eventhough we increased our efforts to try to ferret it out where we mightbe anticipating a slowdown.In terms of the national economy the only thing we might haveto add is that we do have a panel of Fourth-District economists thatmeets quarterly. Their only disagreement with the Board forecastwould be on the implicit price deflator. They are about 4 percenthigher than the Greenbook for 1989. But again these are primarilymanufacturing-based people who are looking at fairly optimistic salesprojections.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I think I see an outlook that's every bit asstrong as the staff would see it. I don't have the slightest ideawhat interest rates might prevail over the period ahead, but it doesseem to me that the economy shows a lot of resilience and a lot ofsigns of continued increase. And it doesn't show any signs that therecent slowdown in money growth is being translated into anythingwhich would be an expansion-ending event. It seems to me that oureconomy has changed rather dramatically in the '80s from the '70s,that we are in a much more flexible wage-price arena than we had beenin before. Otherwise, it just wouldn't be true that we could have thekind of exchange rate adjustments of the dollar that we had and thekind of monetary growth paths that we had in 1985 and 1986 without itshowing through into much higher rates of inflation than the year-over-year 4.1 percent that I think we're now seeing in CPI. And itseems to me that that shows us that the environment has changedglobally and that that has tremendous impact domestically.But we've had a lot of industries that have suffered rathersevere shakeouts. And people's memory gets to be long and so we havemore attention in industrial America and in rural farm Americaconcentrating on cost efficiencies than we did before. And now giventhe present level of commodity prices, the present level of finishedgoods producer prices, crude industrial prices--those prices, it seemsto me with this emphasis upon cost efficiency, provide ample profitmargins to give us the kind of capital investment and the kind ofcontinued expansion that I think we find is desirable for the economy.Now, even though some commodity prices may have shown some response tothe slower money growth, we haven't been having commodity prices thatjust do not show that. And it seems to me that the back hasn't beenbroken in terms of this price cycle so that we can suggest thecommodity price deflation such as began in 1984 and 1985 would reachthe proportions that it did in, say, 1986.Now, I would agree that the one exception to that is oil, butthere again in percentage terms we're not looking at the same kind ofreductions they were looking at in that period. And I would agreewith Roger that the areas of U.S. oil industry that have suchdifficulty finding oil resources, and where the output of oil is solow, are indeed going to experience some dramatic curtailment. But Ibelieve that will be more than offset by the [expansion] under way inagriculture. Just the release of all these acres from the acreagecontrol [program] means demand for more machinery; it means demand formore fuel; it means demand for more fertilizer. So, we already have-39-11/1/88under way a large acreage expansion of the agricultural industry whichI think probably by itself offsets what's happening in oil. Now, itjust seems to me that a foreign exchange movement of the dollar[associated with] decided weaknesses would undoubtedly cause commodityprices to at least remain at these very, very high levels if not toaccelerate. And so it seems to me that the economy does have amplestrength.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In terms of the national economy,our guesstimate for the next five quarters really is not materiallydifferent from the outlook contained in the Greenbook, although thereare some differences in individual sectors. The big difference thatwe continue to have is on the inflation side in that by the end of1989 our inflation forecast is about 1-1/4 points higher than theGreenbook forecast. Now, analytically there are two factors thataccount for that. One is that we have a higher oil price--we have aneffective oil price of $15 whereas I think Mike has $13 for the yearas a whole. And that's about 4/10ths of a percent in our arithmetic;I don't know what it would be in yours. But the big, big differenceis in the fact that we have the unemployment rate drifting down andyou've got it drifting up. From where we are, in terms of labormarkets, the difference in the algebraic sign makes quite adifference. Indeed, if you look through the numbers, by the end ofnext year with essentially the same productivity numbers we end upwith compensation rates and inflation rates that are in underlyingterms 8 to 9/10ths of a percent faster than what is in the Greenbook.I don't know what to make of that. Our year-end unemployment rate is5.1 percent; the [Greenbook] staff's is 5.6 percent. One would liketo think that a half point couldn't make that much difference, but Ithink it's quite conceivable that it could. Indeed, I think I couldeven make a case that it could be worse than that.In terms of the question you raised earlier, Mr. Chairman,about why hasn't more shown through on the wage side given where weare right now, we were looking at some numbers that really fascinatedme yesterday. I'm sure, Mike, that you look at these: I've just neverseen them before. But the breakdown it shows for the collectivebargaining agreements was--for example, in 1988 if I remember thesenumbers correctly--that for still 40 percent of individuals covered byagreements reached in 1988, the agreement provided for some kind of alump sum payment in lieu of, or partially in lieu of, a wage increase.And even more astonishingly, 20 percent of the population in 1988still had no wage increase, but a wage reduction. In both cases--ifmy memory is correct on the numbers, but I think it's close enough--those numbers of 40 percent and 20 percent respectively are downsignificantly from where they were in 1984, 1985, and 1986. But Ifound it surprising they were still as large as they are. And I thinkthat in a symbolic way that is part of the answer to your question asto why we don't see more pressure than we've already seen on the wageside. Now, how much further that kind of thing could work in oursystem, I don't know. I personally think that the point Frank Morrismade about foreign competition is a very big part of it. And maybewe'll get lucky in 1989 as well. But I would agree with Frank thatany way I would cut it that the risks are distinctly on the side of aninflation outcome that is somewhere north of the numbers that are inthe Greenbook.-40-11/1/88As far as the economy itself is concerned, again theanecdotal comments that we're picking up from directors and others arebroadly consistent with the commentary around the table--that thingshave slowed down a bit from the almost breakneck pace of the latespring and summer. But the economy nevertheless is still beingcharacterized as very solid looking into the future. I think we arestill getting anecdotal comments to the effect that export performanceoutlook still looks good, although I must say in looking at theeconomic forecast the one place where I still am a little bit nervouson the downside is in terms of net exports. We've got a slowerimprovement which is understandable, but I don't think that's by anymeans baked in the cake. But all in all, I think that we're prettylucky in one sense to be where we are. And, Mr. Boehne, I think thatone can look at all of this and easily envision things that could havebeen a lot, lot more difficult.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I guess I share the feeling of several of youthat inflation is more likely to create a need for further tighteningas we go forward rather than the other way around. But I don't thinkthat the decision is going to be any easier when we finally have totake it. I think it's going to be more difficult because of theincreasing elements of fragility in our financial system, which wouldreact very badly to anything that threw us into any kind of recession.These leveraged buyouts and takeover loans are so delicately balanced,in terms of cash flow on certain assumptions about revenue flows andinterest rate levels and the ability to dispose of assets in order toget debt back down to manageable levels, that if there's anyhesitation in the economy or any significant downturn in the economy,those could be thrown into very bad straits. And I don't think that'sgoing to get any better as it goes along, nor is the thrift crisisgoing to be less sensitive to that kind of thing. I don't thinkthere's enough evidence to move in a tighter direction at the moment,but it's going to be a tough decision to make if and when we have tomake it because of these other elements.The second thing that worries me is whether we are able tocontrol or manage the decline of the dollar by nominal intervention inthe foreign exchange markets. If these markets ever become persuadedthat intervention isn't going to do the job, and there is a realflight from dollar-denominated assets, particularly securities, itseems to me that either we're going to have to begin consciously todefend the dollar with interest rates or it's going to getautomatically defended because the financing of our deficit is goingto be thrown back into domestic markets that will drive interest ratesup in any case. Those are the two things that worry me most about thecurrent situation, and yet I'm not persuaded that we shouldsignificantly change our course at this stage of the game.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anyone who would like to--MR. JOHNSON. Can I just make a couple of remarks? I'm notsure where we're going from here. Like everyone else, I think thingslook pretty good at the moment; whether it's good fortune or our goodsense, it's hard to tell, but I'll take either one. The situationdoes look fairly good at the moment, but where we're headed and whatwe'll be faced with is a little difficult to tell. I guess I'm a-41-11/1/88little more optimistic about the future--just on the basis of how wellwe have done in keeping domestic demand relatively modest. Whetherthat's going to be enough, I don't know. If foreign demand surgeswhile we're so internationally competitive, we could put more stresson the manufacturing sector, but that's not evident. Domestic demandabroad has at least been reasonably good, but if both Germany andJapan take some modest tightening action--Germany perhaps more thanJapan--I don't see demand for our exports being out of control by anymeans. And there's some evidence on the trade side of a slowing ofexports, so I don't see that source overtaxing our capacity. Growthof our gross domestic purchases, which is I guess the broadest measureof domestic demand, has been very modest--around 1-1/2 percent. Theother measures which are a little narrower, have been higher butthey've been trending down. And this paper that was presented today,and the comments about the loan situation, how much growth can you getout of that kind of a M2 picture? You can't get a lot. There's onlyso much, even if you make some fairly optimistic assumptions about thekind of velocity growth you could get from M2, which has a long-termzero trend. You can't get some sort of disaster out of that, and so Isee the long run looking fairly good. That may mean that pressuressurface later to some extent, and if that happens we'll have to move.Right now, things look pretty good.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. There have been very few changes in the Greenbookprojections this time from last time, and we agree pretty broadly withthat and think they are pretty closely on target. It seems clear thatthere has been a slowing in real activity--or there was in the thirdquarter--and I think it's reasonable to suppose that, on a drought-adjusted basis, the economy will grow more slowly next year than ithas this year. At the same time, I think the risks are on the upsidebut I think they've got a pretty good forecast. I wouldn't be quiteas sure about the risks on the upside as Frank Morris, but I'd be moreor less about where Ed Boehne came out on both the level of output andprices.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. Well, it's getting pretty late, and I reallyhave nothing to add, so I'll pass. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Well, I don't have anything to add either, but Iwill! I hear a lot of consensus around the table as to where we arenow, and a lot of well-taken warnings as to what could occur in thefuture. And those warnings seem to be cutting in a variety ofdifferent ways. What that tells me is that we simply must do whatwe'll do anyway, and that is be very watchful. But it's a little bittoo early at this point to reach any strong convictions as to whatshould be done, or which way things are going. Now, like PeterSternlight earlier in the morning when he was giving his report, Ithought it was a good theme for the day and that is "steady as shegoes."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris, you're the last one.I guess you think you've said enough, is that right?-42-11/1/88MR. MORRIS. I guess that's right. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we now move on to staffcomments on monetary policy and the directive? Mr. Kohn.MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I must say, listening to this, itdoesn't sound all that different from our last meeting. Questions forMr. Kohn?MR. HELLER. Don, how long do you think that that slowdown inMl and also to an extent in M2 can be sustained without really havingan impact on the real side? You talked a bit about velocity, but ifyou're looking at M1, we're really looking at zero growth out for theperiod that you're talking about.MR. KOHN. Right. I think we could have very sluggish growthfor M1 for some time to come. Part of this is the demand depositphenomenon. We expect extremely weak demand deposits over the nextcouple of months as firms catch up on compensating balances. Itreally has practically nothing to do with their transactions and theirspending, but rather with how they compensate banks for the servicesthey get. In addition, we have a very steep deposit yield curve thatI would expect to narrow only gradually, even if rates remain wherethey are--to abstract from any further increase in rates. And thatwill continue to induce both savings-type balances and other checkabledeposits and NOW accounts to move into time deposits. So, I think wecould have extremely sluggish growth in M1 for some time to comewithout necessarily having any implications for the economy. Thinkabout demand deposits: We have a lower level of demand deposits nowthan we had two years ago, and in the meantime we've had 7 percentnominal GNP growth. It just doesn't seem to have very much effect.MR. HELLER. You can argue the other way around, too. Youcan stretch a rubber band only so far, or you're taking up the slackthat really exists there.MR. KOHN. In the rubber band analogy--, in the NOW accounts,there's still quite a bit that is savings motivated, and I think a lotof that can move out. As for M2, which you also asked about, itdepends really on the underlying forces in the economy. If you had aneconomy that wasn't showing the kind of strength that's reallyimplicit in this staff forecast, and interest rates were flat, I'dexpect income to keep growing, say, along a 6 percent path. Then M2growth rates would have to rise toward that, but very gradually, andperhaps we wouldn't reach a 6 percent rate of growth consistent withthat very nice kind of outlook until the latter part of next year.But there's enough elasticity in that rubber band, I believe, tosupport considerable output growth without that much M2 growth or M1growth.MR. HELLER. How about the takeover activity, how does thataffect the--MR. KOHN. I think the principal effects there would be onM3--there's a little effect on M2--because it will be financed largelythrough the banks who will be issuing a lot of managed liabilities and-43-11/1/88that will find its way into M3. We've built that into our forecast.That's one of the reasons why we have the strong M3 toward the end ofthis year in the Bluebook. There's a small effect on M2. For onething, some of the managed liabilities they will issue will be thestuff that will end up in M2--overnight Eurodollars, for example. Foranother, you have the possibility that with a huge volume of takeoveractivity the people selling the shares may take a while to figure outwhat they want to do with the proceeds, and they might park that in M2temporarily. In the past, we haven't really found a noticeable effectfrom that, but I'm not ruling that out with the huge volume that couldhappen this time. But I'd expect the effects on M2 to be very small.MR. HELLER. Thanks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I want to follow up on your comment about oilprices. I agree with a lot of what you said about that, but with thatkind of increase in real disposable income, it might have an effect ondemand that you wouldn't necessarily want to validate fully. However,that still may mean that nominal rates would fall, even though you'resaying that you wouldn't let real interest rates come down as much.MR. KOHN. I'm not sure exactly what would happen to nominalrates. That's why I tried to word it carefully to be vague, becauseI've thought about that. And it's not clear because I think it'simportant that real interest rates not fall in this circumstance.Nominal rates I can't tell you about, because I don't know quitewhat's going to happen to inflation expectations.MR. JOHNSON. Well, that's what I'm thinking, but if therewere a real plunge in prices from this level, and they seem to beviewed as more permanent than this [unintelligible].MR. KOHN. If inflation expectations really did come down andthe Federal Reserve was seen as validating those lower inflation ratesso that the expectations are right, then I don't see happening what Ithink occurred in 1986 when the bond market kind of got carried awaywith the oil price decline, in effect reducing real interest rates.It was very hard to determine at the time and it depends on whoseexpectations we're talking about. As a consequence, we got verystrong growth in the economy partly as a consequence of that and thedecline in the dollar that went along with it. We got very stronggrowth in the economy in the subsequent two years. I don't see thathappening right now, but I think it's something that we ought to thinkabout as--MR. ANGELL. But, Don, real GNP was negative in the secondquarter of 1987.MR. KOHN. That's in the second quarter. I think with thelags in the system, Governor Angell, that the real effects were outafter the [second quarter.]MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I'm just saying, though, I agree if wedidn't appear to be trying to accommodate every bit of it you couldexpect that that still may mean that you would accommodate some of it.-44-11/1/88MR. KOHN. You could have lower nominal interest rates. Andall I was arguing for was a very cautious approach to that, if that'sthe way things--. I would drag my feet.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Don? Why don'twe start the Committee discussion? Let me start off. I think thecrucial question we have to ask ourselves is: To what extent has thisbeen luck or successful policy? It's probably a bit of both; I don'tthink we can segregate the two effects, as Ed pointed out earlier.But what is important here, as I see it, is that to the extent policyhas been the source of this slowing, then it's very crucial that wenot be perceived as weakening prematurely. As best I can judge, it'sextraordinarily difficult to manage a gradual unwinding of the economyfrom the types of imbalances we currently have. There is very littleevidence [currently] of the type of sharp expansions, constructionbooms, or inventory accumulations that are capable of reversing veryquickly. And so long as those types of dangers are not there, it'svery difficult to imagine--from where we stand--the types ofdevelopments that would bring the economy down quickly from here. Ifthis is true, it is in a sense saying that what we're going through isa pause, and that the slowing is likely to diminish rather quickly. Ithink that what we're probably in the process of seeing is that theslowing of the spring and early summer is probably coming to an endbecause we still have very high [delivery] backlogs. We still havemomentum in the system, and we still have some very strong numbers inthe capital investment area. What has not been mentioned today is thereading on second-quarter capital appropriations, which I found ratherimpressively strong especially following what probably is astatistical weakness in the first-quarter data.In any event, as I have listened to the discussion today,everyone seems to be generally satisfied that we are in relativebalance and that no significant policy action seems to be desired. Iwould conclude from that that we probably ought to stay preciselywhere we are--meaning the same directive as the last time, withasymmetric language towards firming. If for no other reason, if theFed has been perceived of as being a restrainer of inflation, arestrainer of imbalances, there are probably far greater risks in justthe psychology of perception if we go from asymmetric to symmetriclanguage. Even though it will not be released for a number of weeks,the markets will read a symmetric directive as though we are in thefirst stage of backing off. That statement is not a forecast of thedirection of the next significant monetary policy action or aprediction that the markets would probably read far more into asymmetric directive than we would anticipate, but I would hope that wecould stay pretty much with the language we adopted the last time. Mysuspicion is that, as we come out of this slowing, we will probablyfind the staff's forecast to be relatively close to the mark. I mightadd parenthetically that there's a strong first-quarter GNP in thestaff's forecast, which I believe is wholly the result of expectedstatistical adjustments to the GNP data to show a liquidation of farminventories in the fourth quarter and a sharp increase in the firstquarter. And no farmer in the country will recognize those numbers.Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. I can certainly support that suggestion. Youdidn't say anything about the federal funds rate associated with it.I would hope that would be back into the middle of the range that we-45-11/1/88had anticipated for the federal funds rate when we approved the lastdirective.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would think--based on Mr. Kohn'sremarks--that the current funds rate is perceived as being somewhatabnormal, if that's not an exaggeration with your insights.MR. HELLER. Thanks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. ANGELL. You support borrowing of $600 million?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, it's essentially--MR. JOHNSON. Well, that's the question I think. Well, Ithink what he's saying--MR. HELLER. What I'm really saying is supporting the fundsrate at somewhere, well at about 1/8th.MR. PARRY. That seems to raise a lot of issues.MR. BLACK. Well, it's been the day to do things.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The Desk will endeavor to implement--ifeveryone is agreeing--policy in the manner in which it has beenrecently implemented.MR. ANGELL. You mean $600 million is the borrowing target?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. $600 million is the borrowing target.MR. ANGELL. Okay.MR. JOHNSON. That's the decoded part of it!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I'm in agreement with what you suggested,although I wanted to register a mild note of concern. I have beensurprised at the extent to which money and credit have flattened outsince July and August. I think it's a coincidence largely that ithappened to be around the time of the discount rate increase; but thenagain, because of all the fragilities out there, perhaps the increasehad quite an expectational impact. I'm sure it also reflects some ofthe lags of what we've been doing; but if you look over the mostrecent three months or so, the thrust of policy as reflected by themonetary base, that growth has been relatively slow, and reserves haveactually been shrinking. I don't think it's time right now to doanything about that, particularly with the dollar under pressure, butit does concern me because I don't think by any stretch of theimagination that we have whipped the inflationary pressures that we'veseen. If we get way out of position, if you will, in the short run inpolicy--and subsequently we're forced to reverse policy very sharplyfor short-term reasons, it's going to make the long-term battle a lotmore difficult to win. So, that's just a note of concern. I wouldsupport what you said.-46-11/1/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't think anyone would disagree withthe way you put it. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I support your positiondespite my longer-term concerns. I think at the present juncturethere's no basis for changing monetary policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I also would be in agreement withwhat you recommend. I might have come prepared to argue for shiftinglanguage to symmetric, but I don't feel strongly about it. But I dohave a question about the borrowing level. The $600 million--, wehave been through a period where the borrowing level has been at $600million with a significant seasonal component. I meant to ask Peterabout this earlier. I have a feeling that at this time each year asthe level of seasonal borrowing comes down, the level of adjustmentborrowing builds up. But there's a possibility that this shift incomposition of borrowing may have caused the federal funds rate, forthis and other reasons, to be a little bit higher than ouranticipation. And if this is the case then maybe we need to thinkabout a precise borrowing number.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have been thinking about that a greatdeal and doing a lot of testing. I don't know whether or not we'vecome up with a final conclusion on this, but that's an issue which isabsorbing a good deal of time for Mr. Kohn and his colleagues.MR. KEEHN. But on the anticipation that $600 million isconsistent with 1/8th or 1/4th, that's what I would favor.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I agree with your recommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your recommendation,too. I'm very sympathetic to what Tom Melzer has said, though. Wecan probably explain the weakness in the aggregates, and the earlyincreases in short-term rates up to this point, but next meeting Iwill be in favor of a symmetric directive if the weakness in moneycontinues for another month. For now, I would agree completely withwhat you recommended.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think we're going to have tomake a move fairly soon, but I don't think this is the time to do it.I think the risk is still on the upside. So, I would agree with yourprescription. And I think it's very, very important that we maintainthe asymmetric directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Well, I guess my views haven't changed much.Although I do have concerns about what Governor Johnson discussed,some flattening of the yield curve, I think that does provide some11/1/88information. Also, no growth in M1 and very low growth rates of M2cause me some difficulty. We ran the Rasche model and we got, usingBoard staff assumptions, 6.6 percent growth in the monetary base in1988 and 5.4 percent in 1989. That gives me some degree of comfortthat the policy path would not be abrupt. Given where the staff hasM2 growth near year end, and given that I think that would probably bean appropriate growth rate to see in 1989, I certainly can live withyour proposal.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I'm very sympathetic with Tom Melzer and BobBlack, and with Lee Hoskins's questions about money growth. I thinkthe 2-1/2 percent growth rate of M2 from September to December inalternative "B" is just fine. I would be somewhat uneasy if we wereto get lower growth than that. I would not like to see those growthrates get down close to zero over a period of time because I believethat would cause some bounce-back. If that low growth were to be thecase, then I think we really ought to talk about it before the nextmeeting; that is, I think we ought to have a conference call. On theother hand, if the aggregates begin to snap back faster than the staffis projecting, then I would want to be very alert to a possibility oftightening because I think where we are is just fine. Now, I have toadmit that what I'm saying is really consistent with symmetriclanguage, not asymmetric. And my caution would be that we use theappropriate language here; that is, I would like the market to learnthat when we say we're asymmetric that we have a feeling that thingsare going to change. I don't think that's the case here, and so Iwould slightly prefer--not enough to vote against an asymmetricdirective--but I would slightly prefer to have it be symmetric. Also,I think that when this directive is announced in December, if wehaven't changed policy then the fact that we were symmetric won't evenbe noticed. On the other hand, if we have tightened, nobody is goingto care what we were at this point; and, in the unlikely event that wehave to ease, we would look a little smarter. So I think there's afair case for symmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Yes, I'm certainly willing to stick withalternative "B". I would note that my remarks about signs of lessrobust business growth and the performance of monetary aggregates havebeen pointed out by some others as well. I don't think anyone hasmentioned that there are financial market participants who thought, asof a couple of weeks ago, that we had tightened monetary policysomewhat when they saw the federal funds rate creep up to 8-1/4percent or above. So I think I can vote for alternative "B" but Ifeel fairly strongly that there should be symmetric language ratherthan asymmetric. And if the $600 million borrowing target were tomean a federal funds rate of 9-1/2 percent, then I would have aproblem with that.MR. ANGELL. Some of the rest of us might, too.MS. SEGER. I wasn't sure.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.-48-11/1/88MR. STERN. I support your recommendation and would only addthat I think Governor Angell makes some valid points about the valueof the language in the directive. But it does seem to me thatasymmetric language remains appropriate at this juncture as I gaugethe risks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I would agree with your policy prescription, Mr.Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I also support this directive. I think I cansupport the directive as long as over the next intermeeting periodwe're not likely to be confronted with any possibility of easing. AndI think that's probably a very good possibility. But I do have alittle sensitivity to what Tom Melzer said, because I don't think theprobability really is zero that some unforeseen event might surface;and I think we may be living a little close to the edge, although partof it may be statistical aberrations. The Chairman pointed out thatthe farm situation is subtracting from fourth-quarter GNP and addingto first-quarter 1989 GNP; I think estimates are for about minus 1-1/4percent or something like that from the fourth-quarter growth rate.And given the third-quarter starting point, the economy must grow alot over the next three months to exceed the third-quarter's midpoint.And I'm concerned that we might find ourselves, at leaststatistically, in a situation that would not lead us to change policybut certainly could create some perception problems. Statistically,we could end up with a flat or slightly negative quarter in the fourthquarter with the drought adjustment; but I don't think that resultwill be anything fundamental and will be made up in the first quarter.I'm comfortable with asymmetric language, but I think if we foundourselves in a situation where there was a need to ease--even if itwere only a slight easing--it would be uncomfortable given thatlanguage. So maybe we ought to consider that possibilty seriously, ifthings don't change by the time of our next meeting. But I can livewith asymmetric now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation, butI am sympathetic with those who expressed some interest in going tosymmetric language both on the basis of what might be happening in theeconomy and also watching very carefully what happens to theaggregates in the upcoming period. But for now, I fully support yourrecommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I support your recommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation,particulary the asymmetric language. One point I'd make is that Ihave a greater emphasis on hitting the $600 million borrowings target.It seems to me it's not really necessary to worry about a federal-49-11/1/88funds rate which differs by an 1/8th or 1/4th from what statisticalrelationships would seem to indicate between borrowings and the fundsrate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman. Icame in with some feeling of moving to a symmetric directive, but Ihave no quarrel with keeping it asymmetric for this time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare, do you want to--MR. LAWARE. I agree and support the asymmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I hear it, we have a significantconcentration on repeating the directive of the last meeting. I askthe Assistant Secretary to read it again.MR. BERNARD. In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. Taking account of indications ofinflationary pressures, the strength of the business expansion, thebehavior of the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreignexchange and domestic financial markets, somewhat greater reserverestraint would or slightly lesser reserve restraint might beacceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserveconditions are expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 overthe period from September through December at annual rates of about2-1/2 and 6 percent, respectively. The Chairman may call forCommittee consultation if it appears to the Manager for DomesticOperations that reserve conditions during the period before the nextmeeting are likely to be associated with a federal funds ratepersistently outside a range of 6 to 10 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesGovernor Heller YesPresident Hoskins YesGovernor Johnson YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesPresident Parry YesGovernor Seger I'm torn.MR. HELLER. Abstain.MS. SEGER. Yes, can I abstain? No, last time I went alongwith it and the asymmetric language even though I didn't want theasymmetric. So, this time I'm willing to go along except that I havesuch a problem with the asymmetric. I think I will dissent, since Ican't vote 50-50.-50-11/1/88 -51-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Our next meeting date is scheduled forDecember 13 and 14. It will not be known for a few days at leastwhether or not the 13th will be necessary. So, I request that youhold the 13th open until you hear specifically whether or not thatdate will be necessary. The evening of the 13th we will have an FOMCdinner in which we will give our best to our longest-serving member,Frank Morris, who has attended his last meeting today. Frank hasserved for more than 20 years, during which there were 210 regularlyscheduled meetings, and it appears that he missed only one meeting. Ithink that's an extra-ordinary record. No question we are all goingto miss you, Frank, but we will get a chance hopefully to see you atdinner on the 13th. If there are no further items of business, themeeting officially is adjourned, and lunch is served.END OF MEETING