Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeAugust 16, 1988A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 16, 1988, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBlackForrestalHellerHoskinsJohnsonLaWareParrySegerMessrs. Guffey, Keehn, Melzer, and Morris, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, andMinneapolis, respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Kohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryBradfield, General CounselPatrikis, Deputy General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. Beebe, J. Davis, R. Davis, Lindsey,Siegman, Simpson, and Ms. Tschinkel,Associate EconomistsMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account1. Entered the meeting following action to approve minutes for theJune 29-30, 1988, meeting.Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMs. Zickler, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Wajid, Assistant to Governor Heller, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Whitesell, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs,Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Lang, and Scheld, SeniorVice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofSt. Louis, Kansas City, Philadelphia, andChicago, respectivelyMs. Lovett, Messrs. McNees, Miller, and O'Driscoll,Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofNew York, Boston, Minneapolis, and Dallas,respectivelyMr. Guentner, Manager, Open Market Operations,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meetingof August 16, 1988MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Are there any questions forMr. Cross? If there are no questions, I would entertain a motion toratify the actions taken since the last FOMC meeting.MS. SEGER. So move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Second?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Joan Lovett, wouldyou report on the--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Could I, Mr. Chairman, just make acomment rather than raise a question? Sam Cross mentioned in thecourse of his remarks that he thought that intervention on the part ofthe major central banks in this intermeeting period had helpedcurtail, if you will, the rise of the dollar. I think that's a fairstatement. I want to actually make a more general, albeit a briefstatement, about intervention because I think it has gotten a bit of abad name. It's not that I have any illusions about the ability ofintervention to be decisive in terms of the position of a currencyeither short term or long term--but I do think there is acharacteristic of the foreign exchange market, at least as I see it,that we have to keep in mind. And the characteristic is theequivalent of these very sophisticated and very aggressive forms ofprogram trading in the foreign exchange markets whereby individualinstitutions and individual traders take very, very large positions.And they're willing to push those positions to the very limit. One ofthe things that those trading strategies do is reinforce, in myjudgment, the tendency toward one-way markets--in a context in whichthe perception is that you can make a quick buck by pushing that asfar as possible. And as long as those trading strategies are asdominant as I think they are, the dangers that can be associated withone-way markets become all the greater, and the tendencies for theexchange market to overshoot all the greater.My point in those circumstances is this: I think thatintervention does play a useful role in reaffirming the fact thatthere are two-way markets. And I think that in and of itself is ofvalue even if one can not argue persuasively that a particularexchange rate could or should emerge from the process. But I do thinkthat the presence of the central banks does create something of aconviction toward two-way markets. If there's any doubt about that,all you have to do is talk to traders. They will say that they tendto be much more cautious when they feel that the central banks may beon the scene. So, I do think that these trading strategies--and theway at least I think they manifest themselves in the market--provideto me a fairly convincing case that there is merit or wisdom in thecentral banks showing their hand from time-to-time in the market evenif one is agnostic about the effects in terms of a particular exchangerate at a particular point in time.8/16/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. When do you envisage--was it 1984, 1985,1986--that this process would have changed? Because, obviously theevaluation of the Jurgensen Report, which endeavored to filter throughall such relationships, was unable, at least to the best it couldjudge, to find any significant intervention impacts. Is thissomething that you're suggesting is--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think the character of the markethas changed in the last several years. All you have to do, in onesense, is just look at the sheer volume of transactions. If you useCHIPS transactions as a proxy--an imperfect proxy, but one which stillis a pretty good way to do it because our survey suggests thatsomething like 90 percent of the CHIPS traffic is foreign exchangetransactions--they're up. And if you look at what has happened in thedevelopment of the derivative markets in foreign exchange, perhapsespecially the options [market], it's very clear that the sheer sizeof the market and the amount of turnover has grown enormously. Lookat the profits that all the major banks and investment banks aregenerating quarterly from foreign exchange trading. I still can'tfully understand that myself. But every single quarter, with anexception here or there, all of these major firms are generating verysizable profits from foreign exchange trading. If you look at some ofthe individual trading strategies, at least in some cases, they are avery elaborate form of program trading applied in a different area.I think all of those things taken together do constitute achange--admittedly over time--but a change in the character, thestructure, the fabric of the market. And I wouldn't argue with anyconviction that the totality of those things is decisive, in any senseof the word, in producing these tendencies to overshoot that we see inthe markets. But I do think that they can be tempered a bit. Indeed,as I said, the foreign exchange traders say they behave differentlywhen they sense the central banks are on the scene. Again, I'm nottrying to make an argument that necessarily would dispute any of theseearlier reports--finding point estimates and being able to say thatthis pattern of central bank intervention produced this result. I'magnostic myself about that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But at some point, the type ofhypothesis you're raising is testable.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It should be.MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, in the Jurgensen report, it's fairto say that group did not really examine closely, in a statisticalsense, the effectiveness of intervention in the framework thatPresident Corrigan is putting forward. In fact, it concluded that inthe very short run there was some case for the effectiveness ofintervention, and that I think is close to what President Corrigan hassaid is a testable proposition. That's about all you can say.Translating that in terms of the early 1980s, and the notion that somecentral banks then had--and even now have--a practice of being in themarket in order to constantly provide a sense of two-way risk[unintelligible]. The Bank of Canada, for example, follows a strategyof that type. And from time-to-time the Bank of England has done it,although not recently. And that was recognized as one motivation forintervention that was different from a motivation designed to alterthe medium-term course of exchange rates. And I think President8/16/88Corrigan is now commenting on the merits--saying that in somesituations, there might be a case for intervention, even recognizingthat in terms of altering the medium-term course of exchange rates, asterilized intervention is likely to be singularly ineffective.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. Mr. Truman said part of what I wanted to say,but I think there's an important distinction between the types ofintervention. The kind that just dribbles $50 million in every day,which seems to me at least to have virtually zero effect, is the kindof intervention that shows up in the Jurgensen Report as having verylittle effect. On the other hand, if you're hitting a one-way marketwith a certain relatively large intervention, then you really get themarket impact that you're talking about. But I think what you've gotto ask is whether by doing that you're also creating uncertainty. Ithink you are. And by creating the uncertainty you're reducing theincentive to take positions, because they're built on the one-waycertainty. Then you've got to ask yourself the broader question ofwhether a central bank is contributing to increasing or decreasing theuncertainty. Clearly, we like to think that we are moving the markettowards the ultimate equilibrium, thereby somehow or other reducingfluctuations. But I think that is really tough to substantiateeconometrically because you're dealing by necessity with small samplesand periods that are very difficult to compare.MR. JOHNSON. What is the average in terms of dollartransactions per day?MR. CROSS. The average in terms of what?MR. JOHNSON. Dollar transactions per day?MR. CROSS. The United States or worldwide?MR. JOHNSON. Well, worldwide.MR. CROSS. We don't really know.MR. JOHNSON. You don't know?MR. CROSS. We know what we do and they know what they do.MR. JOHNSON. I think [theirs is] very large relative to what[we] do.MR. BLACK. Very large.MR. CROSS. On the part of the United States--. Sorry togive you numbers, but worldwide it's probably equal to at least $300or $400 billion a day.MR. HELLER. Yes, but, Sam, that is not the relevant numberfor intervention purposes. What is relevant, I think, is the size ofthe open position in the market.MR. CROSS. Well, that we don't really know.8/16/88MR. HELLER. And clearly no one knows, but that's what you'retrying to do.MR. CROSS. When we are intervening we are trying to bringabout a certain influence. And certainly, the market is constantlyand intensely out there watching to see what signs we--and by that Imean the central banks collectively--are giving. They are very muchconcerned about whether there is evidence that the central banks aregoing to [intervene]. The central banks can hurt them when theychoose to come into the market. And they certainly pay greatattention to that in all cases. And they can, on occasion, keep someof these movements from moving in one direction or another and kind ofgetting--MR. ANGELL. Well, I'm not a purist on intervention. I thinkthere are times when that certainly is constructive. But I wouldbelieve that to intervene all the time is a good way of demonstratingthat you have very little power and, thereby, you are not affecting inany way this perception of a two-way risk. It seems to me that ifcentral banks are willing to alter the basic scarcity of theircurrency they can do a great deal to influence its exchange value.And if intervention is trying to coincide with central banks'willingness to do that, it can indeed give a perception of a two-wayrisk. I find it particularly dissatisfying to have intervention tothe level and the extent that we have done during this intermeetingperiod while at the same time we clearly wanted to decrease thescarcity of dollars in world markets. I see no point whatsoever indemonstrating that we were unsuccessful. They might find it outanyway without our so clearly making it evident.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I wasn't going to comment because I think myposition on this is fairly well known. But Jerry has raised the issuein the context, I guess, of orderly markets. I'm not sure what a one-way market is other than the fact that people are bidding the price upor down on a particular instrument. And I don't see this instrumentas much different than any others. We trust the markets to do pricingin general, so then I don't see why we have a particular problem withallowing markets to price currencies. If it's an orderly marketsargument, then it seems to me that we should come in when markets arepresumed to be disorderly; and that means not very frequently. If weare in all the time, then it defeats the purpose, it seems to me, ofthe orderly markets argument. I'm not in favor of the orderly marketsargument either. I think there may be points in time when we wouldwant to intervene in situations where there's a panic or crash. Otherthan that I just don't see what we gain by it, other than getting awider spread between bid and ask. It seems that we are addinguncertainty to the market unnecessarily.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I have sort of a technical question. I'm not apurist on intervention either, although I think there are times whenthe signal is useful and there are times that it's useful for reasonsof international cooperation, even regardless of the substance--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would agree with that.8/16/88MR. JOHNSON. But the one thing I have been worried aboutrecently is--this is a question I guess for Joan Lovett and Don Kohnand Sam Cross--when we are doing consistent interventions and it'sworking in the other direction from our open market operations, itdoes run the risk I think of confusing the federal funds market as towhat our reserve needs may be. If we have a larger drain need--say itappeared when we are tightening--if the market is not aware of ourintervention actions to sell dollars, they may not know specificallyor may considerably underestimate the draining requirements of theOpen Market Desk. And that can lead to some strange behavior in thefunds market, it seems to me. How do we deal with that? It seems tome that we don't want that kind of uncertainty in the funds market.Maybe we want the two-way risk on the foreign exchange market, but wedon't want this uncertainty in the open market operations.MS. LOVETT. That hasn't been a factor during this mostrecent period, in part because so many people in the market are tryingto put together estimates about how reserves are going to behave--verymuch the same way we are. Data on reserves are released with a lag,but it's a relatively brief lag, so people are able to speculate as towhat factors are influencing reserve behavior. That brief lag maycause people to wonder momentarily in a transition period about theimpact on the funds rate. But I think over just a relatively shortlength of time they've been able to perceive that. For example, inthe recent period, people have been watching the Federal Reserve'sbalance sheet and have seen a rise in other assets and have concludedfrom that rise that while there are many components in it, the foreignexchange component has probably been a fairly large one; andtherefore, our needs to add reserves going forward would be smallerthan they had thought heretofore. So it seems as though it has workedout in this past period. Any sort of disturbance on the funds markethas been fairly brief.MR. KOHN. I agree with what Joan said--there can be no morethan a 7-day lag before they get our balance sheet. I would just addthat I think the only time that it was--MR. JOHNSON. Seven days, though, can be important.MR. KOHN. But most of the time those transactions are quitesmall, particularly taking account of what's done for our own account.It really is lost in the noise relative to the Treasury balance,float, and all those other things.MR. JOHNSON. But truly that's just as big.MR. KOHN. There was one period here, in which we did theoff-market transactions with that had amuch larger effect and caused us, I think, to have a slightlydifferent view of our own reserve needs than the market did. But thatwasn't the usual kind of intervention.MS. LOVETT. I think it was only temporary.MR. KOHN. And that only lasted three days in terms of--MS. LOVETT. One other part of that--whenever there iscentral bank intervention, the financial markets have been quite8/16/88sensitive to listen to that. Each morning one hears what the rumorsare as to whether central banks are in or not in, so that when theytake a look at what they think might be affecting reserves, that wouldbe one thing they tuck in the back of their minds to some degree.MR. CROSS. Most of our intervention has been done in a waywhich was designed to be noticed, because that was part of thepurpose. And I have been impressed with the extent to which thepeople who watch these things closely have a pretty good fix on theamounts being done, and they know the purposes.MR. JOHNSON. A good example, though, is this yen trans-action that we are doing, which is not constructed to be noticed Ithink.MR. CROSS. That's right.MR. JOHNSON. And that's reported with a 7-day lag?MR. KOHN. It's not reported per se, but it's in 'OtherAssets'.MR. JOHNSON. Okay.MR. CROSS. It gets in the balance sheets and we willannounce it. I give a quarterly report in September, and in that wewill indicate that we have purchased these currencies. We will not bespecific about the source--the counterpart--but we will indicatepublicly that we have picked up these currencies.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unless there are any further questionson this issue, I would like to move forward to domestic operations.Joan Lovett.MS. LOVETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Ms. Lovett?MR. HELLER. Did you say bond markets were down 3/4?MS. LOVETT. Initially this morning, when the trade numbersfirst came out, the long bond was down about a point. It seemed thatfor a brief juncture it would be holding, and I don't know whether itchanged further since.MR. KOHN. I think right before we came in, it had come backa little bit from the low point. So it was probably down about 1/2point or less.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What is the trade number?SPEAKER(?). $12.5 billion.MR. BLACK. Was there any revision to the number for theprevious month?SPEAKER(?). Yes.8/16/88MR. TRUMAN. I will cover that in the next--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Lee.MR. HOSKINS. I have one question. Are you perceived in themarkets as changing the way that you signal market participants as towhere you want reserves or where you want the funds rate? Are youmaking a distinction between customer and System operations that isdifferent? It seems to me, as I observe it in the newspapers anyway,that we are trying to signal more directly where we are with respectto funds.MS. LOVETT. Well, I think, during part of the period therewas an effort to let the market know that if expectations had carriedthe rate beyond what the Committee had voted, that seemed to be a wayof letting them know that. The reason, of course, was that theseexpectations could become embedded; and we were trying to signal thatthey were really moving faster than the Committee had instructed. Thelonger those things persist, the more people begin to feel that--ifthese expectations really get imbedded in the structure of rates--whenthe Committee meets again, we may have taken the decisions from it.So we felt it necessary to give a signal when rates seemed to beratcheting higher. That was particularly true when funds seemed to begetting sticky at the 7/8ths level.MR. HOSKINS. That kind of gets to the heart of whether weare focusing on borrowings or the funds rate and all that.MS. LOVETT. Right. Well, we got the borrowings.MR. KOHN. President Hoskins, I will be discussing thatbriefly in my briefing as well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Ms. Lovett?If not, may I have a motion to ratify the Desk's operations since thelast meeting?MR. JOHNSON. I'll move.MS. SEGER. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We will now go toour economic staff reports, and we will have Messrs. Prell and Trumansequentially.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ted will be followingme with some comments on this morning's trade data as well as someremarks on the implications of recent foreign exchange marketdevelopments.[Statement by Mr. Prell--see Appendix.][Statement by Mr. Truman--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Questions for eithergentleman?8/16/88MR. PARRY. Ted, I have a question about your net exportnumber. With this small decline in the value of the dollar thatyou're assuming, wouldn't a model forecast typically give less of animprovement in net exports than what you're showing? It seems to methat for this year it's something like $47 billion, and for the nextyear it's $32 billion. At least some of the models I've seen wouldsuggest that with that kind of very small decline in the value of thedollar you would have a more significant slowing in the improvement innet exports than you have. Was that managed to some extent or--MR. TRUMAN. Well yes, I think to some extent it was because,as I mentioned, we were encouraged by what we had seen in the firsthalf of this year. So, given that, along with other anecdotes and soforth and so on, we have carried a bit more of that through to thesecond half of the year. And, in effect, that attenuates some of theeffect of the dollar alone on the forecast. So we scaled it back alittle bit on the basis of an assessment of what the appreciation todate has achieved for us, or how much it's going to achieve for us.MR. PARRY. So at least that's one area where perhaps itcould turn out that there'd be a little less pressure in terms ofgrowth?MR. TRUMAN. That's right.MR. PARRY. Okay, thank you sir.MR. TRUMAN. It could also be a little more. I must say youtry to put it down and--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I was just going to ask Ted: Haveyou redone your projections of net exports since you got the Censusmerchandise trade figures?MR. TRUMAN. Essentially, they are very close, [even] withthe revision. Although the June number is "bad", the May revision wasquite large and in fact if anything, the two together were a littlebetter than we expected in our forecast. They were a little worsethan what was implicit in the GNP numbers. But it translates tosomething like maybe a 10th or two at an annual rate on the second-quarter real GNP. So that's not going to change anything. And bothcomponents pretty much matched up with what we suspected.MR. BLACK. This figure for net exports for, say, the fourthquarter of 1989 would not be very far off from $47.2 billion then?MR. TRUMAN. Yes. The number would be exact. I think thatnumber, if I may put it that way, had less impact on us than normal.I wouldn't--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I want to compliment the stafffor giving us these drought-adjusted GNP projections because I thinkthese really give us a more realistic appraisal of the pressure onresources that we are likely to see during the rest of the year than8/16/88the ordinary GNP numbers. The decline from the drought is hardly ausual source of decline in the GNP because it doesn't generate anyresources that you can shift into other uses in the economy. So, ifyou look at drought-adjusted growth rates for this past quarter andthe next two quarters, you get 3.6 percent for the second quarter--anumber I got from my staff--3.8 percent in the third quarter, and 2.8percent in the fourth. And I must say that this adds up to two fullyears now of running the economy substantially in excess of our long-term growth potential. We have a real barn burner of an economy onour hands. That's the only thing I can see.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I wanted to ask Mike a question. Whatpercentage of the GNP growth rate is investment demand considered tobe in terms of the components of the growth rate? Is that a bigfactor?MR. PRELL. If we look at the next couple of quarters, realBFI accounts for a third of the GNP growth in the third and thefourth quarters. Over the course of next year, it accounts for about20 percent of the growth.MR. JOHNSON. It's pretty significant.MR. PRELL. It's clearly a key dynamic income-generatedsector in this forecast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If you add in the inventories that gowith that as one of the long production cycle, you're getting ninemonths of consolidated inventory in front of the expenditure outlook.I suspect the numbers would be a significant increment over that.MR. PRELL. As I noted, we now are looking for inventories,at least over the second half of this year, to be positivelycontributing to GNP growth. And we are looking for it to besignificantly in the manufacturing area, related in part to thisdurable goods strength in business equipment in particular.MR. JOHNSON. How big of a factor is PDE in that?MR. PRELL. It's the bulk of it--if not more than that if weare right in our forecast of negative nonresidential structures overthe second half and essentially flat next year. So the whole story isproducers durable equipment. And a large part of that story is ourreading of the current trend in the computer and office equipmentarea, which has been growing very rapidly. While we had it tailingoff noticeably over the forecast period, it remains a strong elementin the forecast.MR. JOHNSON. The reason I'm asking is because I was struckby the presentation to the Board yesterday and talking with CharlieSchultz earlier who made a comment I thought was kind of interesting.He said that a lot of that PDE growth--correct me if I'm wrong--is thedeflator. The decline in prices for producers durable equipment isgenerating a lot of the real output side of that. If you apply afixed-weight deflator to PDE, I don't know that you get a totallydifferent result, but what does it do?8/16/88MR. PRELL. I think that would overstate the contributionthat makes. The PDE deflator is declining--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's not the PDE deflator; it's thecomputer component.MR. JOHNSON. Computers.MR. PRELL. Indeed, but looking at the total PDE number--MR. JOHNSON. I was noticing yesterday it was down about 3percent, or 2-1/2 percent.MR. PRELL. The total PDE deflator is declining at somethingover 2 percent a year in this forecast. Given that we have PDE risingat 14 percent this year and 6 percent next year, it isn't the wholestory by any means.MR. JOHNSON. It's not the whole show. Well, say you applythe fixed-weight deflator though, how much would that take out of thegrowth in PDE?MR. PRELL. It's not so much I think the fixed-weight as thequestion of whether you want to really deflate those computerexpenditures at that rate.MR. JOHNSON. Okay that, then.MR. PRELL. I don't--MR. JOHNSON. I'm not suggesting we should, but I'm saying Ithink that's a relevant measure. But--MR. PARRY. But if you didn't take that into account, itwould be very misleading.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But I think the issue is--MR. PRELL. I think the other thing to consider is that, in asense, your potential and actual growth would be lowered by the sametoken. Your measured real growth would be slower and your potentialreal growth would be slower, but resource utilization quotations inthe short run wouldn't be materially different. So, I think we aregetting distortions of some of the numbers, in effect, by this base-to-base year against which we are measuring PDE prices--computerprices in particular. But I think the real crux of the matter is thatno matter how you slice it, we are at levels of resource utilizationmuch higher than they had been or than we had expected. That's what'sreally driving our inflation forecast.MR. JOHNSON. Okay. But you're suggesting, though, that thepotential number changes with the way you look at the deflator?MR. PRELL. Well, if you were to assert that GNP growth hasbeen overstated by the use of these 1982 price deflators, thenpresumably potential GNP growth is also being commensuratelyoverstated. So it doesn't give you any more room to maneuver. I thinkit's important to have some handle on what's happening with the-10-8/16/88capital stock for one's assessment of productive potential. Butthat's a much longer-horizon issue. This is sort of like those otherquestions relating to the possible mismeasurement of output whetherit's [unintelligible] or anything else that affects both actual andpotential output [unintelligible]. And it doesn't do much for thegap.MR. PARRY. Isn't the analytical issue raised here that youmay be overstating inflation a little bit--that there has actuallybeen more real growth because of declining prices, which has not beentaken account of in the fixed-weight index. It seems to me that maybe a bigger analytical issue in this area.MR. PRELL. Well, this gets into very complicated, almostmetaphysical, issues. I'm not sure that there really is a problem inthe sense of overestimating.MR. JOHNSON. But you can't look at the fixed-weight on oneside only. It seems to me that you've got to be consistent. And likeyou say, if you believe the deflator issue is important on the growthside, then you should be looking at the implicit deflator otherwise--MR. PRELL. I'm not sure; it depends on the question.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think this question--MR. JOHNSON. Well, it's almost an apples and orangesproblem, though.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Now we are about to get into thediscussion of what is the definition of a unit of economic output.And that's going to go on for six weeks!MR. JOHNSON. Yes. Okay, I will stop.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd appreciate that. I think they'rehorrible. We had a running debate at the Board meetings on thissubject--on the effect of the shifting base of the price index in theGNP--which probably at this stage fills up about six looseleaf booksof about 1,000 pages.MR. JOHNSON. That's right. It doesn't change the overallstory, but it does around the margin. That's okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Change the structure. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Mike, I wondered on the personal consumptionexpenditures, does the greater amount of floating rate debt--homeequity loans as well as ARMs--in this cycle have a significant impactthere?MR. PRELL. We've thought about that. I must say the amountof quantitative work we have done to date on this is not as much as Ithink we want to do over time. It's hard to get a fix on thehousehold portfolio. Our assessment is that probably the amount ofwhat I might call rate-sensitive assets does not exceed the amount ofrate-sensitive liabilities in quite the same proportion as itpreviously did. But, on balance, an increase in interest rates tends-11-8/16/88to augment household cash flow. We don't think the changes that haveoccurred really would make a big difference in the responses of thehousehold sector in the short run. But it is a new ball game to someextent, and there are distributional questions that we don't have areal good fix on. So I think it's something worth giving furtherthought and investigation to. But our basic assessment is that itdoesn't make a big difference.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I was intrigued by your comments aboutinflation and what might be necessary to get it moving in the downwarddirection. In fact, your forecast does have it moving down and Ithink you have the peak in the fourth quarter. I guess that promptsthe question: What kind of tightening do you have in mind in terms ofinterest rates?MR. PRELL. Well, there're two things I should say. One, thequarterly pattern between now and the end of next year reflects insignificant measure the quarterly pattern of food price increases,which are strong until next spring and then are tailing off toward theend of the year. The second thing is that it reflects the particularpattern of oil prices and energy prices that we have assumed in thisforecast. And that is an element that contributes to inflation in thefirst part of next year, after having been essentially flat in thesecond half of this year. So the bulge there is somewhat misleading.More fundamentally, we think the trend is one of acceleration at leastthrough much of next year, and then tending into 1990 with an ever soslight upward tilt to compensation and underlying price trends. Weassume that interest rates will continue to move up over the nextcouple of quarters and we essentially have that 9-1/2 percent areafunds rate being reached by early next spring.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. I was wondering whether Ted Truman could say afew more words about the economic, and particularly the monetarypolicy, assumptions that he has underlying the dollar forecast inother countries, especially Japan and Germany?MR. TRUMAN. For the monetary policy side, we have interestrates abroad rising at about half the amount that they do here overthe forecast period.MR. HELLER. What they will do in the future or they--MR. TRUMAN. Yes, that's right. So, that may be between 1/2and 3/4 of a percentage point on short-term rates abroad over theforecast period. On the fiscal policy side, we don't have anythingbuilt in of a particularly stimulative nature in any of thosecountries. As you know, there's a slight expectation that fiscalpolicy in Germany will be coming in tighter in this forecast horizon.MR. HELLER. Thanks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.8/16/88MS. SEGER. Mike, could you elaborate a little bit more onthe interest rate outlook pattern? I know you mentioned fed funds areexpected to reach 9-1/2 percentby next spring, and I think you saidlong-term Treasury bonds, 10-1/2 percent. It's hard to hear thismorning at this end of the table, but I think you said 10-1/2 percentby next spring. Are you suggesting that this will be the peaking ofrates for this cycle or that this is just sort of a run?MR. PRELL. Again, I express that we recognize theuncertainty about these things and wouldn't want to be excessivelyprecise in our characterization of what is involved in this forecast.But basically, we have the rates getting up to that level by thesecond quarter of next year and staying there.MS. SEGER. How about mortgage rates? I noticed in yourcommentary you indicated that you think housing is probably number oneon the hit list, as we tighten further. But when I went through andlooked at some of the forecast numbers I didn't see really majordownward revisions. So, maybe you can tell me what kind of mortgage--MR. PRELL. We've made only a modest downward revision inhousing starts as we get out into 1989 some ways. We've made someupward adjustment in the mortgage rate forecast. Mortgage rates havebeen running a bit tighter to the Treasuries than they had previously.We have mortgage rates getting up towards 12 percent in the secondhalf and very possibly around 12 percent.MS. SEGER. 12 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any further questions foreither gentleman? If not, we are ready to do our round robin. Whowould like to start off?MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I'll start with the EleventhDistrict and get the less-than-good news out of the way early. Iwould say that the perception of what's happening in the Texaseconomy, and the Eleventh District generally, is improving somewhat.I think we are beginning to see some evidence showing through in thestatistics. We did have growth in our District in the last half oflast year that had kind of plateaued or stalled out during the firsthalf of this year. But now we do think that we are seeing somerenewed or resumed growth in the District and this is reflected in theemployment numbers and that is primarily centered in Texas.Those categories where we are not seeing much improvement, ofcourse, remain in the construction side of it, finance, and insurance.We do have our real estate remaining weak. We've had fairly goodrains in our District, although somewhat spotty, but the feeling isthat the rains have ameliorated the drought effects. The informationthat we are getting from our bankers around the District is that theydon't see a major threat to timely repayment of agricultural loans inthe District.We are somewhat nervous, I guess, about oil prices. If we doget a decline there, that obviously will be a negative. However,there has been so much adjustment to lower oil prices that it wouldnot have the same effect as earlier declines had. Given the fact thatour economy seems to be so much more closely linked to the national-13-8/16/88economy, and given the fairly good forecast for the national economy,we feel that that will continue to be a pull for us and will bepositive.Attitudinally, as far as the financial situation isconcerned, I think there is a great deal of relief with the approachto the resolution of the First Republic situation, and that hasreceived very good press, has been very well received. Now theremaining speculation is whether the last big one will have to havesome kind of relief.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, economic activity in our Districtcontinues to show I think very, very considerable strength. That'sparticularly true in the manufacturing sector, and more specificallyin those activities that are either related to exports or capitalgoods where those operating levels continue to be very, very high.The steel industry, for example, is continuing to run at quite closeto capacity. The third quarter is normally a period in which thesteel industry shuts down a bit to deal with maintenance, but thisyear the maintenance is being deferred to deal with continuing demand.Chemicals and paper are continuing to run at high levels. Autoproduction schedules for the third quarter are considerably higherthan in the third quarter of last year. So, I do think on the capitalexpenditures side, Mike has certainly covered it very well. I thinkwe are going to see higher increases in capital expenditures than wemay have forecast. And I'm sensing from a lot of companies that theyreally are thinking about adding significantly to their expenditurelevel.I have just a couple of comments on the agriculturalsituation, other than crop estimates, which you've seen. First,implements: Interestingly, as we got started on this drought thing,it did not show up in implement sales. Through June they were holdingpretty well; but the July numbers are now in and, on a comparativebasis, July sales of tractors and combines, for example, areconsiderably under last year. That's not surprising, but certainlythis is a negative feature. Agricultural banks, a second element ofagriculture comments: We surveyed the agricultural banks in ourDistrict again last week, and the story I think continues to be morepositive than one had expected it to be. The weak producers wereweeded out in the previous adjustment. Those credits now on the booksare farmers who are strong enough that they can deal with this droughtwithout a renewal of significant problems among the banks.To me, the most surprising shift that I've sensed over thelast month or two is this employment thing. There has been, I think,quite a modification in attitudes out there. There is now, I think,quite persistently a shortage of [unintelligible]. The manufacturersI have talked to are running at very high levels, and their constraintreally is the availability of labor to deal with it. And that's alsothe case I think in the service sector. I was talking to somebody theother day that has opened two major retail stores in Chicago. Theyput out applications, or requests for applications, and they wereflooded with people. But they have high standards for theiremployment, and the applicants came in short on that. Therefore, theyhave opened one of their stores very significantly undermanned. As I-14-8/16/88talk to people, it seems that the shortage of labor really isbeginning to be felt. There are a couple of key contracts for whichnegotiations have just started. And I think people have beenfollowing that very closely. My sense of all this is that the wageside and the inflation picture are going to continue to accelerate.We are going to continue to see increases in wage costs.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Twelfth Districteconomy continues to grow at a healthy pace, with particular strengthin the coastal states, excluding Alaska. This growth appears to beputting upward pressure on wages. For example, in southernCalifornia, Oregon and Washington, employers are having difficultyhiring qualified workers at prevailing wages. I also might sayparenthetically that in California the minimum wage rose to $4.25effective July 1st. Inventories are satisfactory to lean throughoutthe District at both the manufacturer and retail levels. In someindustries, including paper and aluminum, low inventory levels resultfrom strong demand combined with limited production capacity. When wechecked with District retailers, they indicated that the previouslyexcessive inventories in women's apparel, which were quite a problem acouple of months ago, have been brought under control.If I may turn briefly to the national economy: Even with thedrought, real growth is likely to exceed the growth of potentialoutput during the second half of this year. And next year we expectgrowth similar to that in the Greenbook, assuming further significanttightening of monetary policy between now and mid-1989. We do have asomewhat stronger dollar and a smaller improvement in net exports, butin our forecast this is offset by stronger consumption than that whichis incorporated in the Greenbook. With the economy continuing to growabove or at potential over the forecast period, inflation in 1989--measured by the fixed-weight deflator--seems certain to accelerate bythe roughly 1/2 percent that is in our forecast and the Greenbook's.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm going to tell alittle different story today than I usually do. In fact, since I'vebeen sitting on this Committee I have not had an opportunity to reportlower economic activity in the Sixth District at any time. But I'mgoing to make that kind of a report today because activity in theSixth District, with the exception of Florida, is slower than in thenation. I think this is partly a reflection of strength elsewhere.Of course, Louisiana and Mississippi have been in the doldrums forsome time, but now Georgia is beginning to experience slower growththan the rest of the country, basically because of less immigrationthan in the past.Having said that, several of the region's manufacturingindustries are quite strong. Paper and pulp products, for example,ship building, and petrochemical plants are starting modernization andexpansion projects, basically in reponse to pressure on capacity.They also report higher prices for materials.I've talked to a lot of business people and really pressedvery hard since the last meeting on the wage question. And I don't-15-8/16/88think I'm really much more ahead than I was the last time in the sensethat, while there is this anticipation of higher wages and a fear thatit's going to happen, I'm not hearing that it actually has takenplace. Some of the people that I've talked to are in fact labor unionpeople, and in the organized labor sector I don't get any report, atleast in our area, of any pressure for wage increases of any kind.They report to me that job security is basically the major concern ofworkers at the present time.However, I would also report what Si Keehn mentioned thatthere does seem to be a shortage of labor, particularly in the servicearea. And a number of firms that I've talked to are having difficultygetting entry level people even though they're paying above theminimum wage. Of course, in Louisiana the unemployment rate is thehighest in the nation and so the expansion that we have in someindustries like chemicals is taking place in a very soft market forlabor. In addition to this, we've had substantial layoffs and willcontinue to have substantial layoffs at Lockheed, where the work forceis estimated to fall from 20,000 to 12,000 over the next 12 months--avery, very substantial layoff. And that's occurring right now. Weare also getting cutbacks in the automobile plants, and TVA is cuttingback in Alabama as well as in Tennessee and that's supplying labor tothe region. We also have a fraction of Eastern Airlines cutting--, arelatively small impact, but a negative one nonetheless.Nonresidential construction in our region is stronger thanthe rest of the nation; it's up about 4 percent, which perhaps is alittle surprising. I am a little concerned about the projects thatare on the drawing boards, particularly in the city of Atlanta. I'mconcerned that the volume of new office space is not going to beabsorbed very soon.We have fortunately had some rainfall. It has been veryspotty, but I think it has provided enough moisture to salvage thesoybean crop, at least for the time being. So we are doing a littlebetter there.Looking at the national economy, we have no basic differenceswith the Greenbook forecast. There's a slight difference perhaps inunemployment, which we don't expect to rise quite as much, and ourinflation forecast would be marginally higher. I think, however welook at it, we are looking at a very strong economy. And I don't seethat that is going to abate any time soon, and that obviously hasimplications for policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Anecdotal information that I've picked up insome recent calls would tend to confirm what's in the Greenbook. Forexample, I would describe retailers as guardedly optimistic. Augustgot off to a good start in the first week and then was somewhat slowin the second week, but I think that was felt to be largely weather-related. In general, I think retailers feel that they've got theirinventories in pretty good shape. They don't feel terribly exposedand they are guardedly optimistic about the prospects here.On the manufacturing side, you pick up the sense of strengthstill in capital goods orders--backlogs, and so forth. The commentary8/16/88on the raw material price increases over the last year or so is thatthere's still some evidence of difficulty in passing all of thatalong. In the District itself, our numbers for the most recentquarter, which would be the second quarter, reflect what Bob Forrestalhas described. Some employment declines show up in construction,textiles and apparel, food processing, and the like. But in general,we have paralleled the rest of the country. I don't attribute toomuch to this weakness. I think it has to do, as Bob said a while ago,with the fact that there's strength elsewhere as opposed to signs ofimminent weakness in our District.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. The District economy continues to operate atvery high levels, with increasingly tight labor markets. The onlypart of the District where I'm hearing complaints about the pressureson wages is from the Jersey shore; and that's largely, I think, fromthe Second District's garbage floating down there.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We've got a lot of that.MR. BOEHNE. As I say, there's nothing new. As far as thenation--I think it has been said a variety of ways--but the bottomline is that we are in a territory of accelerating inflation and wehave to resist that growth. The only questions are timing andmagnitude. As far as the components of risk, I agree that the risksare on the upside on capital spending. But we may get more restrainton consumption this time around than we have in the past, largely Ithink because of the increase in variable interest rates on consumer-type loans, both home equity loans and also variable-rate mortgages.If people have to spend an extra $50 or $100 a month on mortgagepayments, that gets right into consumption fairly quickly. I thinkthe shorter lags on consumption really are what we want because, asyou look at the profile of the expansion, we are getting personalconsumption growing 2-1/2 percent and what we really would like to dois get it down in the 1 to 1-1/2 percent range to be able to bringabout the shift toward the external sectors. So I think that wereally do need to watch this consumption. We may find that we'll getquicker restraint from monetary policy tightening than we have in thepast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. The story in the District hasn't changed much.There is still strength across the board in the manufacturing sector,so I won't bore you with the details of that. What we've focused on,and what many of you have focused on, is what's happening in labormarkets. We have two areas where we have some shortages occurringright now. One happens to be in the service areas, at entry levelpositions. It's particularly bad in the Columbus area, which has hada very strong economy. The second area is in the more skilledpositions in manufacturing, and that's across the board in a number ofdifferent cities where capital projects are underway. So, we areexperiencing some labor shortages right now. A major bank in theColumbus area is talking about total compensation increases in theneighborhood of 5-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent--I can't define it any betterthan that--because of the difficulties of getting people on board inthat market and the rising wage rates at the entry level.-17-8/16/88In terms of retail activity, the Pittsburgh market has a 15to 20 percent hike in wages for entry level people because a majorretailer there is in the market trying to hire 1,200 people. In termsof sales,They've noticed a significant increase in whatshe would call back-to-school buying. They would have expected abouta 10 percent gain and what they're getting is something on the orderof 25 percent. Now that is firm specific, so there could be somethings that have gone on within the firm generating that. The onlysign of weakness that I could find happens to be in a little stainlessand steel strip indicator that I follow. It's an index of new ordersput out by one firm, and that's dropped significantly in the month ofJuly. What this seems to mean is that we haven't seen any signs ofreal weakness. We don't have a boom: but we have continuing strengthacross the board and some tightening up in labor markets.As we look at the national picture, we don't see it muchdifferently than the staff, a little higher on the inflation side. Ithink we have a little more in terms of the labor compensation builtin than they do, but not a lot. I think the risks are clear, probablynot worth stating, but I'll do it anyway. They're obviously on theinflation side at this point. I don't think we've seen sufficientsigns that our policies have impacted the economy. Maybe there's alag that we haven't seen yet--that they will begin to impact. But Ithink we ought to gear our policy more towards the risk of inflation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I share Frank Morris's appreciationof the staff's efforts to give us some drought-adjusted figures forthe GNP for the projection period. Obviously, that drought has been asevere blow to a lot of parts of the country, but there's reallynothing that monetary policy can do in the short run to deal withthat. So, I think we need to focus on these drought-adjusted figuresin trying to plan the course of monetary policy. These figures showGNP, after a bulge in this quarter, working down on a drought-adjustedbasis to around 2 percent in the early part of next year. That seemsto me--in light of the tightness in labor markets and the higherlevels of capacity in a lot of key industries--to be about as fast aswe would want GNP to grow at this stage.I'm not quite as optimistic as Ed Boehne was--and I gather,probably Martha--that on the basis of these variable rates on consumerloans, consumption will slow down as much as the staff has guessed.They've got 1.3 percent throughout each quarter of 1989. If I had toguess, I would think it's probably going to run higher than that--although that would certainly be a desirable rate, in view of thenecessity of getting that down to the point that we can accommodate animprovement in our balance of payments.What really bothers me most, I think, is what bothers most ofthe others; that despite all this tightening that we have done upuntil now, and the staff's projection of considerably more tighteningbeyond this, we've still got pretty big increases in inflationprojected. For example, the CPI less food and energy is rising atover a 5 percent rate at the end of next year, and much the same sortof thing is true for the fixed-weight GNP deflator, which is close to-18-8/16/884-1/2 percent. These may be too high, I don't know, but theycertainly seem reasonable to me, given the upward pressure on wagesand employment costs that are now becoming increasingly apparent. Andwhat this means to me is that we still have a serious inflation threatfacing us. And if we have projected inflation at less than itactually turns out to be, then that's going to cross, I think, apretty important threshhold in terms of what it would do toinflationary expectations. And I think that could be very seriousindeed. So I hope we can hold it down some--at least as low as thestaff is projecting. And I would like to think we can do better thanthat.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. With regard to the national economy, a point thatthe staff commented on and that I would emphasize is that it seems thesurprises this year really have been almost uniformly on the upside.The incoming statistics seem to continue to indicate strength, as Iread them, and it seems to me that we have used up capacity morequickly than we had anticipated.As I look at the District economy, both the measures ofeconomic performance and the anecdotes I'm hearing suggest to me thatsurprises may continue on the upside for some time longer. Icommented last time that, at least in many of the diversifiedeconomies of our District, we had boom or close to boom conditions,and that's continuing in those economies. The one really new piece ofinformation that I picked up in the last several weeks that I wasn'thearing much about earlier--and allowing for all the caveats such as Idon't know what the seasonal factors are and the sample is small andso forth--is that I have heard from a wide range of manufacturersabout their ability to raise prices now 4 or 5 percent. In some casesthis is the first price increase in 2 or 3 years. But they are nowputting them in place. And some have commented that this is now thefirst increase; they plan on another one later in the fall. So forwhat that's worth, I think I've started to hear a lot more, not aboutconcerns about inflation, but about actual price increases.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, the New England economy appears tohave moved into a new phase at the beginning of the fourth quarter oflast year. For 13 years we were an economy that was growing fasterthan the economy as a whole, and about 40 percent faster in terms ofthe rate of growth in personal income. Since September of last year,we've seen a situation in which the rate of growth in New England isrunning a little over 1/2 the rate of growth of employment for thecountry as a whole and about the same rate of growth of personalincome. I've been analyzing this and I've concluded that the reasonfor the slowdown is simply sheer shortages of labor. The unemploymentrate is 2.8 percent for New England as a whole. And there's just noway that we are going to be a growth area in the next decade, it seemsto me. This is causing some embarrassing spinoffs. The governor ofMassachusetts has found his revenues coming in well below projections.And, of course, the reason is simply that Massachusetts is fullyemployed; we can't grow the way we've done in the past.-19-8/16/88The only state in New England which is doing better than thenational average in terms of growth of employment and income is Maine.And that's the state with the highest unemployment rate and with a lotof people underemployed in the labor force. But the rest of NewEngland is flat out. If you look at the areas of employment for thisfully employed economy, there are only two occupational areas where weare doing better than the national average. One is finance,insurance, and real estate, and the other is construction. I findthis rather alarming because the reason, of course, is that we stillhave this big commercial office building boom going on. we arestarting to see signs around Stanford of surplus space. But I justgot a report from andthey're projecting that the current vacancy rate of 11 percent inBoston, which is still low by national standards, is going to drop to8 percent by the end of 1989. I think this is baloney. And I thinkwhat it means is that by the end of 1989, the real estate business--and I'm afraid some of our bankers are going to find themselves havinginvested in some of these buildings--will be taking on thecharacteristics of Houston and Dallas. So, I think we are definitelyin a turning point situation, which stems sheerly from the fact thatwe just don't have any labor for growth any more. I see statespending in Massachusetts being projected--, they're projecting a rateof growth of revenues next year of 8.3 percent. It's not going tohappen. It can't happen in the slow-growing environment that we aregoing to have.MS. SEGER. Big tax increase.MR. MORRIS. I think something has to give there. It's notgoing to be before the election. I think the euphoria is going to bedisappearing and we'll be facing a lot of the problems of a slow-growing economy.MR. PARRY. Do you have a significant in-migration?MR. MORRIS. we are getting some in-migration, but theproblem is our housing is so scarce that the price of residentialhousing has just ballooned in the past few years. It has gone toastronomical levels, we are up to New York and San Francisco levels.And it's very difficult to move people into Boston; they get stickershock when they see our residential real estate prices. So I thinkthe prospect of more than a modest in-migration is very, very dim.MR. PARRY. We are getting record in-migration in California.I think it's about 700,000 or something like that a year--it'sincredible. And we have similar housing problems, but I guess it'sjust that you can find cheaper areas. Plus, there's a very large[unintelligible]. That seems to keep a lid on things a bit.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, in some ways, Mike Prell gavemy report. I think I agree very much with how Mike characterized theeconomy. Getting to the anecdotal stuff, I really haven't much toadd. There is more talk about scarcities in the labor market, even interms of part-time jobs and things like that. In terms of anecdotes,I think we'll get a better fix on things in early September. I thinkmost of these major companies come back after Labor Day and sit down8/16/88and really begin the process of thinking in earnest about 1989 and soon. I think that some of the feedback that should begin to flow outof that will probably give us a better and fresher picture of what thesituation is. But at least for now, virtually every comment I hear isvery much on the bullish side.In the context of the outlook and the forecast, I have just acouple of comments. Looking at the external side of the Board staffforecast and, for what it's worth, the New York Fed staff forecast,both have real net exports in GNP terms in the fourth quarter of 1989below -$50 billion. And I think that is quite a remarkable result inone sense. But I think it belies something else that gets kind oflost in the dust here--and that is, that both also have for the year1989 a current account deficit that's still $125 billion. And thosecurrent account deficits are going to have to be financed. I mentionthat because, while there's a certain element of euphoria in marketsand elsewhere about adjustments taking place, the fact of the matteris that in financial terms, as measured by the current account, westill have very, very large external imbalances. And for that matter,the budget deficit is still sitting there stuck somewhere around $150billion. So, I don't see that a lot has been achieved in terms ofsignificant progress on both the internal and external financialimbalances that are the root cause of many of our problems.On the inflation side, I guess my biggest concern by far atthis point, Mr. Chairman, is that I think there is at least a 50/50chance that the inflation genie is already out of the bottle. I don'ttake any forecast very seriously, but if we look, for example, at ourown forecast--which by the way has a very modest increase in interestrates with orders of magnitudes about half of what Mike is talkingabout--it has a GNP deflator toward the middle and the end of nextyear at rates of increase of 4-1/2 percent and higher. It has afixed-weight deflator of 5 percent and higher; it has a CPI of 5-1/2percent and higher; it has compensation per man-hour at 5 to 5-1/4percent and higher. By each one of those measures, the accelerationin the rate of inflation is somewhere in the area of 1 to 1-1/2percentage points over what has been the experience for the pastseveral years.That to me is very problematic in its own right. But what isparticularly problematic is that it just doesn't take much at all forthose price forecasts to end up a threshhold level higher. In otherwords, instead of pushing and penetrating 5 percent on some measuresyou could easily get results that break through the 6 percent level.It takes very little to go wrong, at least in the context of our pricenumbers, to produce that result.As I said, our forecast differs from the staff only in thesense that I think the interest rate assumptions or, if you will, thepolicy assumptions may be somewhat different. But when I look at thesituation in that light, it does produce that fear on my part that wemay already have an accelerating inflation problem on our hands thatis going to be very costly to deal with.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, with respect to the Greenbookforecast, on a year-over-year basis our forecast would be very-21-8/16/88similar. However, looking at the shorter term--and I'm taking aboutthe third and fourth quarters, and particularly the third quarter--ourforecast is a bit higher. I hate to describe it as substantiallyhigher, but in terms of final sales, for example, consumption isroughly a percentage point higher or so in the third quarter and alsosomewhat higher in the fourth quarter. That suggests that the lasthalf of the year is a bit stronger than the Greenbook forecast. Andit implies, at least to me, some further pressure on wages and pricesthat may not otherwise be built into the Greenbook over the forecastperiod.With regard to the regional forecast, as has been the caseover the last couple--and perhaps the last three--years, we areimproving in the District, but at a pace somewhat slower than thenational recovery rate, as measured by personal income, for example,employment, and other similar measures. Retail sales are moderatelyhigher than they were a year ago with inventories reported to be aboutin line--as a matter of fact, being trimmed within the last month ortwo. Auto sales are holding up; measured year-over-year they are abit higher than a year ago.Two areas that are particularly important in our District areenergy and agriculture. The level of energy prices has continued todamp the enthusiasm of people for going out and spending money tostick holes in the ground. As a result, there is not muchenthusiasm--particularly in that belt which would include Oklahoma,parts of Colorado, and Wyoming, which are still depressed because ofenergy. Laid on top of that, obviously, is the agricultural situationof the drought, which has been very varied across the District. Ifyou look for example, at Nebraska, parts of Kansas, and westernOklahoma, they've had ample rain and the crops will reflect that. Ifyou look, on the other hand, at eastern Kansas, Missouri, and up intoSi's area in Iowa and on east beyond that, the drought has had a veryserious impact.Having that in mind, our numbers are a bit stronger than theGreenbook. It isn't clear to me whether or not some of that may beexplained by the drought impact and the timing of that impact on thosenumbers. By and large in the agricultural sector, there will be animpact on the producers, but if you look into the financial sectorthat finances agricultural production--as I think Si may havementioned his survey shows--the banks are in pretty good shape. As amatter of fact, they have gotten rid of a lot of the bad loans overthe adjustment period. They have built their capital back, accordingto our survey, by over 10 percent. And in a sense, they are in verygood position to accommodate this drought impact. I would findsomething to worry about if this were to be a two-year drought insteadof a one-year drought; then that story would change dramatically.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I have just one comment and a couple of anecdotesthat I've picked up in the last few days. The comment involves thedrought-adjusted real GNP growth figures. I too found these veryinteresting, particularly to see the amount of deceleration that itshows over the fourth quarter. That's really dramatic--from 3.8 to1.8 percent. So it does paint quite a helpful picture. Also, onething I haven't heard mentioned in connection with the drought is the-22-8/16/88fact that it motivated the people down the street here to rain about$3.9 billion on farmers in the form of cash. That ought to dosomething for somebody.On the anecdotes, a number of people in home building haveexpressed to me concern about the latest upward move in interestrates. I would say that their numbers are somewhere around 100thousand to maybe even 200 thousand starts a year more pessimisticthan what we are showing. Also, one of the things that has beenpointed out to me involves defense spending and the impact of thisinvestigation that's going on here in Washington--looking at the[unintelligible] and procurement process--and what this means as faras the slowdown in the actual granting of new defense contracts andalso the payout of some existing ones. This may help your area,Frank; it gets a lot of this money up there.Also on the export side, a number of manufacturers are veryconcerned about this rebound in the dollar because they were justreally moving forward to emphasize exports and to gear up forproducing more products for export. And now, as they see the dollarrebound, they're concerned that maybe they'll get geared up just intime for the market not to be there. I think that that is somethingcertainly to look at, particularly any increase that's above today'salready higher levels. And the final thing I've picked up is in theconsumer area. I was talking to a couple of daysago, who told me that the only strong area there was sales of airconditioners; you can all figure out why that has been the case. Andthe sales of lawnmowers have been very weak.MR. BLACK. I can explain that, Martha.MS. SEGER. Snowplows are coming up.MR. BLACK. One of us is really--MS. SEGER. But it is sort of interesting that that was theexact comment made. This person also mentioned the concern over theconsumer debt burden and what that may do in the future, particularlyif economic growth does slow dramatically. I believe that someretailers are looking at this variable-rate loan issue and whether ornot the higher interest rates in the market feed back into theconsumer budget more rapidly, because even though ARMs are oftenadjusted only once a year, the variable rate credit cards and the homeequity lines often are adjusted monthly. Therefore, we would get amore prompt feedback. And I know there is some concern out there thatthat would be another source of restraint on consumer spending. So,that's just a little bit extra on anecdotes for you. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. It seems everyone wants to comment about thedrought. Let me mention one item of caution, and that is that adrought has an impact not only upon the supply side of production, butalso on the demand side. And no one really knows whether or not thedemand side effects are less than or greater than the impact upon thesupply side. So, I think I'd have to caution that there is a muchlarger segment of the U.S. society that is affected by agriculture andthe loss of rain. It may affect behavior in regard to consumption as-23-8/16/88well as durable goods expenditures. So, I think there's someuncertainty here that needs to be kept in mind.In the second place, I think you have to remember that justas we have the drought-adjusted GNP figures for 1988, you're going todo the same process for 1989. We are looking at agriculturalproduction in the grain area that is only at 73 percent of capacity;and that's going to go to 97 percent of capacity next year. Andyou're going to have a dramatic move forward, because when you changethe acreage reduction to qualify for government programs from 27-1/2percent to 10 percent, you're getting more than that change inplantings because the higher price will induce some people not to playthe game. That is, there will be farmers who will leave the programrestrictions altogether. So there'll be an impact for GNP that is nota capacity or inflation induced impact that does need to beconsidered. And the final thing I might mention about the drought isthat no one really knows how much that bill they passed is reallygoing to cost. It has a lot of complexities in it, in regard to$50,000 and $100,000 limitations and whether the $100,000 encompassesother payments. So there will tend to be, in some sense, probablyless actual outlay than may have been anticipated.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You mean it'll be less than $3.9billion?MR. ANGELL. It could very well be less than $3.9 billionbecause no one has really done a microeconomic analysis regarding howmany of the people who are supposed to receive the payments will berestricted by the caps. And there will be some farmers who willreject the payments because they do not want to commit themselves totwo years of crop insurance. So, there are a lot of uncertaintiesthere.I think that all of us would recognize that we have morestrength [in the economy] right now than we would like to have. And Iwould agree with Jerry that certainly the rate of inflation currentlygoing on is unsatisfactory. But it seems to me that that's anindication that our policy wasn't exactly what it should have been inprevious periods. Certainly, in the fourth quarter of last year andthe first quarter of this year, we did not have the monetary policy inplace that in hindsight we would like to have had in place.I think we can learn something, however, by the impact ofthis discount rate increase and looking at the bond markets. Now, Ihave looked at key markets because I think there's a lot ofinstruction there. The bond market weakened, of course, as it alwaysdoes when the discount rate increases. It almost didn't for 30minutes this time; the bond market almost tried to remain strong inthe face of a discount rate increase, because there were some peoplethere apparently at first who thought that the Fed's going to betighter, so that improves the outlook for inflation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That wasn't the reason. They were allshocked into silence and incoherence.MR. JOHNSON. They were waiting for the phone.-24-8/16/88MR. ANGELL. But it didn't take long for the normal stance todevelop, which was that, after all, if the Fed did this drastic thingwhich wasn't expected--and, of course, it makes the markets a littleangry for us to do something that they don't expect us to do--thenthings really must be worse than they anticipated. And so we have akind of feedback that, if we are not careful, impacts the bond market.Now the equity markets, it seems to me, also reveal some indicationabout how monetary policy affects perceptions. And I think the rateof real investment is not unrelated to equity market behavior. Itseems to me that in spite of the fact that you can't see everythingyou want to see, Lee, there's some evidence there to say that there'ssome restraint in place. I think the foreign exchange markets alsocertainly can be expected to operate with feedback loops--from thebond market particularly. And when the U.S. bond market has adifficult period of time, then I think you'd expect foreign exchangemarkets to react to that. My own view is that the foreign exchangemarkets will probably continue to be stronger than anticipated, andindeed, that's our primary policy mistake--that we did not standagainst the foreign exchange depreciation which in a sense is behind[our having] a heavier growth path than we should have had.I think commodity prices also are showing some effect ofmonetary restraint. And I don't know whether the rest of you havenoticed it or not, but to me it's kind of pleasing to have M2 be on a4 percent growth path; and maybe we'll get it down to 3 percent. Whenyou get ready to do your report, Don, I guess I want to find out whatimpact a 9-1/2 percent fed funds rate and a 10-1/2 percent rate willhave on M2 growth. Certainly, that seems to me to be a difference.And I guess it's pleasing to me to see that when M2 growth got up to 8percent and right above our target range that, policywise, we wereable to turn that around and bring that down to an acceptable level.Now I don't know whether 4 percent is right or 3 percent or 2 percent,but I guess I'm more confident than others are that if we stay with 4percent or 3 percent or 2 percent on M2 growth that things will workout so that we'll all be happy with the inflation results down thepike.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. Let me start out by observing that there's anenormous difference between the tone of this discussion and the toneof the discussion that you would hear, for instance, in the OECDeconomic policy committee or WP3. When foreigners are talking aboutthe United States these days it is generally with admiration: Gee, Iwish I were in your shoes--with the possible exception of theJapanese. I listen to this discussion here, and it is probably themost pessimistic discussion I've heard for the last two years aroundthis table. I'm not exactly sure what accounts for that differenceexcept that people look a lot more skeptically at their own future.Overall, I still think everything is going more or lessaccording to plan. If you look at the various components of GNP, wecontinue to have the best progress in the export sector and theinvestment sector, and that's exactly the way it should be. We hadgrowth last quarter of gross domestic purchases of 1.1 percent. Ifyou look at the projections out--2.3, 1.4, 2.7, 1.7, and 1.2 percent--they are all in that ballpark range. So, certainly it's not going tobe a runaway economy in any sense of the word. Yes, there are certain8/16/88areas where we do see shortages; quite a few people have talked aboutskilled labor shortages. But I fail to see how a tight monetarypolicy will produce more skilled workers to alleviate that particularshortage.Actually, I saw a very interesting article produced by theChicago Fed research department that was arguing essentially that thewage pressures wouldn't be as pronounced as many people were going toexpect. I don't like the PPI increases any more than anybody else; Ithink that is a worrisome index indeed. But on the other hand, asGovernor Angell just pointed out, the commodity prices which are evenfurther down the pike, are again very well behaved and roughly on thelevel that they were exactly one year ago. I think the differencebetween the GNP deflator and the fixed-weight price index isn't onlydue to base periods and things of that sort. It's due to the factthat Americans are smart and they are shifting away from the expensiveproducts to the less expensive products. As a result, actualinflation is less than the inflationary pressures which are emanatingfrom some sectors.The dollar continues to be strong as well. I think overallif you have to make a judgment on whether you really want a muchstronger economy, you would say no. Do you really want a much weakereconomy? I certainly would say no. And, therefore, I've come up withthe conclusion that we shouldn't tinker all that much.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further comments on this roundrobin?MR. HOSKINS. I see commodity prices as having moved up morethan Bob Heller does. I look at the indexes in the Economist magazineand they're all up 20 percent or better versus a year ago.MR. JOHNSON. Depends on which one you look at.MR. ANGELL. It depends on which index you're looking at.MR. HOSKINS. Well, [unintelligible] whether you're usingSDR, dollar, or sterling index.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Have they got grains?MR. JOHNSON. Yes.MR. ANGELL. The Economist index is the highest year-over-year rate of increase of any index.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's [a reflection] largely of grain.MR. HOSKINS. I can't tell what's in it. It just says allitems, food, industrial.MR. HELLER. If you're looking at the Federal Reserve index,it's within a fraction of a percentage point from the level a yearago. Is that correct?-26-8/16/88MR. JOHNSON. It's the same with the Journal of Commerce.But there are a couple of them that are much higher; there are acouple that are no change.MR. HELLER. Especially some indexes that are weighted.MR. JOHNSON. Depends on what you weight it by, too.MR. PARRY. Bob, you made the comment that the slowdown isjust what the doctor ordered. Is that correct?MR. HELLER. Domestic.MR. PARRY. Domestic that we see in the forecast. What isthe monetary policy implication associated with that forecast?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the next session. GovernorJohnson's got a relevant comment.MR. JOHNSON. I don't know if it's relevant, but I've got acomment. I think everyone has laid out the risks pretty well. Almosteveryone agrees that the risks are on the upside, and that's the way Ifeel. I think the risks are tilted more toward the upside, although Idon't think they're zero on the downside either. We've seen that evenwith a half point change in the discount rate--it went from 6 to 6-1/2percent, relative to where the funds rate is now. And in the schemeof things, you wouldn't think that would be a big factor, but you seenervous ripples in the financial markets when you do that. We've allseen over the last year or so how expectations can change fairlydramatically. And I think we have to be cautious about that. So, Ithink we should be concerned about the magnitude [and] the timing ofthe actions we take.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It seems to me you're also getting overinto the next session.MR. JOHNSON. Okay, I'll get away from that. But the otherthing I wanted to say on the overall view, in terms of actions thatwe've taken in the past and depending on what we do in the future: Idon't think it's going to be that easy to manage the adjustmentprocess by the actions we take. I think our moves, in the past, havehad an effect of strengthening the dollar, and they would continue todo so. They're going to affect both domestic and overall demand.Either the exchange rate flows through and it weakens ourcompetitiveness some, or foreign central banks try to stabilize thedollar and you're going to get a weakness on the foreign demand side.I know Ted pointed out there are some lags. But eventually that'lltake place. So I'm not sure we should believe that we can get theadjustment process at the same time we get the slowing down. I thinkmost of what we are seeing on the adjustment process is a result ofwhere the exchange rate has come to this point. We've had asubstantial adjustment on the discount rate; we'll have lagged effectsfor some time to come. But I think a price-stable economy here isconsistent with a fairly large current account deficit. I don't thinkyou can get them both down unless you have--I don't know, maybe amajor recession would do it. But I'm not sure that's in our interestto do.-27-8/16/88 -28-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no further comments, andbefore we break for coffee, I was hoping that Don Kohn could get hisremarks in.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You'll need the coffee.It turns out my comments overlap substantially the subjects GovernorAngell covered, post-drought anyhow. Wayne, you and I will have tothink about the implications of that some time together. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you Mr. Kohn. We'll take a breaknow and when we come back we will first discuss what Don has beensuggesting and then we'll go to a round robin on the Committeediscussion on policy.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible] Mr. Kohn and GovernorAngell.MR. ANGELL. Don, I appreciate your--MR. KOHN. Oh, I thought the questions were going to be forGovernor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Well, fortunately, I get to ask the questions.MR. KOHN. Okay.MR. ANGELL. Don, for the fourth quarter of 1988 and thefirst quarter of 1989, M2 growth was, I think you said, 4 and 3-1/2percent. Could you give me some confidence intervals on thoseestimates?MR. KOHN. Actually, I'll give you our point estimates andyou can put your own confidence intervals around them. Mine would bevery wide; I have 3-3/4 percent for the fourth quarter of 1988 and 3-1/2 percent for the first quarter of 1989.MR. ANGELL. Do you want to give me the standard error of theestimates then on--MR. KOHN. No. I don't have one, but--MR. ANGELL. Well, give me just sort of a range.MR. KOHN. Oh, I would say plus or minus 1-1/2 percentagepoints.MR. ANGELL. Oh, that's pretty narrow. Okay.MR. KOHN. I just made that up.MR. ANGELL. I don't mean to cast aspersions on yourforecast, but that's pretty tight.MR. KOHN. The basic point, as I see it, is that the rise ininterest rates that we already have will be damping M2 growth relative8/16/88to its rates so far this year. So, I think we'll be seeing things atleast below 6 percent, or under 5 percent. Now, I don't know how farunder it will be--3-1/2 or 4 percent is our basic forecast--but Ithink the message is pretty clear.MR. ANGELL. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. On page 12 of the Bluebook you say that thetightening of reserve positions under alternative "C" immediatelyfollowing the discount rate hike would be somewhat surprising tomarket participants. I find that statement surprising. It seems tome that the market is anticipating us to follow-up the discount rateincrease with a firmer policy and that they'd be surprised if wedidn't.MR. KOHN. I think that's true in a general sense. If youlook at, say, futures market rates and things like that, bill ratesare a little higher by the end of the year than they are now, but notby a lot. And I guess I think generally they expect us to firm. I'mnot sure they'd expect a full half percentage point. The Bluebook inpart was addressing that point--another half percentage point on thefunds rate a week after the half percentage point increase in thediscount rate. I think you're right in the sense that the market isanticipating some gradual firming of the funds rate over the remainderof the year. You can see that in these surveys of marketexpectations. But I don't think they'd be anticipating something ofthis magnitude this soon; that's all I meant to say.MR. JOHNSON. Wouldn't you see that in bills? I don't thinkyou've seen that in the spread of bills over the funds rate. You'vehad a little bit of upward pressure, I think, because of supplyconditions, due to the suspension of the long bond. But you don't seea big spread developing in bills over the funds rate.MR. KOHN. No, you don't. In fact, the bill rate looks alittle low relative to the funds rate. I would associate that alittle bit with some of the uncertainties associated with a discountrate increase, a little flight to liquidity--not much, but a little.But I think if you do look at the--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The futures markets don't show the typeof tightening that's in alternative "C".MR. KOHN. Not in "C", no. But at least the money marketservices surveys that we get do show some gradual firming seen by--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the question is, which is the morevalid approach: to look at the futures markets for the Treasury bills,or at a survey of forecasters?MR. KOHN. If the forecasters have the investment funds, theyought to be consistent with one another.SPEAKER(?). That's right.8/16/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And if they are not, which do youchoose?MR. KOHN. I don't have specific numbers in front of me.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. My recollection, however, is that theforward markets are showing less of an increase than is implicit inthe forecast.SPEAKER(?). That's right.MR. KOHN. Certainly less than alternative "C".CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I think this is a version of Governor Angell'squestion. But what has been the historic performance of the M2 modelor equation recently? Has it been tracking reasonably well?MR. KOHN. It's not too bad. We missed last year--actuallythe GNP revisions didn't do us any favors because M2 was low alreadyrelative to the model projection by about a percentage point. Nowit's low by about 2 percentage points after GNP was revised up. Wehave several models, but one of them I'm looking at--this is one thatmissed last year by about 1-1/4 percentage points in fact--was righton in the first quarter and underpredicted the second quarter by acouple of percentage points. It hasn't been bad. You shouldunderstand that these projections are not strictly model-basedprojections. We do take into account the errors that the models havebeen making, and make judgmental adjustments for that. We pay perhapsa little more attention to what they tell us about the interest rateeffects; and then we factor that into our own sense of where velocityis going and the projections of income growth that we get from theGreenbook.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Don, both alternatives cover a relatively shortperiod of time. Would you indicate which of the two alternatives, "B"or "C," is most consistent with the policy assumptions in theGreenbook forecast?MR. KOHN. Well, for the next six weeks it hardly matters,but the Greenbook really didn't have an increase of interest rates inthat very short period of time necessarily behind its forecast.MR. PRELL. Nominally, for the current quarter, we take theexisting funds rate as given through the end of the--MR. PARRY. The quarter?MR. KOHN. Yes.MR. PARRY. So, it's really more consistent with "B," you'dsay?MR. PRELL. Yes, but basically for the GNP forecast, we aremore interested in the drift over the next several quarters.-30-8/16/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it's consistent with "B" butgoing to "C" the next time.MR. KOHN. Firming some at some point in the fourth quarter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions? Lee.MR. HOSKINS. Don, I took it that the last part of yourdiscussion, with respect to operating procedures, was [a suggestion]that we might want to discuss them. So I guess I would like to make astatement about them in terms of my preferences. There were basicallythree options that were laid out: one is fed funds targeting; anotheris in between which is sort of half fed funds and half borrowings; andthe last is straight borrowings target. In my view I would preferstraight borrowings target if, as you suggest, we can live with it interms of allowing the funds rate to fluctuate a little bit more. Ithink there are disadvantages to doing what we are doing--that is,sort of half fed funds and half borrowing--because I do think it leadsto some confusion in the marketplace. If I had to choose between thethree options, I would choose the borrowings target because I thinkit's the cleanest and it's the one that leaves us with the best chanceto get back to aggregates targeting, if we ever get confident withusing the aggregates. But I would take explicit funds rate targetingover what we are currently doing, as long as we stay on what I wouldcall an economic conditions kind of policy--that is, responding in theshort term to changes in the numbers. It seems to me we are muchbetter equipped to do that with an explicit federal funds rate target.But we have to be aggressive if we are going to move it and get aroundthe concern that you had with that--that it gets too narrow on us.And it has been.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Don, in connection with this issue of thedeviation of the fed funds rate from the borrowing target, seasonalborrowing has been relatively high. How much of the deviation do youthink is caused by that? And doesn't this high seasonal componentsuggest that we perhaps need a higher borrowing target than weotherwise would?MR. KOHN. I'd say it goes the wrong way. The idea ofseasonal borrowing is that it doesn't respond quite as much tointerest rate pressures as regular adjustment borrowing. You have anautonomous seasonal factor influencing that borrowing that should tendto bias the funds rate down rather than up relative to ourexpectations. So I would say that for some time the seasonalborrowing hasn't had any effect. It might at very low levels ofadjustment plus seasonal borrowing targets, but we are not there anymore. I think the most recent period is evidence of that. But you'reright. If you thought that somehow it was having an influence, you'draise the borrowing target at even higher federal funds rates. But Idon't think it is.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think I share Lee's objective ofgetting back to the point, if we ever can do this, where we can reallycontrol this supply of reserves--somehow measured--so as to control-31-8/16/88the rate of growth of the money supply. To put it I guess a bitunkindly, it seems to me that what we do now really is sort of amodern-day version of the real bills doctrine, in a sense. The marketgets all the money it wants at some price or some borrowed reservelevel. If it wants more, we pump out the reserves and we say thedemand for money has increased. If it wants less, we sop up reservesand say the demand for money has declined. If we want to nudge it oneway or another, through either the borrowed reserve target or throughmanipulating the federal funds rate, we change the price of money--inmuch the way the discount rate used to function under the old realbills doctrine. So I really don't see that it's much different fromthat.But, given the uncertainties that people feel exist in theaggregates at the present time, I think I would come out a littledifferent from where Lee does on which of the various alternatives weshould use. I would use the federal funds rate. I think we areconfusing the public, we are confusing ourselves, and we are confusingthe boards of directors by going through the borrowed reserve target.And in recent days, we've been resolving all doubts in favor of thefederal funds rate, and I would prefer to just use that federal fundsrate as long as we are on this kind of regime. But I think at somepoint the aggregates are going to behave in a more normal,predictable, way and we can reduce this degree of fine tuning thatwe've been following. And only then will I feel very comfortable withany policy decision. Now we have to pick out a level of interestrates somehow defined, and predict what will happen. The way I dothat is to figure out what I think it is on an ad hoc basis and then Ibear in mind that most of our mistakes I think have been on the sideof being too easy, historically. So I put in a fudge factor and votefor something a little tighter than I think it probably ought to be onthe ground that that's the way we usually miss. But I do hope oursimulations suggest M2 is beginning to behave reasonably normally now;Don verified that to some degree. And I hope somewhere along the waywe can get to the point that we are really controlling the supply ofmoney rather than letting it be purely demand determined.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's one of the most interest-ing events--which we haven't really focused on in the last six or ninemonths--how well behaved M2 has been.MR. ANGELL. M2.MR. BLACK. It has been very good really. Wayne said a whileago he was taking considerable comfort in M2; and I was taking a lotof comfort in that, too, until Don pointed out that it was the RPs andthe Eurodollars that were weak. The consumer-type components of M2were relatively strong, so that reduced my degree of comfort. Still,that's something that makes me feel better than I otherwise wouldbecause they've been--MR. ANGELL. But Don, you've got built back in some reboundin those.MR. KOHN. That's right.MR. ANGELL. And you've got weakening in the reserve balance,so that's still accounted for in the forecast.-32-8/16/88MR. KOHN. In that--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Caught me drinking.MR. BLACK. He can do that to people.MR. BOEHNE. On the issue of whether we have this hybrid, orborrowings or a federal funds target, there is no right answer here.And at different times one will be better than the other. But thereare some lessons I think to be learned by both the successes and themistakes of the past. You laid it out, Don, as kind of three choices:a federal funds, borrowing, or hybrid. But really the choices areover a much broader kind of a continuum. If you think, for example,at one end of that continuum you have a pure reserve targeting and atthe other you have a pure federal funds targeting, and you think ofreserves as a 10 and federal funds as a 1, this borrowing approachthat we have been using the last few years is probably a 3. It'spretty close to federal funds rate targeting. It is a compromisetoward taking account of the federal funds rate. If we compromise itfurther along the lines that we've been doing, we really move very,very close to a federal funds rate target. And there are advantages,and there are disadvantages.But I think that if we look back over our history, if youhave an approach that--as we had with the borrowing figure--has awiggle factor, it does allow the market to tell you something. Itdoes allow the market to tell you that there is a greater demand forreserves. It also avoids the trap of pegging a federal funds rate.Now, I know that there is no one around this table who would ever,ever get caught up in the problems of pegging the federal funds rate.However, that risk is there for lesser mortals and I think one has tokeep that in mind. The other thing is that it's easy around thistable to ease. There's no trouble for a central bank to ease; that'svery easy. The hard part is what we've been doing the last fewmonths, to tighten. We need all the help that we can get when we findourselves in that situation. And I think that the give that theborrowing approach allows in that procedure has been very helpful inthe snugging up that we've been doing since March. And I think themore we move over to a federal funds rate, the more difficult it wouldbe to follow that kind of snugging up. It's true that the market hasled us sometimes; sometimes it was good, sometimes bad. We ought tobe making decisions, not the markets. Nonetheless, when you get tothe practical side of it, I think this technique was helpful for us toget out in front of the inflation curve earlier than I ever recalldoing it. And I think this procedure helped.The other thing is--and I think this is an issue that one cantalk about--that this procedure does give the Chairman a little moreleeway than a federal funds target. And I think that, when we meetevery six to eight weeks, it is important for the Chairman to havesome leeway in this. Maybe everybody around the table will not agreeevery time he uses that discretion. But the way the markets operate,the way they're fast changing, and timing issues and all that, I forone think that it's important for the Chairman to have a littleleeway. So that's where I come out. Even though there aredisadvantages to reserve targeting or borrowing or whatever, I would-33-8/16/88not like us to move any more in the direction of the federal fundsextreme. I would prefer to be pretty close to the borrowing ratherthan this hybrid that we've backed into the last six weeks.MR. JOHNSON. But, Ed, don't you think if you have asymmetriclanguage that the Chairman could just as easily choose to move thefunds rate as he could a borrowing number?MR. BOEHNE. I think, Manley, he could. I think he could intheory. I think in practice that this borrowing procedure gives him alittle more flexibility and gives us a little more ability to movesooner than we might otherwise. I can't prove that's the case.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it proves that it is the case--that it's easier to move a borrowing target than it is to move fedfunds.MR. BOEHNE. Right. That's my point.MR. BLACK. That's basically a political argument.MR. BOEHNE. If the Chairman calls up and says I've upped theborrowing $50 or $100 million that's one thing. If he calls up and hesays I've upped the federal funds rate a quarter percentage point,there's a difference.MR. ANGELL. The political perspective is quite different.If someone said well, the Chairman moved the fed funds rate--MR. BOEHNE. Right.MR. JOHNSON. I just can't comprehend that, I'm sorry.MR. HELLER. Obfuscation.MR. JOHNSON. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think there is a case--MR. BLACK. It's a political argument, though, and I thinkthat's the strongest argument that Ed has made for the borrowingtarget. And I think that's why we stuck with it.MR. BOEHNE. I think if you're completely logical, Manley,you come out where you do. I just don't think human beings and humannature are completely logical.MR. JOHNSON. But you're saying the Chairman would somehowhave illusions himself that a $50 million change in the borrowing isnot moving the funds rate?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. BLACK. I think [unintelligible] moves it, so be it.MR. PARRY. It seems to me that characterizing the recentperiod as being a hybrid is maybe a little bit too strong, because inthe last statement periods we've really hit borrowings right on the-34-8/16/88head. And some times and days, there may have been some attempts toresist the funds rate. But if you are getting your target, then youmust be pretty well content with the interest rates that are resultingfrom it. I know there was a problem very early in July, but I don'tknow that it has been operating all that poorly in the last few weeks.Would you agree with that Don, or not?MR. KOHN. Well, I think we came out fine.MR. PARRY. Yes.MR. KOHN. But we did engage in some operations at certaintimes that we wouldn't have done if we'd been just paying attention toborrowing. In the end, everything turned out terrific.MR. PARRY. That's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Ed Boehne has said much of what I wanted to sayI think, except that he came out the wrong place. I happen to viewwhat has happened over the last few months--that is, the borrowingtarget as moderated, if you will, by the federal funds level--asproviding the flexibility that I think serves this Committee fairlywell, at least at this time. I must say that over the long haul Iwould move to the borrowing target. But for the near term--the restof this year at least--I like what we've been doing.I agree with the proposition that moving the borrowing targetis much easier, much more acceptable, and perhaps of some greatercomfort to the Chairman, than moving the federal funds target. But Idon't think we ought to be deluded. What we are doing when we aremoving the borrowing target is targeting what we believe to be afederal funds level. But they work together; they have workedtogether over the recent past, although apparently there's someconfusion in the market that I don't quite understand because of theDesk operations. I would not want to change at the moment; I'd liketo do what we've been doing. I have a question I guess for Don,following onto Bob Forrestal's comment with regard to the seasonalborrowing level, which has peaked, and I think is at an historicalhigh.MR. KOHN. That's correct.MR. GUFFEY. Roughly at $400 million.MR. KOHN. Right.MR. GUFFEY. Traditionally, that starts running off aboutmid-August on down to the end of the year. Given the fact that wemight maintain, for example, a $600 million borrowing level, myquestion is, with that seasonal running off, does that imply that wehave a built-in tightening if everything else remains the same?MR. KOHN. If you believe that the seasonal was having aneffect on the funds rate it would--that's the direction it would go.I guess I would just reiterate that our work in the past has failed touncover a significant effect of that sort. Your direction is right; I-35-8/16/88don't disagree with your analysis. It just doesn't seem to show up inthe data when we've tried to control for it. I think it would if wewere at much lower levels of borrowings, perhaps. But particularly atthis level, I guess I wouldn't expect it.MR. GUFFEY. But over the last two or three months we've beenessentially at a frictional level of adjustment borrowing.MR. KOHN. Very close to it.MR. GUFFEY. If you give credence at all to seasonalborrowing [ unintelligible] some slightly different characteristic--.MR. KOHN. I would say a bit above there, but not that farabove.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I can certainly accept targeting a borrowingfigure. But it does concern me when the fed funds rate whips all overand then that confuses market participants. But I think the way tofix this--maybe we can discuss this issue at some future luncheon--isto release our minutes more promptly so people will know what we areup to. Then they wouldn't have to be going through all these littlesubtle signals trying to figure out what it is we are really doing.And, you know, if the fed funds rate goes to 9 this afternoon at 3:00,some people are going to suggest probably that it's there because weput it there. They won't know. I think that getting the informationout more promptly about what our policy moves are would help to calmthe markets down and would really eliminate some of this confusion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I may be a little confused, but I think this isthe third time we are discussing this, and it has already beenresolved twice. So perhaps it's already--MR. BLACK. This is not the only issue that has ever beendiscussed three times.MR. MELZER. On the merits, I'll simply say I really feelstrongly that it's in our interest to define our business as being inthe business of reserves and not rates. I understand the linkagebetween the borrowings target and the funds rate, but the funds markethas automatically been extended to other markets. And as soon as thepublic and politicians attribute to us having control over interestrates, I think we are on dangerous ground. They do enough of thatanyway. So I think it's important how we define our business.Secondly, I'd say when policy is on the move there's going tobe volatility in rates. There's more uncertainty, and that's going tobe the case. I don't think it's a bad thing. And finally, even whenthe market gets ahead of us, it's not necessary to validate what getsbuilt in. Now, I think it has made sense to do it where we've doneit; and I've been in favor of that. But, for example, as we sit heretoday with a statement having been made with the discount rate, Ithink we have the flexibility not to validate what might be getting-36-8/16/88built in now and not give up any ground at all in terms of where wethink we need to get. Those are the thoughts I have.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. I think the problem that a lot of peopleperceive--and that's why it's on the table for a third time I guess--is precisely the problem that Joan was describing earlier, where themarket was perceiving one thing and then the Federal Reserve wasalmost led along the path by the market. And unless we chose to dothe opposite, in essence, we were caught. And that, I think, madesome people uncomfortable.I think the other problem is that quite often you do havethese technical problems. Recently, there haven't been any technicaloperating problems; but get a computer failure or encounter rainstormsin certain areas of the country, and borrowings are all over the map,and as a result, it gets difficult to really see what's going on. Inaddition, as Don Kohn was talking about, the reluctance of bankers toborrow or maybe a tighter administration of the window--which has notbeen suggested recently, but had been raised earlier--was perhapsinfluencing the amount that was actually being borrowed.I think overall I'd be in favor of moving closer, asPresident Melzer said just a minute ago, to the reserve targeting,because that's what we ultimately want to do. Obviously, there areproblems [with that approach] too. So, if we can devise a procedurethat gets us to a 5 or 6 on Ed Boehne's scale, I'm certainly willingto listen. But technically I haven't exactly figured out what thatprocedure would be.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we all would like, if wepossibly could, to get back to some form of money supply targeting,reserve targeting, because in fact that's what a central bank does. Ithink if it weren't for the extraordinary breakdown of relationships,we would never be having the first, not to mention the third,conversation.MR. HELLER. But, Mr. Chairman, the one thing that you can'tfail to wonder about is why the relationship is better again than itused to be. Maybe it is because we are doing something close to fedfunds targeting. And in that environment, you may see the moneysupply and GNP relationship being reestablished. And [perhaps] assoon as you start controlling "M" again then that relationship willtend to break down the famous Goodhart's law.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, in an odd way. we are where we arecontrolling M. We all have been focusing on the--MR. HELLER. Yes, but in a short-term operational sense.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But, we are not doing it day-by-day. Ithink that there has been a fairly consistent awareness of the factthat M2 has in fact been well behaved. Were it otherwise, I wouldsuspect you'd be hearing different sorts of reactions at certaindifferent times around this table.MR. ANGELL. Absolutely.8/16/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any other questions for Don?If not, let's get to the policy questions. Let me see if I cansummarize what I think I'm hearing at the moment. There seems to belittle change in the general view that the economy remains quitestrong and that the underlying structure is firm. There are a fewmarginal weaknesses on the edge, but remarkably few relative to thisstage of the business cycle expansion. In fact, I didn't even hearmention of weakness in the apparel-textile area, which is the onlything that I've been hearing in any context. Apparently it's not abig enough issue to be talked about.The thing that concerns me the most at this point, as Imentioned on our telephone conference the other day, is thatinventories remain--as somebody put it--lean. That is reflected inlow inventory-sales ratios and in remarkably contained lead times onthe deliveries of materials and equipment. In fact, if anything inthe last two or three months--leaving July out--lead times haveactually softened some, suggesting that the usual underlying elementswhich generate demand for inventories have been largely absent. Andyet it is very difficult to find a business cycle expansion that atits tail end does not begin to show some pickup in [inventory]accumulation. There is some accumulation going on in steel and someof the other materials, but in general it's not a big deal.It strikes me that our policy thrust ought to be in the areawhich cuts the top off of inventory accumulation, and if possible,capital goods accumulation. Real short-term rates are very crucialissues in inventory policy. We must be, I think, in a position wherewe feel comfortable that we are not financing a bulge in inventoriesthat will eventually topple the whole system. And I think that we'renot, but I'm not quite clear what to read into the July industrialproduction index which, looking at the detail, struck me as the typeof distribution of output which is more suggestive of a backing up ofmaterials production than shipments into the final sales area. In anyevent, whether one looks at it in terms of capital goods or inventory,there's just nothing out there which suggests that this is notcontinuing and will possibly even be moving at a rate in excess of theGreenbook [projection].And what that tells me is that the odds are obviously strongthat we will be having to tighten again in the future. As aconsequence, I think there's no doubt that we should be continuingwith asymmetrical language. At the moment I myself am content to sittight, at least for the short run, largely because I think we shockedthe market with the discount rate more than I thought we would. Iwas, I would say, uncomfortable with the Japanese markets and a littleuncomfortable with our own. I think they're stabilizing now, but I dothink that they still have adjustments coming from the discount ratefor a while. I don't know whether or not it's several weeks, orlonger, but I'd feel quite comfortable at this stage staying with the$600 million of borrowing requirement, but maintaining asymmetricallanguage, as a consequence of acute awareness that any forms ofevident problems get met with tightening. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I agree with you that the markets, particularlythe equity markets and to some extent the bond markets, did react insuch a way as to indicate that a discount rate change is more than a$200 million change in borrowings. It really shouldn't be, but it-38-8/16/88does seem to be. I would favor the $600 million. I favor theincrease in the fed funds trading range, that is 6 to 10 percent, togo with that. I would also be most appreciative if there was supporthere for moving the behavior of the monetary aggregates up in theorder [of the factors listed] in the operational paragraph. I wouldprefer having it go to first place. I could certainly settle for itbeing in second place. In fact, if we said something like "thebehavior of the monetary aggregates consistent with reductions in therate of inflation"--that combination would seem to be very appropriatefor me. By that I don't mean that the growth rate of M2 in any onemonth ought to be a cause for a dramatic move. What I would meanwould be that if the 26-week rate of change of M2, for example, wereto get below 3 percent, I suppose that to me would be significant.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you accept asymmetric?MR. ANGELL. Asymmetric would be fine. I would prefersymmetric, but I'd accept asymmetric. If I can get monetaryaggregates, I'll take it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I think the Chairman said it; his statement isclearly consistent with mine. As I said before, I think that therisks are still on the upside. I think we need time to see how themarket digests this discount rate change, but I think we should beprepared to move [on the basis of] the economy's performance--especially if the inflation indicators continue to show pressure. ButI think at this stage, the appropriate action is to support asymmetryin the language and maintain the $600 million borrowing with thediscount rate where it is. Let's see how those winds blow.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would you respond to Governor Angell?MR. JOHNSON. On Governor Angell's point, I wouldn't mindadvancing the aggregates in the list a little bit if we all agree thatthey're behaving a little better. But inflation pressure I think isnumber one, the major issue. I'm sort of agnostic on whether the M2demand is behaving that much better. I somewhat agree with thepossibility of what Governor Heller suggested--that M2 velocity hassomething to do with the stability--, the prediction accuracy on T-bills and short-term interest rates, to some extent. So, I'msatisfied with where it is, but I can support moving it up; I'm sortof indifferent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. When I joined the Board somebody told me thatalternative "B" was always the correct one. I'm grateful to the staffthat there are alternatives "B" and "C", so "B" is still the correctone.MR. KOHN. We had a long debate in the Bluebook meetingabout whether we should cut off the first letter of the alphabet.MR. HELLER. You've got to make it easy. I'm happy tosupport alternative "B". And I think the Ms are right in the middleof the target range; that's very good. I think we should avoid-39-8/16/88adopting a stop-go policy so we are not overdoing it on the tight sideand see that danger would be there. I think I'd go along withGovernor Angell on giving the monetary aggregates a bit moreprominence. I'm not sure I want to move it to the first spot, butsomewhere in the middle is fine. I think that that would be very goodin front of foreign exchange and domestic financial markets. Overall,I support $600 million borrowing and I'd prefer symmetric language butbe happy to go along with asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I can support alternative "B" considering howrecently we tightened and also the short time before the next FOMCmeeting. However, it seems to me that further tightening will beneeded soon, if it isn't needed now, and that alternative "B" canhardly be described as a policy that keeps us ahead of the curve withregard to the problems of excessive economic growth and intensifiedinflationary pressures. Therefore, I strongly recommend theasymmetric language. It would permit a tightening of policy in theintermeeting period if incoming data indicate no significantdeceleration in economic activity. With regard to the ordering of thephrases in the second sentence of the operational paragraph, I wouldnot be in favor of changing the position of the monetary aggregatesbecause I know how quickly their behavior can change and we mightregret moving them up to a more prominent place this early.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I agree with what you outlined, Mr. Chairman,the $600 million and asymmetric language. I feel strongly also thatwe are going to have to move again. I'm particularly concerned aboutthe very rapid growth in the last couple of months of the narroweraggregates. And picking up on what Bob Black said earlier, I thinkthat the nature of our implementation of policy is such that if thedemands are there in the market for reserves we'll fill that demand atthe given borrowings level. So I think we can't be complacent thatwe've done enough, certainly. But I also agree with what you said: Ithink it's important to let the prior move get digested. And I don'tfeel strongly that the ordering in the language has to be changed.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that every-thing that we've heard around the table this morning plus the incomingdata suggest that if the economy continues to be very strong we aregoing to have to take another move fairly soon. But I don't think nowis the time to do it. One of the concerns I would have about movingright now is not only the shock to the domestic market, but also thedestabilizing effect that it might have abroad--in the sense that youmight get a ratcheting of rates around the world if we were to movevery quickly after the action we've just taken. So I come out that weshould stay where we are with the $600 million of borrowing. But Ifeel very strongly that the language should be asymmetric. Withrespect to the ordering of the directive, I don't really see anycompelling case to change the order. I don't think the relationshipbetween the economy and the monetary aggregates has been established,and I think the order does suggest the way in which we look at things8/16/88for purposes of making policy. While I don't feel very strongly aboutit, I would rather keep it the way it is.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I'm completely in agreement with the analysis ofthe strength of the economy. I feel a little bit like I was in avehicle that was accelerating down the road and I have an instinctivedesire to hit the brakes a little bit and snub it down. But the thingthat worries me is that I think the road's a little slipperier than itlooks in the sense that there's some fragility in the infrastructureof the economy.First of all, consumers have a heck of a lot of debt. Andthe most recent instruments of that debt--equity credit lines, as wecall them--I think have been abused in the granting throughout a largepart of the industry. I think there's a significant danger that if wegot into any kind of a downturn in the economy we could have a lot ofconsumers in a considerable amount of trouble in that particular area,because they've converted other kinds of debt to equity credit lines.Probably more important, however, is the heavy debt structurein the corporate sector. If you were to look at as many of theseleveraged buyouts and takeover schemes as I have, you would find thatin a lot of these the cash flows that are designed to service the debtthat's involved are very skinny indeed. And they depend on arelatively stable interest rate structure and the ability over areasonably short period of time to liquidate assets in order to getdebt down to manageable levels. Well, it seems to me that asignificant increase in interest rates--even one as modest as the onedescribed in the Greenbook--over the next 12 months or so could createsome major problems, at least for some of the situations that I'veseen. And that could have a very sobering effect, it seems to me, onthe overall economy through the problems that would be incurred bysome very large companies.Another one that I guess tends to slip out of our mindsoccasionally is the real estate situation. It has been gettingbetter, not only in the banks--which have increased their capital inorder to sustain the possible losses in this area--but also in thecountry generally. The country has been benefiting from lowerinterest rates and the ability to restructure some of that. It seemsto me that a lot of that ground that has been gained could be lost ifthe cost of servicing that debt goes up significantly, as it wouldbecause much of it is denominated in variable rates. Finally, thisthrift situation--an aspect of which we intend to discuss at theluncheon today--has not gone away. It's getting worse. And asignificant increase in the cost of money to these troubled thrifts isjust going to accelerate the rate of loss in that industry.When you take all of those in the aggregate, it seems to meif we snub the brakes too hard and too fast, or oversteer thisvehicle, we have a risk of going into the ditch. All I'm suggestingis that, while I think snubbing the brakes and being prepared to do sois important, I think we have to keep a very close eye on what theeffects of significantly higher interest rates could be and be readyto ease up quickly if that happens. I'm not sure I understand all ofthe terms like asymmetrical language and so forth, but I certainly-41-8/16/88would support the $600 million target on borrowings. And I'd leanmore toward the borrowings and reserve targets as opposed to eitherthe funds rates or, with due respect to my friend Governor Angell, theaggregates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, a while ago I commended Mike Prelland his associates for producing drought-adjusted figures on GNP. Iwould like, with equal vigor, to commend Don Kohn for producing anasymmetric Bluebook. I agree completely with what you said on policy,and a willingness to act further if the need should arise. I alsoagree with your statement that it might well happen that we will need"C" next month. [If that's the case,] I would hope we would have anintermeeting telephone conference like we've had. And finally, Iwould agree completely with Governor Angell's suggestion that we movethe aggregates up to number one, which probably doesn't come as agreat surprise to some in this room.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, I find it a close call between whether wetighten further now or whether we wait for a while. I think yoursuggestion about asymmetric language resolves that as far as I'mconcerned, so that the specifications of "B" with asymmetric languagelook okay to me. I do think it probably pays here to take a littlepause at least, and assess the results of our actions to date, giventhe uncertainties associated with any forecast and errors that go withthese things as well. Along those same lines, I would admit that Itake some comfort anyway in the slowing in M2 and the prospectiveslowing in M2 if Don's forecasts are in the ballpark. I would not beat all troubled if that in fact materializes, or even materializes alittle more pronouncedly than Don envisions. I think that will helpkeep us on the right course.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I agree with the policy pre-scription as you outlined it. Going back over the past severalmonths, I think the record's been good; we have been moving in theright way. And I think it is appropriate to see if at some point thisdoesn't begin to have an effect. But I do think it's clear fromcomments that we've got more to go, and the question is more of timingas opposed to the direction that we are going. So, I would be infavor of the asymmetric language and a borrowing level of $600million. And I'd allow the fed funds rate to seek its own marketlevel. But also I think if there are any other indicators, I'd moveagain on this, and I do think the phone call procedure has worked outvery well as a way of dealing with these interim changes. Certainly,I would encourage continuation of that. With regard to the language,I do feel that the pressure now is on the inflationary side and weought to maintain that focus. So I would leave the language in theparagraph just as it is.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. [I favor] alternative "B" with an asymmetricaldirective. I would keep the ordering on the language the same.-42-8/16/88However, I think a legitimate point has been raised about M2 and Ithink we probably ought to take a look at it at the next meeting tosee if the case for it has improved. If it has, then I think at thatpoint it would make more sense to put it higher up on the list. But Ithink it would be premature at this point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I, too, was surprised at the asymmetry in Don'sBluebook. And I thought about it a little bit and I figured if he canget rid of "A" this month, he can get rid of "B" next month. I don'thave any faith in this trend.MR. KOHN. It's not a trend!MR. HOSKINS. I think that kind of reflects my views on whatwe ought to be doing. I think the surprises, just from six weeks ago,in terms of the staff forecast have been on the upside; we are verystrong relative to where we thought we were. Now policy is on themove. I think the markets expect policy to stay on the move. And Ithink that leads me towards a preference for alternative "C".I would be much more comfortable if the economy had beengrowing at 2 percent and we were waiting to see the effect of ourpolicy. I don't think then it would be so urgent to move. JerryCorrigan made a point earlier that the inflation problem may alreadybe there, in terms of rising. I think he was referring tocompensation costs. So it seems to me important to try to keep thething moving along. I am sensitive to the issue raised that we havemade major moves; and certainly people can disagree on the timing.But as I listen to the concensus around here, at least to this point,very few have indicated that we don't need to move. And I guess mypoint is we've started; we probably should continue. So we could use"C" with asymmetric language going the other way which would requireus to kind of gradually pull towards "C" and not go directly to that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm not sure what you mean by that.MR. HOSKINS. What I mean is we would choose "C" but wewouldn't move agressively towards "C" until we got stronger, until wegot more data in. In other words, we have a commitment to be at "C"by the time we are at the next meeting--to a gradual tightening.MR. ANGELL. Okay, so you mean you want to go to $700 millionnow and then to $800 million by the next meeting?MR. HOSKINS. Right. So let me just finish off by saying Iwould prefer to move M2 up in the ranking.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. I find myself with Mr. Hoskins. I think we aremoving too slowly. We've had in the past month evidence showing thatthe economy is much stronger than we thought a month ago. We've hadthis dazzling--more than 800,000--increase in payroll employment intwo months, we are seeing the producer price index, excluding foodand fuel, break out on the upside of the range that it has been in inrecent years, we are seeing a rising trend in labor compensation.-43-8/16/88Granted, most of that reflects medical costs and not necessarily allwages, but it still shows the beginning of a rising trend in laborcosts in the United States.I view this present situation as being asymmetric in thissense: that given the powerful [unintelligible] in time, if we were tomove to a policy that was too restrictive we would have plenty of timeto correct it as we did in 1983, 1984, 1987. But if we make theopposite mistake and have a policy that's too accommodating, we mayfind ourselves way behind the curve and facing a situation in which weonly have two choices--accommodating an accelerating inflation orpushing the economy into recession. And it seems to me that is thereal danger of moving too slowly in the face of evidence that theeconomy is picking up very strongly.Steve McNees reminds me that the average forecasting errorfour quarters out is 1-1/2 percentage point, plus or minus. If theerror is plus, meaning that our forecast is on the downside, I thinkfour quarters from now we will have only that choice: Do weaccommodate a further acceleration of inflation or do we push theeconomy into recession? And that is the kind of choice we ought to betrying to avoid at all costs. The cost of moving now, running therisk of following too tight a policy now, is a lot less than the costof being forced into making one of these two bad choices. And theonly way you can avoid making one of those two bad choices, as welearned in the 1970s, is by taking a risk early in the game. Duringthe 1970s we were doing exactly what we are doing here. We weremoving policy in the right direction, but we were never moving itenough to stay ahead of what was going on in the system. I feel thatwe are making exactly the same kind of mistakes today. I would buyHoskins' suggestion of moving initially to $700 million with the ideaof closing up at an $800 million level. I think that sounds sensiblerather than doing it all at once. But I have a very strong feelingthat we are moving policy too slowly here.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Well, I guess I'm a "B", $600 million today.It's not a new [unintelligible]. First of all, I think the discountrate hike did catch almost everybody in the markets by surprise.Everyone is on vacation, and I don't think that we've had the fullimpact, particularly in the stock market. Also, we've had severalrounds of tightening so far this year and I'm not convinced that allof those have been felt in economic activity yet. Also, I think theforeign exchange markets are very, very important to this process.And I would want to be sure that we didn't get the dollar moving sorapidly north and get it so strong that it would impede our ability tofix our trade imbalances. I think it's important to get that doneover the long term.I do believe money matters and I think the monetaryaggregates--particularly M2--have been looking quite good, behavingvery well. In connection with that, I would go along with WayneAngell's idea that we move it up. I'm not sure that today I'm willingto put it in spot number one, but I am willing certainly to move it up[in the directive listing of factors]. Some of the indicators ofinflation and inflationary expectations, I think, look better thanthey did a couple of months ago, particularly looking at prices of8/16/88such things as gold, oil, certain commodities. And I realize we havea weak producer price index and some of those, but I think the moresensitive price numbers are not looking necessarily worse. As I said,I would go for a $600 million borrowing target, and I guess I wouldprefer a symmetrical directive, but I can certainly live with anasymmetric one.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I also would go with "B", a $600million borrowing assumption, and the asymmetric language because I dothink the next move will have to be up. As for the placement of theaggregates, I'm rather ambivalent on that at the present time. Havingtightened the position, which would lean towards moving to a littlemore restriction, I must confess I have a little discomfort. I sharemany of the concerns that Governor LaWare pointed out. Given thesituation that we have in the Southwest, and having I guess the bulkof the thrift problem centered down there as well as other things, I'ma little uncomfortable as rates move up--as credit becomes a littlemore restrictive--about what the full implications are going to be. Ithink it's going to make it fairly difficult for us. However, sincethere can only be one monetary policy and it has to be a nationalpolicy, I fully support the direction of what we are doing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would also prefer your pre-scription, that is: "B"; $600 million; asymmetric. It seems clear tome that the next move probably is up, but I have a feeling that wedon't really know what the impact of our most recent moves has been.It's time to pause a bit and see what impact that has on the markets.The other issue--if it's true that the next move is up, and I thinkthere's fairly strong agreement around the table--we are kind of in abox as far as I'm concerned, in the sense that you have this spreadbetween the discount rate and the funds rate which many think doesmake a lot of difference. Over time as that broadens, I don't thinkwe can lose sight of that spread. And as a result, after the movethat's being talked about here in the intermeeting period, you mayhave to consider another discount rate increase. That has a marketimpact, an announcement impact, that I think has to be thought aboutlong and hard. With respect to the outlook and moving it up, I'd justlike to pause and see where we come out.With regard to the aggregate question, I have great faith intalking about the aggregates as an intermediate target for the longrun, but I would prefer not to move it up from where it is now forintermeeting guidance for what policy should be. I think it's aboutin the right place, about number four. And we ought to keep it thereuntil there's a bit more confidence that it means something for short-term policy guidance.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Like some others, there is at leasta crisp debate in my own mind as to whether you could make a case thatwe should proceed promptly with a further move in the direction oftightening. But I am persuaded that the interest of orderlyprocedure, if nothing else, suggests that there is something to be-45-8/16/88said for what I will call a short period of gestation here. So inthat setting, I would support the formulation that you suggested Mr.Chairman.I don't want to muddy the waters, but I would myself at leastprefer the form of asymmetry that eliminates any reference to lesserreserve restraint whatsoever in the directive. I am absolutelyconvinced at this juncture that we are going to have to firm up policyfurther and I think the sooner we get on with that test the better.That's because, fundamentally, I agree with much of what Frank Morrissays. I am afraid that even as we speak the inflation problem may beon top of us. And I agree with much of what John LaWare said aboutthe financial risks. But the other side of that is that the one thingwe know will get us those killer interest rates is a killer inflationrate. So I am very sensitive to those financial risks, but I'm also,as I say, very sympathetic with what Frank said.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. As I read all comments, it'sclear that we have a strong central tendency for $600 million,asymmetric language, alternative "B". Amongst the members, there'smarginal support for moving up the Ms, although little support fornumber one as yet. So I would suggest that what we do is to move theaggregates above foreign exchange, because it's hard to place that--MR. JOHNSON. [Unintelligible.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's probably the way to do it.MR. JOHNSON. Because people believe that's what we aresaying.MR. GUFFEY. Move it where? Where are you going?MR. ANGELL. He's going to take it above, into number three.MR. BOEHNE. Promote it to three.MR. ANGELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Now, it's conceivable that it may getdemoted--MR. FORRESTAL. That's my problem.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible.] There's definitely amajority of the members in favor of doing that. I've been tabulatingas it goes along. But it is not a strong concensus.MR. ANGELL. I think your resolution is fair.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You do?MR. ANGELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I knew you might.MR. GUFFEY. Does that mean that the markets---46-8/16/88VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll just say for the record--I'mnot going to make a fuss about it--I would prefer that it stayedfourth in line, but--MR. ANGELL. Well, it's close.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But I had you down.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You caught it; I figured that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I didn't bother asking you.MR. FORRESTAL. You want another vote?MR. ANGELL. We already have you down.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Use the 6 to 10 in here.MR. KOHN. The monetary aggregate growth, now that it'sgetting more emphasis--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. 3-1/2 to 5-1/2 is what you've got in theBluebook for "B".MR. KOHN. 3-1/2 "to" or 3-1/2 "and"?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. 3-1/2 "and". Why, did I say "to"?MR. KOHN. Or I didn't hear.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay.MR. HELLER. You say 3-1/2 and 5-1/2?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. 3-1/2 and 5-1/2.MR. BERNARD. [The operational paragraph would read asfollows:] "In the implementation of policy for the immediate future,the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree of pressure onreserve positions. Taking account of indications of inflationarypressures, the strength of the business expansion, the behavior of themonetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and domesticfinancial markets, somewhat greater reserve restraint would orslightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable in theintermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expectedto be consistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the period from Junethrough September at annual rates of about 3-1/2 and 5-1/2 percent,respectively. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if itappears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditionsduring the period before the next meeting are likely to be associatedwith a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 6 to 10percent."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call a vote.-47-8/16/88MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesGovernor Heller YesPresident Hoskins NoGovernor Johnson YesGovernor LaWare YesPresident Parry YesGovernor Seger Yes[Secretary's note: Governor Kelley was absent and did notvote.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The only remaining item on the agenda isto note that the next meeting is Tuesday, September 20.END OF MEETING-48-