Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJune 29-30, 1988A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Wednesday, June 29, 1988, at 3:00 p.m. and continuingon Thursday, June 30, 1988, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBlackForrestalHellerHoskinsJohnsonKelleyParrySegerMessrs. Guffey, Keehn, Melzer, and Morris, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, andMinneapolis, respectivelyKohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryBradfield, General CounselPatrikis, 1/ Assistant General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. Broaddus, J. Davis, R.Davis, Lindsey,Siegman, Simpson, Slifman, and Ms. Tschinkel,Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account1/ Attended Thursday's session only.6/29-30/88Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Wajid, Assistant to Governor Heller, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Rea 1/ and Whitesell, Economists, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMr. Oliner, 1/ Economist, Division of Research and Statistics,Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMr. Thomson, Executive Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of San FranciscoMessrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Rolnick, Rosenblum,and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of St. Louis, Kansas City, Minneapolis,Dallas, and Chicago, respectivelyMessrs. McNees and Meyer, Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of Boston and Philadelphia, respectivelyMs. Krieger, Section Chief, Open Market Function, FederalReserve Bank of New York1/ Attended portion of meeting related to consideration of the Committee'slonger-run objectives for monetary and debt aggregates.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meetingof June 29-30, 1988June 29, 1988--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good afternoon, everyone. Before we getstarted, I think you're all aware that all of this paraphernaliaaround here is for our once-a-decade picture. So I presume everyone'shair is appropriately combed or constructively disarrayed. Secondly,we have dinner this evening at the British Embassy and I assume thateveryone has [arranged] transportation appropriate to their needs; ifnot, shout, and we'll get that all done. Well, let's get the minutesof the May 17th meeting out of the way. Would somebody like to movethem?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I will move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do I hear a second?SEVERAL. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, I assume they areapproved. Sam Cross usually has very little to say, but today Isuspect he's got a lot on his agenda. Sam?MR. CROSS. Well, it's been an interesting period, Mr.Chairman. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any questions for Mr. Cross?MR. BOEHNE. I have a couple of questions. What kinds ofconsultations and cooperation, or lack of cooperation, currently existamong major central banks of the world on these recent interventions?And a related question is what are we trying to accomplish with whatwe're doing or what we're not doing?MR. CROSS. We have had consultations with the other centralbanks and we've talked with them quite frequently every day. But wedon't always have the same view of what's happening in the market orwhat should be done in response. I mentioned in my report that theGermans specifically had been quite concerned about the decline in theexchange rate for the mark, which they feel has inflationaryimplications for them, particularly with what they see as excessiveliquidity in their economy. They think it is neither good for them,nor for the monetary system more broadly, for the mark to be decliningas it has been declining under the circumstances. The dollar/markrate has changed from its low point in January by about 26 pfennigs,which is more than 15 percent. And as a surplus country, they feel asthough they should not be in a situation with the mark declining;they're a bit concerned about that.Our own activity has been aimed not at trying to drive thedollar down; no one wants to do that. But equally, it seems to me, wedo not have an interest in seeing the dollar move up to unsustainablelevels and then see it fall again. Our view is that a substantialamount of what is going on now is indeed a covering of shorts. Wehear a lot of talk about what's happening in the options market. Wehear a lot of talk about hedging operations by investors here and6/29-30/88elsewhere. And we think that a lot of this is a covering of shortpositions which were built up over the past several months at the timewhen the market view was that the authorities would not let the dollarrise. And therefore, [market participants] could pretty well have aone-way bet on which way to hedge. Once this gets cleared out, westill have a huge deficit, and we still have all these other factorsthat have to be dealt with. I don't think anybody thinks we're out ofthe woods at this point. So our efforts in the interventionactivities and the other activities we've undertaken have been partlyto give ourselves some more currencies. Those currencies could becomevery useful in future months when we could very well be needing themin order to help support the dollar. [The intervention sales alsowere undertaken] to show some resistance to the rise in the dollar, soas not to let it get to levels which are simply going to beunsustainable--because service problems could well disrupt the marketagain. That's how I would [unintelligible]. We have operated, as Isay, only in deutschemarks, not in yen where the movements have beenmuch less.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just a further comment. From my ownperspective, in this period of the last week or 10 days or so--leavingaside any particular exchange rate question--I regret that we have nottaken greater opportunity in these circumstances to accumulatebalances in yen or marks or both. If you take a long view, it'sawfully hard to see that the fundamentals have changed in any materialway. The trade deficit is still there; the current account deficit isstill there. We still are going to have to finance, over the next 4years or 5 years, cumulative current account deficits of $400 or $500billion. And to the extent there are risks over time, I think theystill lie elsewhere. I personally regret that we have not taken theopportunity--even if we choose not to use them--to accumulate somebalances in this period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's actually what we're tryingto do. We would be in yen now if the Ministry of Finance werefavorably disposed to our doing that. But I think, as Sam Crosspoints out, in this type of market, which is essentially a short-covering market, one would have to react downward; the[unintelligible] of the rise probably delimits the extent of thesubsequent decline. And any accumulation of currencies puts us in aposition where we don't have to swap or obtain foreign currencies byother means. I personally would like to see us pick up a couple ofbillion dollars a year. I'm not sure that we can; and I'm not surethat we can without having other market effects. But to the extentthat there's a lot of short covering and rapid runups, rather than allof the central bank sales of dollars occurring other than from theUnited States, I think it's useful for us to get at least a part ofthat. And I think we're trying to.MS. SEGER. I think this question is related. I'm neverquite sure about the decision-making process. Is the quarterback onthese decisions the Secretary of the Treasury? Are Treasury officialsthe ones who decide the point at which to go in, or were we doing itbased on the suggestion of the Bundesbank? I just missed that.6/29-30/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Technically, it's a joint venture. Inprinciple, the interpretation of the Constitution puts the Secretaryof the Treasury as essentially speaking for the President--as thequarterback, as you put it. However, in the huddle, so to speak, weget a lot to say. And in many instances we recommend the plays. AndI would think that we've been pretty much on line. In other words, ifSam Cross has a particular point of view--if he likes a specificstrategy--more often than not we can convince Treasury that that'sappropriate to do and get the authorization.MS. SEGER. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Lee.MR. HOSKINS. Is the perception by central banks that this isa technical problem, rather than a change in trade balances that is asurprise or a change in monetary policy?MR. CROSS. Well, there have been changes in monetary policywhich were intended to support some moves that have taken place. Butcertainly we hear a great deal to suggest that a large part of this isindeed short covering in one form or another--be it dehedging byinvestors. All of last year Japanese investors bought a lot of U.S.dollar-denominated assets, but they hedged a lot of dollar-denominatedassets. And some of those hedges have been eliminated.Also, we've been hearing for a long time that corporationshave been holding off entering the market. As the rate has moved up,there has been the need to buy some dollars in order to meet theirneeds and their requirements. But certainly it's our view that a verylarge amount of this is of the nature, in one form or another, ofcovering options and other hedging. The holders of those short dollarpositions became worried at times when they saw that the dollar wasmoving up. And when they detected that, they did decide to short[unintelligible] immediately to keep the dollar from rising.MR. JOHNSON. You say they didn't decide to short?MR. CROSS. Well, because it has become costly.MR. JOHNSON. Because the dollar was under upward pressure,right?MR. CROSS. The dollar was under upward pressure, and alsothere was a view that the dollar could go up farther and that theauthorities would not hold it. I think it was, in part, a change intheir perception about what the authorities' attitudes were going tobe.MR. JOHNSON. I'm just saying that some fundamental--MR. CROSS. If the dollar hadn't risen, then there wouldn'thave been any need to short [unintelligible].MR. JOHNSON. Well, that's the point I meant.MR. CROSS. Sure.6/29-30/88MR. JOHNSON. Something caused that to happen.MR. CROSS. No, as I said at the beginning, there has been afirm undertone to the dollar because of some improvement in the tradefigures embedded in the changes and a changing view of Federal Reservepolicy. There already was a firm undertone, but this view about whatthe authorities would do popped up last week.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Up until the recent change in [official] rates bythe Germans and also the English, hadn't the change in relative[market] rates in support to our dollar grown stronger?MR. CROSS. If you look at the change in short-term interestrate differentials, the differentials have gotten much narrower vis-a-vis the mark since the last meeting.MR. TRUMAN. I think you're right. The first part of theperiod and before the last meeting they were moving the other way,MR. CROSS. That's right.MR. TRUMAN. And they moved back over the short and long endsin the last couple of weeks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Particularly since they moved--MR. TRUMAN. To some [extent] that's a reaction of themarket--the other side of what's going on in the exchange market.It's difficult to disentangle the movement that's essentially the[unintelligible] from the exchange rate expectations.MR. PARRY. I guess the point is that there is somefundamental basis for what happened to the dollar. I mean it's not--MR. CROSS. I wasn't trying to suggest that nothing hashappened in the dollar.MR. TRUMAN. We're just distinguishing between the period upto the Summit, if you want to put it that way--during which there wasa gradual movement--and what came after that, whether kicked off bythe Summit communique or other factors or sort of a general sense ofreassessing these factors and what they implied for longer-termtrends. But we've had the phenomenon of short covering, and that initself could--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Maybe a structural question, Mr. Chairman. Dowe have any limiting factors as to how much foreign currency we canaccumulate ourselves as opposed to for the Treasury?MR. CROSS. We have a limit. I think we're way below that.MR. GUFFEY. Well, isn't it--MR. TRUMAN. We have these informal limits of 12--6/29-30/88MR. CROSS. $12 billion.MR. TRUMAN. $12 billion, but because the evidence--MR. GUFFEY. Set by this Committee?MR. CROSS. Set by this Committee, right. It's an informalunderstanding set by this Committee, so it is formal [in that sense].But we are well below those numbers and we're not likely to--MR. GUFFEY. Is there a limiting factor as to how much theTreasury can accumulate?MR. CROSS. Only just that they--the classes of[unintelligible]. But they've got to have--MR. GUFFEY. Money?MR. CROSS. That's right, to offset the foreign currencycounterpart. But there are ways of doing it.MR. TRUMAN. They could work--MR. CROSS. There are innumerable ways to work outarrangements whereby both the Treasury's and the Federal Reserve'sforeign currency balances could be increased.MR. TRUMAN. There are also [unintelligible], of course, theCommittee's Procedural Instructions, which limit the amount ofoperations within daily and--MR. CROSS. We have daily currency limits, intermeetingperiod limits, and all of those.MR. TRUMAN. It works on both sides.MR. CROSS. We haven't reached any of those during thisperiod.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Sam, you didn't mean--and I presume PresidentCorrigan didn't mean--when talking about the fundamentals, that thereisn't a change in fundamentals when for 18 months the monetaryaggregate growth rates in the United States have been approximately1/2 of the growth rates of other major G-10 countries. You would callthat a fundamental that might be showing through, would you not?MR. CROSS. What I was saying was that, obviously, there havebeen a lot of changes that have occurred in the period, including whathas happened to our trade [balance] and all the rest.MR. ANGELL. So you would include the fact that the tradebalance does seem to be moving in the right direction as a change inthe fundamentals, wouldn't you?MR. CROSS. I would indeed. But all I was saying was thateven with that improvement, we still have very, very large trade and6/29-30/88current account deficits that have got to be financed. It haschanged; there's no question about that. It has shown someimprovement.MR. ANGELL. But you would also conclude, I presume, that theinterest rate differentials that are necessary in a period ofsustained dollar depreciation would be quite different from theinterest rate differentials necessary if market expectations [changed]in regard to either the rate, a change of depreciation, or perceptionsof stability, would you not?MR. CROSS. I don't know--I'm not sure how to answer yourquestion. Obviously, interest rates are a factor in determining thestrength of the dollar. And changes in differentials--certainly Iwouldn't say they are not significant as well. I think they are--MR. TRUMAN. Actually, Governor Angell, I think implicitly inhis report Sam said that, because there was a growing sense ofexchange rate stability during the first part of the period. [Funds]were, therefore, then moved into the higher interest rate currencies.This is consistent with your proposition--if there was exchange ratestability it [unintelligible] shift from pressure on one or morerates. You would expect to see some adjustment in interest rates andthat's simply what Sam is saying in response to President Parry'squestion and yours. The question is how firmly held thoseexpectations are and how long they're going to be sustained.MR. ANGELL. I did not mean my questions and accompanyingcomments to indicate that I did not believe that there cannot be anovershooting in regard to a rebound from a previous situation. Itwould seem to me that one would expect that such sustained rates ofdepreciation of the dollar against other currencies over such a longperiod of time would not be followed by a period of everythingstabilizing, but by some period of volatility. So I don't mean tosuggest that I am out of step with the notion that maybe it would beappropriate to accumulate some balances if one can do that withoutcreating the impression that the dollar's upside potential is very,very low--which could recreate this one-way bet that we've seen forsuch a long time. I think it's a very delicate matter.MR. CROSS. We've been trying to operate so as not to give animpression that we are capping the dollar, and we have been urging theEuropeans to operate in a way which would not give an impression thatwe were putting caps on the dollar at a particular level. We havebeen offering some resistance, but we've been trying to do it in amoderate way. There's an old Scottish golfer's prayer, you know, "MayGod give me the strength to hit easy." It's an effort to try toresist, not to absolutely assure that we're trying to cap the exchangerate. That's certainly not what we're trying to do.MR. ANGELL. Indeed, you've done that. And my comments arenot at all a criticism of the Desk's actions. I just couldn't quitesit still with some of the comments I heard.MR. CROSS. Yes. But it's certainly true that during theperiod when the dollar has been stable, as Ted said, the investorshave become very conscious of interest rate differentials and theattractiveness not only of the U.S. dollar, but the Canadian dollar,6/29-30/88the Australian currency, and various other currencies where thenominal interest rates are quite attractive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think he's trying to say, "Don'tshank".MR. FORRESTAL. Sam, there was an article in The New YorkTimes either today or yesterday which suggested, as I read it, thatthere was really a pretty deep cleavage between the European centralbanks on the one hand, and the United States and Japan on the other,with respect to intervention. Reading between the lines, I wonderedwhether the European central banks are really urging us to cap thedollar. Do you get any sense that--MR. CROSS. Well, I think the Germans in particular are muchmore troubled about what they see as the problem of a depreciatingmark. They're very conscious of that. And they think theinflationary implications of excessive liquidity at home, which theythink [unintelligible] plus a depreciating currency are very bad.They think it is bad from the point of view of internationaladjustment to have a big surplus country like Germany having adepreciation in its currency. They're very conscious of that and theyview the problem from that perspective. We view it from a differentperspective. Inevitably, we're going to have those differences ofview.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mr. Cross?MR. HOSKINS. Just a comment. I guess I'd feel remiss, sinceI complained on the downside of the dollar that I didn't see the gainsfrom intervention, if I didn't make the same complaint with respect tothe upside on the dollar. That's no criticism of the operation ofyour Desk, it's more a question about what we're trying to do withpolicy in terms of currency intervention. My concern is as touncertainty in the market rather than smooth outlooks and also that wemight convince ourselves, perhaps, that we can do more than we reallycan do.MR. CROSS. Well, I don't think we're under any greatillusions about the extent to which intervention can or cannot makefundamental changes. Certainly, our effort has been to try to dealwith instability rather than to add to it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no further questions, I'llentertain a motion to ratify the transactions since the May meeting.MS. SEGER. I'll move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Second?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Sternlight?6/29-30/88MR. BOEHNE. We went through some trouble several years agoto wean the markets from the notion that an eighth of a [percentage]point variation in the funds rate made a significant difference.Along came October and we essentially went to a funds rate target andan eighth of a point did make a difference. Through changes inlanguage in the directive we've tried to move away from that, yet itseems to me that the last couple of weeks have indicated that aneighth of a point does make a lot of difference in our own thinkingand the thinking of the market.My comment is not directed at the substance of policy; Ithink the snugging that was done was appropriate for policy reasons.But it does seem to me that we ought to be working against the notionthat an eighth of a point makes a lot of difference, because I thinkthat if we have to make adjustments in policy--when the Treasurybalances don't work out right or for a whole number of other reasons--that could cause us to box ourselves in. It seems to me that over thelonger term, we ought to get to the point where the markets can seesome movement up and down in the funds rate and not overly emphasizethe substance of that in terms of policy. I don't think our actionsin the last couple of weeks helped us in moving in that direction. Iguess my question, if there is a question, is did it make anydifference that we took out the sentence in the directive last time,and watered it down the time before, that we were going to allow alittle more movement in the funds rate in the implementation ofpolicy?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it did make a difference, PresidentBoehne. I think that's how it was able to unfold that in undertakinga change in the borrowing which we thought would be associated with a7-1/4 percent funds rate, it got us to something more like 7-3/8percent, or even 7-1/2 percent with the addition of some seasonalpressures here. I've heard a number of times the commentary back fromthe market that they perceive us as operating now very much more onreserve numbers and not as much on the funds rate. So, I wouldn'tshare your evaluation of recent weeks.MR. JOHNSON. It's 8 percent today.MR. BOEHNE. It's a Wednesday, too.MR. BLACK. Your borrowed reserve figure is below target,too.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is another issue here. There is ageneral concept in the market--which I think we want to reinforce andhave been trying to reinforce--that we are gradually moving. I thinkthe one thing we don't want to communicate is ambiguity on thatquestion. I think that's what has been crucial, in a sense, asdistinct from an eighth or a quarter [percentage point on the fundsrate].MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, this is a minor matter, but I findit rather curious that Lloyds, at about the time they're recognized asa primary dealer in the U.S. market, dropped out of the gilt market.I wondered what the--6/29-30/88MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, that gave us a little pause, too. Wequizzed them quite a bit about that because we look for lastingcommitment. But I think they're quite different markets. It waspretty obvious from the word go that the primary dealer group in theLondon gilt market was overpopulated and that firm along with severalothers did choose to opt out of that market. We thought they made aplausible case to us about the difference in conditions in the twomarkets. And they have performed satisfactorily, in our judgment, inthe U.S. securities market.MR. BLACK.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. You mentioned that bond yields could have beenaffected by some expectation that there wouldn't be long-bondauthority?MR. STERNLIGHT. Right.MR. JOHNSON. Recently, though, I've also seen speculationthat the House is going to issue long-bond authority. And to someextent, I think the bond market today can be reflecting the reverse ofthat.MR. STERNLIGHT. We were hearing that Governor Johnson. The[long] bond has declined in price today on reports that maybe thatproposal would be put into this technical bill on adjusting the taxmeasure. From my conversations with people at Treasury, my impressionis that they would not be at all surprised to see the additional bondauthority put into that bill, but they have rather little expectationthat it will work its way through the legislative process in time forthe August refunding.MR. HOSKINS. Peter, have you heard much discussion on thestreet about a discount rate change?MR. STERNLIGHT. Maybe a week or so back there seemed to besporadic comment of that nature. I would say there is not all thatmuch of it right now; I would say it is not a widespread expectationat this point.MR. HOSKINS. What would you think the impact on the fundsrate would be if the discount rate were to be changed?6/29-30/88MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think if we're keeping the borrowinglevel about the same, there would be a tendency to have virtually thewhole of it pass through--MR. HOSKINS. Oh, the whole change would--MR. STERNLIGHT. To the funds rate.MR. JOHNSON. I just thought about one other thing I wantedto ask, which was mentioned by Bob Black. The funds rate wasgenerally trading slightly above even the narrow range that wassuggested would be associated with a flat $50 million [increase inthe] borrowing number. And we haven't really been around thatborrowing number very much. I still sense that there is a bit of aproblem with the borrowing function relative to what we might expect.If we were to run at $550 million of borrowing consistently, would wesee slightly higher funds rates than what we would ascribe to $550million?MR. KOHN. I think it's a little hard to say, because we hadthese technical factors, as Peter mentioned--the corporate tax dateand now the quarter-end pressures. It's true that in the secondmaintenance period we had a relationship which suggested thatborrowing was a little low. But in the first maintenance period itwas high--that was reversed. So the more recent evidence mightindicate to some extent that the borrowing was low relative to thefunds rate, but there are so many other things going on. I don'tthink you could conclude that a further shift--now this would includein our calculations the additional shift that we saw last fall--thatanother $100 million downward shift in the borrowing function [hasoccurred]. We've just carried that through; that certainly has [not]gone away.MR. JOHNSON. Okay. Actually I guess that's still with us inyour--MR. KOHN. Absolutely; yes.MR. JOHNSON. Okay.MR. MELZER. I noticed in one of the recent daily wires thatstaff were somewhat surprised about the increase in demand depositsand the reserve data. I guess it's in this current period. Anyfeeling as to what that's associated with and what's driving the--MR. STERNLIGHT. We did get that big upward revision in thepath a day or two ago.MR. KOHN. In the demand deposits, it could be a problem withthis tax date because the surge in demand deposits is in this week ofJune 20th, which includes the tax date for both the individual non-withheld and the corporate taxes. Whether our seasonals capture thatright [is a question]. The preliminary data that came in yesterdayand today suggest a runoff, though not a runoff of the entire amount.But the $3.7 billion increase in the June 20 week offsets a decline of$3.5 billion in the previous week. So demand deposits generally havebeen running a little stronger than we expected but are highly-10-6/29-30/88volatile. A lot of the volatility, by the way, is at the very largestbanks, so it may be associated with things like the tax dates.MS. SEGER. Picking up on one of Manley's questions--if wehadn't done this recent +$50 million on the borrowing target, wherewould you think the fed funds rate might be today? Would it still behitting 8 percent?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think to the extent that where it is nowis largely a function of these quarter-end pressures, I would think itwould be very close to that anyway--shade an eighth off maybe--MS. SEGER. But I thought we took that move because we wereworried that in the next few days the fed funds rate would declinebelow 7-1/2 percent if we didn't do it. I guess that's what confusesme.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think there was that concern that as alonger--MS. SEGER. Did we not expect these special factors or--MR. STERNLIGHT. I think as a longer-term matter our judgmentthen was that staying with the $500 million could tend to push thefunds rate back down. Then the question was whether that was reallyappropriate in light of the kind of directive that had come out of theMay meeting. But I think it kind of got overwhelmed by these seasonalpressures as the month went on.MS. SEGER. Those seasonal influences were greater than wehad originally expected them to be?MR. STERNLIGHT. They seemed so to me, yes.MS. SEGER. Okay.MR. KOHN. I do think the funds rate could have come undersome downward pressure at the end of last week. I remember the phonecalls we had Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, and then Monday when fundswere trading between 7-3/8 and 7-1/2 percent. I think if we hadn'tmade that change things could have tended more toward [unintelligible]and then they would have firmed up this week. So, with the quarterend, I do think there was a possibility--toward the end of last week,maybe early this week--of having a different situation in the interim.MS. SEGER. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Mr. Sternlight?If not, can I have a motion to approve the transactions since May?MR. BLACK. So moved.MR. JOHNSON. Second.MS. SEGER. Second.6/29-30/88 -12-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We now move to thereport on the economic situation with Messrs. Prell, Slifman, andTruman.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We shall be referringto the materials labeled "Staff Presentation to the Federal OpenMarket Committee." [Statements--see Appendix.][Secretary's note: No transcript exists for the remainder ofthe afternoon session, which presumably included questions to stafffollowing this presentation.][Meeting recessed]6/29-30/88June 30, 1988--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everybody. As you mayrecall we left off at the point when we were about to go around thetable on comments on the economy. Anyone like to start off?MR. FORRESTAL. Well, perhaps I could start, Mr. Chairman.Before I turn to general business conditions I thought I might giveyou a brief report on the drought situation in the Southeast. Weheard some such reports about other parts of the country lastevening. The first thing to say is that not all areas of theSixth District are being affected. The southern portion of theDistrict, particularly Florida, has enjoyed almost normal rainfall.And so far there has been very little direct impact from the drought,but the situation is getting increasingly serious. Winter wheatyields are 40 percent higher than a year ago because of the dryspring. The soybean crop, I think, can still be salvaged if we getsome rainfall during July. As in other places, we are seeing cattleproducers marketing their herds ahead of time and we also are seeingthe use of hay that would ordinarily be used next winter for feedsupply. The poultry producers seem to have a little more latitude,but I think they, too, will be under increasing pressure.One other issue that's being raised by grain dealers in ourarea is a fear that the Administration might try to limit--or evenhave an outright ban on--exports if the drought severely reducesdomestic food supplies. I don't know whether there's really any basisfor that fear on their part, but they are expressing it to us. Andsince they've only just begun to get a foothold in foreign marketsthey are, of course, concerned about their ability to meet exportdemand and to maintain their credibility as a predictable supplier.The drought is having a very bad impact in Atlanta and places northwhere the rainfall is anywhere between 50 and 75 percent below normallevels--not because there's so much agriculture up there, but becausethe streams and lakes feed some of the water supplies in downstateareas.I think the other important thing to mention--and it doesn'tget a lot of play in the press--but in addition to the farmers andagriculture generally, a lot of businesses are being affected becauseof a short supply of water. This is a very serious situation not justbecause we are having a drought in 1988, but because in the Southeastthis is probably the 5th or the 6th year out of the last 7 or 8 thatwe have had below average rainfall. So, it is a serious situation andwe'll undoubtedly have adverse effects if it doesn't clear up.Looking at the region generally, we are seeing a slowdown ineconomic activity across the region, and generally that has been goingon since the beginning of the year. Most of the activity that ispositive is in the manufacturing area. The service area seems to beslowing down a good deal. We have lower retail sales; housing is notas buoyant as it has been. We're also seeing the adverse effect of a40 percent reduction at the Lockheed plant in Atlanta which is, of1. Secretary's note: Mr. Forrestal and other Federal Reserve Bankpresidents commented on economic developments in their regions at adinner at the British Embassy.6/29-30/88course, having a rippling effect through the economy. And justyesterday it was announced, as you may have heard on the news, thatTVA is laying off a number of people--25 percent, I think, was thenumber.Looking at the national economy, our forecast is somewhatstronger for both 1988 and 1989 than the Board staff's. We also seesome slower growth in the second part of this year, but ourdeceleration is not as marked as the one shown in the Greenbook. Ouroutlook shows more strength in personal consumption expenditures thanthe staff's, especially in 1989. I think the difference is that thestronger expansion we see in 1989 is due to a smaller rise in interestrates than was assumed by the Board's staff. Because of that forecastwe don't see much of an increase in the unemployment rate, althoughlooking at the CPI--I will stay away from the deflator, Mr. Chairman--we would see stronger inflation than the Board's staff.While I'm happy that we're going to continue to have growth,on the other hand, since we are basically at full employment, Isuppose I am concerned that we're growing at a rate that's beyond theeconomy's potential. That suggests to me that if inflation doesworsen over the forecast horizon, rising prices, and perhaps wagepressures, will become embedded in expectations. So, my generalfeeling is that we should not risk a possible overshoot in growth.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, in terms of the kindof anecdotal and impressionistic points of view that reach us, I wouldsay they are essentially unchanged in that the main thrust of what wehear is still decidedly upbeat and [unintelligible] in terms oforders, especially in the manufacturing sector. We took an informalsurvey just in the past 2 weeks of about 8 or 10 very major companieson a particular point of capital goods imports and substitution ofdomestic sources for capital goods imports. And while the results ofthat survey were not decisive, they certainly were suggestive of thefact that there is now some evidence that even in the capital goodssector there is some substitution going on in terms of domestic versusforeign sources, although that's mainly in components. There clearlyare important instahces of, say, heavy machinery, in which foreignsources are for all practical purposes the only source. Nevertheless,at the margin, there are some signs of a better [unintelligible],especially in components, in the capital goods sector. The two otherthings that are a bit different impressionistically--and this is a bitsurprising--are that some of the commentary coming out of upstate NewYork, even the Buffalo area, is more upbeat than it has been, and thatthere's a bit more commentary here and there about labor markettightness and scattered signs of pressures on wages.But insofar as the forecasts themselves are concerned, Ithink that one thing is pretty clear--they have to be approached withsome humility. If you go back 6 months ago, for example, and look atwhat has happened, compared with what was being talked about, thenthat humility is well earned in the sense that the performance overthe first half of the year--regardless of exactly where the secondquarter comes out--clearly is going to have been a great deal strongerthan was widely expected at the turn of the year. I still rememberyour own comment at the time, Mr. Chairman, when you said [of the-14-6/29-30/88forecast] that it might be an interesting thought but something wasgoing to be wrong with it. What was wrong with it, of course, wasthat the economy was stronger rather than weaker. So, I think we haveto take any forecast as kind of a broad-brush profile of what mightemerge rather than with a great deal of precision.Again, the question is: Where are the risks and what are theconsequences of the risks in those forecasts? As I look at it in thatlight, I think the risks are decidedly asymmetric on the side of anupward drift, or worse, in the inflation rate over the next 6quarters, given current policy. Without making a big deal out ofthis, if you look, for example, at the New York staff's forecast,unlike the Board staff's forecast, it essentially assumes currentinterest rates over the period as a whole. Our staff forecast shows areal growth rate over the next 6 quarters in a range of 2-1/2 to 2-3/4percent. But--and this is a very big "but"--that result emerges in acontext in which the New York staff's forecast has a smaller gain innet exports and has inventories declining in every quarter of theforecast period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In inventory investment?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes. Hence, the implied growth infinal domestic demand in our forecast is, in fact, a good dealstronger than the Board staff's forecast. Not surprisingly in thatsetting, the inflation numbers that fall out of our forecast aresignificantly different in that we end up with a fixed-weight deflatorin the 5 percent plus range and a CPI in the 5-1/2 to 5-3/4 percentrange. Again, I take those numbers with a grain of salt, but what Ido not take with a grain of salt is that if the inflation rate,however measured, were to get in the area of 5 percent or more, justgetting it back to 4 percent--much less price stability, whatever thatmeans--is going to involve enormous costs to the economy. So, I thinkthat is where the greatest risk lies.I ask myself the question: Well, how do those risks translatein terms of where we are now? And, particularly, what weight shouldbe given to the changes that have already been made in policy insofaras that broad sweep of an outlook is concerned? I certainly agreewith the thrust of the staff's Greenbook and Bluebook commentary tothe effect that domestic demand growth is going to have to be furthercurbed over this period. I myself am not sure how much weight to giveto the rise in interest rates that we've seen over the last couple ofmonths, because in fact, that rise is rather modest, I think. Indeed,if you look at real interest rates in Ted's chart 8 in the bookyesterday--or in any other formulation of real short-term or long-terminterest rates--I think you can make a case that not a whole lot haschanged. Certainly, the level of real interest rates now is notwildly different than it has been for the last 3 years. So there is aquestion in my mind as to how much difference the current policyposture makes versus where we were, say, 8 or 10 weeks ago.The bottom line as I see it, is that if--for policy reasons,or faith, or whatever--it turns out that growth is somewhat weaker fora quarter or two or three, I certainly don't view that as the end ofthe world. In fact, I think it's not altogether bad. It works in thedirection of prolonging the expansion in general and it actually helpsthe external adjustment process. On the other hand, if inflation-15-6/29-30/88crosses whatever threshold one chooses to worry about--I pick the 5percent threshold--I think the costs of that are going to be very,very great indeed. And that's how I essentially come to theconclusion that the risks, at least in my judgment, are decidedlyasymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Twelfth Districteconomy continues to grow, but the pace of growth appears to beslowing. The region does continue to benefit from increased foreigntrade; and high-tech industries are facing strong demand, particularlyin the aircraft area. Also, wage pressure is building in suchindustries as forest products, aircraft, and food processing. Webelieve that capacity constraints are becoming a concern in thefastest growing areas of the District, particularly the PacificNorthwest. Business investment is high in plant and equipment, butfirms are not expanding what we would consider to be aggressively, andwe are noticing that delivery times are lengthening.With regard to the drought, it is not having much of animpact on the District's agricultural industry, although Idaho andUtah and also eastern Washington are threatened by drought conditions.Subpar yields are expected in much of the District because ofunseasonable weather, which ironically is associated with unseasonablerains. But current high prices will make the farm income of theDistrict actually rise.Turning to the national economy, if short-term interest ratesmove up about 100 basis points over the next year or so, we expectgrowth to average about 2 to 2-1/2 percent--perhaps toward the lowerend of that range--over the forecast period. And we also would expectthat the slowing in growth would produce only a slight increase in theunemployment rate. Without factoring in any implications of thedrought for inflation, I believe that the labor market conditions, andalso a falling dollar, will cause an acceleration of inflation toabout 4-1/2 percent next year, as measured by the fixed-weightdeflator. And I would also associate myself with the comments of ViceChairman Corrigan as far as the risks are concerned.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob, did I hear you correctly? You saidthat the Twelfth District is slowing?MR. PARRY. The rate of growth is slowing somewhat.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Where is it slowing?MR. PARRY. Well, I'd say it's fairly general. We've seensome slowing in retail spending. We've checked with retailers andthere seems to be less spending across the board in the retail area,although concentrated I'd say in apparel and, to some extent,automobiles. Even lumber, I think, is not growing as rapidly becausethey've hit a constraint. If you look at some of these[developments], it's basically consistent with the slowing of theeconomy from what we can see.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's characterized by both supply anddemand constraints, am I right?-16-6/29-30/88MR. PARRY. Yes, but taking the retailer, it's clearlydemand.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, with regard to the Districteconomy--except for agriculture, and I'll comment a little later onthat--I think, broadly, conditions in our area are pretty muchunchanged from previous meetings. I've commented before on the steelindustry and industrial equipment. Those types of activities arecontinuing to be very, very strong. And I think the improved exportmarket has really had a very positive effect on the manufacturing partof our District. There are some industries that have been sellingalmost exclusively on the domestic side that are now beginning toexport products, and this is a very positive thing. And I think thevalue of the dollar will continue to provide good export opportunitiesand also improve production on the domestic side. In machine tools,for example, where imports as recently as a couple of years ago hadabout a 60 percent participation in the machine tool businessdomestically, that number is now down to about 37 percent. So,there's been a very significant positive shift in the machine toolindustry. And from all of my contacts on the manufacturing side, thetone out there is very positive; everybody has a good expectation thatthe expansion will continue.On the drought picture, I can add little to what was saidlast night or to what Bob Forrestal said. I think we are continuingin a period here where we have a bit of a window. I keep hearingabout the 10-day window; it keeps moving out. But I think we are at apoint where if we do get some rain the [unintelligible] can be pulledout of the bag here. If we get rain--and there was some rain earlierthis week--I think the corn crop probably will be down by some 10 to25 percent. For soybeans, there's still enough time that if we getsome rain that could be a normal crop. But having said that, if wedon't get as much rain as we'd like, even under the worst ofcircumstances, the component of commodity prices in the final retailvalue of food is such that we would not expect that this drought willhave that dramatic an effect on food prices. I think the number thatMike suggested yesterday is very much within the range that we wouldforecast.I've been worried about the effects of this on the banks asmuch as anything. We did a quick survey of some of the ag banksearlier this week and I, frankly, was very reassured. I would haveexpected that some of these problem loans would begin to reemerge.The banks that we talked to said "no," that's not the case--that theweak borrowers were really shaken out over the past few years. Thestrong borrowers are now those who remain and they have the strengthto sustain a bad year such as this. That's not the case, as Iunderstand it, with the nonbank lenders--the FMA, FHA, and the FMHA.There are apparently [unintelligible] some problems in loans todevelopers. The banks at this point feel adequately collateralized;they're not taking that much collateral. They seem to have plenty ofreserves built up for this and they think they can handle the problemwithout an onslaught of additional problems.I also checked with the exchanges. I was concerned thatwe've gone through a period here where the margin calls were pretty-17-6/29-30/88heavy. And the exchanges say that there have been no particularstrains. The volume of margin calls has been high, but so far theyhave been met. The banks that deal with us are not experiencing anyshutoff in terms of the credit that they're granting. So theexchanges, I gather, are coming through.Finally, with regard to inflation, our forecast of thedeflator is a little lower than the staff forecast for both '88 and'89, but I think we may revise that somewhat. Nonetheless, it'sclearly the case that we are on an accelerating trend line here and Ithink all the signs do point toward an increase on the inflation side.Capacity utilization for many of the industries in our Districtcontinues to be at very high levels and I am sensing some upwardmovement with regard to [unintelligible] prices. Markets have beenpretty sticky in the past, but I think there's a little more give inthis.A little more positively, I do think there is something of achanged attitude with regard to some prices over the last two or threeweeks, in nonferrous metals and chemicals particularly. They have hada very significant roll up. I have talked to a number of people whohave the expectation that such prices will stay about level for awhile--not go down, but not continue the kind of increases that we'veexperienced over the last six months or a year. On the wage side, Ithink there is a hardening attitude developing in the wage contracts.Admittedly, the results are coming in very favorably--the numbers lookpositive--but I just sense that in the bargaining process labor has aharder attitude than they have had in the past. So far the unit laborcosts have remained in check because the [unintelligible] changes havebeen good; productivity increases have been pretty good. But I think,intuitively, the risks on the inflation side just have to be on theupside. And certainly, the agricultural picture only adds a littlepressure--yet to be determined how much--but a little pressure on theupside. So, I'd agree with Vice Chairman Corrigan that the risks hereon inflation are very much on the upside, not on the downside.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd just like to interrupt for a minute,because a very crucial issue seems to be emerging here, and I waswondering whether we could just retrace for a second. Everyone iscommenting explicitly that while the wage data don't show this,there's a subliminal sense of changing wage demand pressures. Couldwe go back--does anyone want to address this specific issue? BecauseI think it's a very important question as to whether, in fact, thatWall Street Journal article, which I thought was a little overdone, isanywhere near correct. What can you give me more than just yourfeeling? What's the evidence that you're--MR. KEEHN. That's the problem; there is no evidence.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But you're obviously speaking to peoplewho are on the firing line. It's not just a guess; something ishappening because you do hear--MR. KEEHN. I am talking to people--chief executive officersof companies--who are continually going through the wage bargainingprocess. Job security has been the number one issue and continues tobe very high priority. And labor has been very reluctant to go onstrike. I don't think there's necessarily going to be a change in-18-6/29-30/88that. But they are just getting a harder attitude, because they areconcerned that the increases they're getting are not keeping pace; andthey feel they have a stronger position than they have had. It hasn'tshown up in the numbers and I think that's the mystery in all this.That we've gone through the process--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's recycle those who have alreadytalked on this issue and then I hope that those of you subsequentlywho have some insight on this will address this question. Bob?MR. PARRY. Two specific comments on that issue. First ofall, in the state of California, the minimum wage goes up tomorrow bya little more than a dollar an hour to $4.65. I think there's noquestion that that's going to have an impact. I think most people areexpecting that to have some impact. I'm not saying a lot of peopleare working at that low minimum wage, but it just has a ripple effectthrough everything. Another example I'd give is that there is a bigstrike in the lumber industry at the present time. It actually hasbeen expanding in terms of the number of workers involved and it doesinvolve wages. What seems to be on the table is a proposal which Ithink is around 4 to 5 percent over a four-year period, which wouldbring them up to where they were a couple of years ago--but that'ssort of irrelevant from the viewpoint of what it does to inflation atthe present time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Jerry?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I guess I'd make two points.First, I think that if you take all wage and related data as a whole,you can make a case that there may be a bit of an upward tilt alreadyevident there.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think there is. It's a lot less thanone would get from any of the analytical equations or from history.The question is--as I hear this conversation emerging--is it more thanthat?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As I said, I was going to make twocomments. One is that I do think you could make a case that there isa bit of an upward tilt already there in the wage data taken as awhole. In terms of the anecdotal stuff, again it's quite common forbusinessmen, small and large, these days to talk about thedifficulties they're having in terms of attracting and retaining goodquality workers at all levels. You hear comments, for example, thatthey have had to selectively bid up starting salaries. And at leastin New York State, both upstate and downstate, for example, we havehad in the recent past a couple of very, very large wage settlementsin the public sector. This is the type of thing, school teachers andthe like, which in a macroeconomic sense is literally a pimple. Butthey are very, very high profile and high visibility types of things.So again, I think Si is right when he says that it's something that isin the air; but I think it's here, at least a little, in the numbers,too.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob, do you have something?MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, in the Sixth District Ican't really point to any hard evidence. I think you're quite right-19-6/29-30/88in being concerned about that because it just isn't showing up in thedata. When I talk to my directors at the head office and at thebranches--and that covers a lot of territory--they say they're notexperiencing any wage pressures in their own industry, but they havethis subliminal fear, as you put it, that there is going to creep intoexpectations--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Something is causing that and I thinkit's important to figure out what it is.MR. FORRESTAL. Yes. And it's very hard to put your fingeron it. I was with a group of business people in Nashville the otherday and I specifically asked this question about wage pressures eitherin their own business or in others that they might know about. Andthe answer I got was "no, but with prices increasing, and with thesense that inflation is on an upward path, that ultimately is going tobe translated into higher wages." So I think it's a fear that perhapsis ahead of the data.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, in the Eleventh District, not agreat deal has changed. I think I reported that we had someimprovement in the Eleventh District economic picture over the lasthalf of last year. It seems to have flattened out over the lastseveral months--at least that's what our statistics are saying. It'sa little confusing, though, because in talking with business peoplearound the District I'm probably hearing more optimism, other than inbanking and real estate, than I've heard in the last couple of years.I think expectations are pretty [unintelligible] in the Houston area,and there the expectations, as well as the statistics, are becomingmore consistent than throughout the rest of the District.Looking at the District and trying to project ahead, we thinkpossibly we are poised to resume some upward movement. Our portionsof New Mexico and Louisiana are both showing some growth, but I thinkfor the states as a whole, most of that growth really is in RogerGuffey's and Bob Forrestal's parts of those states. Manufacturing hasleveled off and that's where we were getting most of our improvementlast year and fairly early this year. That seems to have peaked abit. Energy has been stable. We've seen considerable job loss inretail trade and financial services; and, of course, constructionremains our weakest sector.We're having a little negative impact from the drought, butit's not anything compared to what's happening in other parts of thecountry. We have some dry spots, although judging from reportsearlier this week the dry spots in our District have all had prettygood rains; and those that have had pretty good rains were missingthem, so it's kind of evening out. The drought, though, is prettymuch of a regular feature down our way and our people know how tohandle it and prepare for it and expect it--so maybe we're not quiteas exposed.I did meet with a group of investment bankers and nonbanklenders last week and they confirmed what we've been hearingotherwise, and what the statistics have been showing--that there'sreally little or no new lending to the small and medium sized-20-6/29-30/88businesses. And we think that this capital shortage is likely to bean impediment to the continuation of even the weak recovery. So, thatis a matter of concern.On the wages, I really have no insight into that, Mr.Chairman. In fact, it's not something that I'm hearing discussed toomuch down our way. Job security and hopefully trying to get a littlemore job growth are what we're hearing about, as opposed toconversation about pressures or moving wages. On the nationalpicture, we're pretty close to where the Board staff is on that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I don't think the local District numbers providea lot of insight; they're very much in line with what's going onnationally--somewhat stronger manufacturing growth, somewhat weakerresidential and nonresidential construction. But, particularly in thenonresidential sector, we were late to adjust; it was quite strongwhile national figures were turning down.On the wage side, the only thing I have to add pretty muchmirrors what Bob Forrestal said. I got this froma major consumer durables manufacturing firm, and it reallyis that people see CPI numbers that begin to approach 5 percent. Hisanticipation is that the pressure won't be very strong from labor;he's not seeing it yet. And in my judgment, that would be the reasonfor this, here on the wage side.Nationally, our forecast is based on our St. Louis model.And what we've done is pick monetary growth--I don't know whether youcall it appropriate monetary policy or likely monetary policy--that'sconsistent with what we've seen in '87 and in the first half of '88,which is M1 growth somewhere in the 4 to 6 percent area. What thatthrows off in terms of numbers is something that's very close to theBoard staff's forecast for the second half of this year. But for nextyear we're considerably higher--about a percentage point--in terms ofnominal growth and somewhat higher in real growth; we're a good7/10ths of a point higher in terms of inflation, which is troubling, Ithink, particularly because of the kinds of things we're seeing now interms of the behavior of the dollar and financial markets and soforth. There's a risk that in the short run we could get lulled tosleep. I think we need to be very mindful of that problem.But having said that, I guess I also have to say that incomparing this period, say, to the late '70s and early '80s, we'redealing with monetary growth rates that are roughly half of what wewere dealing with at that time. So, I'm not sure in a longer-termcontext that we have to do as much to accomplish the longer-runinflationary goals. I guess I'm saying, in part, that I think what'sshowing through in our forecast are the effects of some earliermonetary policy actions going back perhaps to '86--some temporaryeffects and so forth. And I think that the process of dealing withthose building inflationary pressures in the longer-term sense has tobe a gradual one. In other words, it doesn't require the same kind ofresponse necessarily that it would have in the late '70s and early'80s. And I suppose we've seen that in terms of our actions now,because very timely, relatively modest, actions have had aconsiderable impact. I'm not saying that it isn't going to take more-21-6/29-30/88of that to deal with this problem we perceive of this temporaryinflation getting built into wages. But that's what our forecastshows.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, let me talk a little about the Districtfirst. I commented on the drought last night and I really don't havemuch to add to that situation. Exclusive of the drought, althoughit's hard to do this in any rigorous sense, I think that Districteconomic growth is actually accelerating. We have continuedimprovement in the mining economy, continued strength in pulp paper,wood products, and so forth. And it is turning out to be a good to avery good year for tourism, even though it has been too hot to catchany fish. In Minnesota, which in terms of economic activity is theheart of the District, if it weren't for the drought, I think you'dalmost have to describe the situation as a boom. Unemployment inMinnesota now is down to just a touch over 3 percent. All themetropolitan areas, where the economy is reasonably diversified, arelooking at very strong economies. So, that's a description of thesituation.As far as wage pressures go, what we've picked up anecdotallyfrom some of our directors and advisory council people is this: one ofour manufacturers, whose entry level wage is $6 to $7 an hour,reported that he just can't keep people at that wage at all. It'slike running an employment agency. They'll hire somebody in themorning; [the new employees] work a couple of hours and if they don'tlike it, they just walk out the door at the first break and apparentlygo across the street or go do something else. It's a very tight labormarket in that sense. We do have reports, certainly, that minimumwage jobs are going vacant in the District. Our own experience hasbeen that it's certainly taking longer, considerably longer, to fillentry level clerical jobs than it did as recently as a year ago.Another one of our manufacturersindicated that now he's just starting to have problems with the union.Now, I don't think it has translated into higher wages or anythinglike that yet, but my impression is that the union is just starting toget more aggressive. At least that's what he has reported.As far as the national economic situation is concerned, Ifind myself largely in agreement with the Greenbook outlook. And theGreenbook, at least in my view, does point to the right issues that wehave to confront here. I think it might well be difficult withoutsome further policy actions to keep the rate of increase in thedeflator at or below 4 percent over some sustained period of time.Whether we'd do that in any quarter-to-quarter PERIOD, I wouldn't tryto forecast. But I have a hunch that that's where the risks lie. AndI think international considerations are going to turn out to beimportant, perhaps increasingly important, in this situation because Iam struck by the fact that it's not just our economy that has grownmore rapidly over the last several quarters, but a number of importantforeign economies. Other things equal, I think that does add todemand pressures.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.-22-6/29-30/88MR. BOEHNE. On the District and the question you raisedabout wages, the concern about higher wage costs is certainly there inan anecdotal sense. I've tried to pin it down as best I can. I thinkto a large extent it's a state of mind, but when I ask for specifics,these are the kinds of things that I'm told: It appears that thegreatest pressure is at the starting salaries at lower levels. Forexample, someone who runs a very large supermarket chain in ourDistrict told me that he had to raise his starting salaries about 25percent--now that turns out to be about $1 or $1.25 an hour. Butthen, when you work that up to the people who have 6 months to a yearand a year and a half of experience, you get a kind of stair-stepincrease. Another place where you hear of this is at servicesinstitutions. For example, at financial institutions, whereas a yearor so ago they were talking about wage budgets with increases in the 5to 6 percent range, we hear more right at 6 percent, and now I'mhearing talk of 6-1/2 percent. Another thing we hear is that this 5percent number on the CPI seems to be one of special concern. Whilethere aren't as many COLA clauses in union contracts now as there wereseveral years ago, where they are in contracts, 5 percent on the CPIseems to be a trigger point. Since we've been getting pretty close tothat in recent months, I think there's concern that the COLA may betriggered. Now, that will have an impact. Generally, most of theconcern about [wages is coming from the] non-union side. I think thisis not surprising in our District because, if there's one unifyingtheme among almost everybody you talk to throughout the District, it'svery, very tight labor markets. Otherwise in the District, we havereports of very strong manufacturing and some moderation in retailsales--the same kind of things that you find in some other Districts.At the national level, Jerry Corrigan said a lot of what Iwanted to say in terms of [unintelligible]. [On the inflation sidewe] see this accelerating trend. For example, the consumer priceindex the last 3 months was 4.9 percent versus 3.9 percent theprevious year. The producer price index in the last 3 months was 6.2percent, and in the previous year, 2.2 percent. If you look at theintermediate [level], crude goods in the producer price index rose ata rate of 8-1/2 percent in the last 3 months and 5 percent over theprevious 12 months. And industrial raw materials are really at abouttheir highest level during the expansion since the '79-'80 peak. So,I think that it's not just that we're fearful of an economy running upagainst supply constraints and inflation in the future. I think thatwe are seeing some very tangible signs that we're on this acceleratingtrend. And it's much less costly to try to keep inflation fromaccelerating than it is to unwind it later on.In the chart show yesterday, as I heard it, essentially thebasic message was that what we have to do is slow real growth fromsomething like 3 percent plus down to 2 percent or a little more. AndI agree with that in general. The idea that that can be done with a 1percent rise in interest rates over the next year--I hope that'sright. But I suspect there would [not] be a very large kick from thatsmall of an increase in interest rates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the data for thelast two months are pretty close to ideal. We've had a slowdown inconsumer spending and an increase in exports, and we've had moderation6/29-30/88in the growth of orders since December. I was quite alarmed at therate of growth of new orders for durable goods and capital goods lastyear. That was clearly something that was not sustainable. And sothe inflection toward slower growth that we've seen since December iswelcomed.We're seeing the first signs of the impact of a slowdown inmilitary spending. General Electric laid off 800 people from adefense electric factory. It's the first layoff in the defenseindustry that I've seen. So I think that the military budget stimulusto the economy has peaked and will probably be a somewhat negativeinfluence in the next few years. And that will perhaps give us alittle more breathing room in the industrial sector--breathing room weneed very much. I think we're at a point now where the economy reallycan't sustain a growth rate of more than 2 percent without generatinginflationary pressures. And I think we've got to lean against anyperiod of growth in excess of that. I sense that there has been adeceleration in recent months and I hope that continues.I've been going around New England on a private campaign toavoid a future commercial building glut in our District. We have thekind of euphoria in commercial building now that they had in Texas inearlier years. And I think there's not a proper recognition that theNew England economy from this point really is going to be a veryslowly growing economy. That's the speech that Mr. [unintelligible]referred to yesterday. We're at a 2.9 percent unemployment rate. Inaddition to that, we've got a slower natural growth rate of the laborforce than the rest of the country because our birth rate has beenrelatively low. That's compounded by the fact that our labor forceparticipation rate is substantially higher than the national rate.We're running about 2 percentage points higher in the participationrate for men and about 3-1/2 percentage points higher for women. So,the only way we can grow as fast as the national economy is by havinga very large in-migration of population.So the arithmetic of the New England economy is very clear.We're going to be a slow-growing--prosperous, but slow-growing--economy for the next decade. But I see the commercial developersmaking plans on the assumption that we're going to grow as fast as wehave in the past 15 years. That's why I'm out trying to generate alittle caution among the lenders, because I think the history ofDallas and every other place is that as long as the lenders willprovide the developers money, they're going to build. I can remembervery well the time a couple of years ago when Bob Boykin expressed hisdismay at the fact that a new office building was just getting startedin Dallas despite the drop in the price of oil and despite the factthat the vacancy rate was over 20 percent. So we're trying to do whatwe can to have a building boom that doesn't end in a glut. I'm notsure we'll be successful, but we're trying.In the regional area, we have an expectation of a rising rateof wage increases for which we can't provide any documentation either.Steve McNees generated a wage forecasting model a number of years agoand it performed very well until the last few years where the modelsays that wages should have been going up much faster than they havebeen.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's true with every model.-24-6/29-30/88MR. MORRIS. Yes. And I think that is really the basis forour concern, because you really can't look at the data and say we'reat an inflection point. I think that may be the basis for concerngenerally. Wages should have been growing more rapidly for a 6th yearof expansion than they have, and ergo, they will be growing a lotfaster. I think quite clearly our job is to keep a sharp eye out forthe growth rate in the economy and to lean against it if it gets [toohigh]. I don't know whether the 2 percent guideline is the properone; I'm inclined to think that, given the arithmetic on productivityand labor force growth, we can't come out with a number a lot higherthan that. I really question, unless we get a much betterproductivity performance than we've had, whether the 2-1/2 percent thestaff is using is not too high--whether two percent may be morerealistic. But I think we're at a point now where we've got to leanagainst any rate of growth in excess of 2 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Well, let me just say that I see things thatare similar to many of the presidents. First, on this growth issue,clearly the pace of growth we've had has shown itself to be too strongto be sustainable without an acceleration in inflation. But what kindof growth is necessary to keep inflation from accelerating--or even toallow it to decelerate from current levels--I have no idea. I wouldhate to get into trying to fix on any number to shoot for to setmonetary policy. I think what we ought to do is take action until wesee the response we're looking for in terms of financial marketexpectations and the environment for decelerating inflation,regardless of what the growth rate consequences happen to be.But, like everyone else, I think the economy has certainlylooked strong, with manufacturing at a high level and exports near aboom. But I acknowledge exactly what Frank was saying: that this yearso far we've seen a leveling off and a beginning of a slowing inmanufacturing; and orders have started to trend down. Payrollemployment growth rates have slowed. We still have significant growthin employment, but it has slowed. The housing market is certainly atlower levels. Domestic demand is continuing to grow at the slow paceof '87. So, I think we're getting the kind of domestic demand growthperformance that we've been seeking with our policy, and that's veryencouraging.The markets themselves are starting to acknowledge theeffectiveness of our policy, in my opinion. We have finally, I think,seen the financial markets start to react to the firmness of ourpolicies. And in my opinion, we've seen a fundamental shift in theexchange rate, and it has been acknowledged in the bond markets tosome degree. That could all turn around if we get a whole set orseries of bad trade numbers and if things don't look like they'recontinuing to progress some on the external side. Nevertheless, Ithink that we've gotten the kind of response in the financial marketsthat we've been seeking with our policy.One of the things that concerns me a little and makes me wantto be cautious at this stage is the fact that because we're gettingthat response, and the dollar has strengthened, and the yield curvehas flattened out--all of which I think are desirable characteristicsand exactly what we want to see from our policy--this response is-25-6/29-30/88nevertheless going to put pressure on foreign central banks to tightenup their own monetary policies. The Bundesbank raised the discountrate this morning. I think that's probably desirable given the fact,as Gary pointed out, that some of those economies have been growing ata faster pace. Nevertheless, it's going to have the effect of dampingdomestic demand abroad. So, I think the stronger dollar in the UnitedStates and the response by foreign central banks to tighten, to shieldthemselves from the potential transmission of inflationary pressuresthere, are going to damp foreign domestic demand.The combination of our slow domestic demand and a more dampedforeign domestic demand, I think, is what we want; but it's in theworks. There's going to be a lag there, and I think that we have tobe very careful not to go the point where we're going to combine ourfairly slow domestic demand growth with a decelerating foreigndomestic demand and leave ourselves without a trade adjustment. And Ithink there is some risk of that, although we can always get the tradeadjustment by dramatically weaker U.S. domestic demand for imports.But I think that's not what we're looking for. So, I think the laggedeffect of our policy action is in the works and what we're seeing onthe inflation side now is to some extent--as has already beenmentioned--the lagged effect of past policy actions. And what we'vedone in the recent past now is going to show through with a lag. Thefinancial markets, I think, are showing confidence in the fact that wehave been effective in our policies; otherwise, I can't imagine whythe long bond markets and the dollar would be behaving as well as theyhave.It's true that commodity prices have been acceleratingsharply. I attribute a lot of that to the drought conditions and theyare less forward looking than the others; commodity futures, I think,only go out a couple of years. And they can turn on a dime. We'vehad two sharp declines--to the limit--on the CRB index the last coupleof days just because of a little rain in the Midwest. So I think wehave to be fairly careful at this point because there are lags and wehave to take them into account.On the wage side, once again, I don't see any acceleration inwages from the [published] numbers. There are some slight curves inthe numbers, but those don't look any wavier than they have since1983. But I do sense some more nervousness. We're 6 years down theroad in the expansion and there's no doubt that industry is morenervous about the progress on the wage front from this point on. Butthe Conference of Chairmen met here recently, and without exception,they all said that they saw no pressure on wages, just like you haveall said. Yet there was a sense that, if workers felt they were goingto fall behind relative to price pressures and their real wages wereto deteriorate for another year, you might see a much more militantlabor situation.MR. JOHNSON. Ithink pointed out in that conference meeting that he had beenexpecting wage pressures in '87. They thought that they were going toarise because of the upward pressure on oil prices, which caused theCPI to grow faster than nominal wages that year.6/29-30/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. He's the head of theMR. JOHNSON. He said he was surprised that the pressuredidn't materialize. And I think that's what is going wrong with themodels, for some reason. I don't know how long you can get by withthat, but the fact is, the wage pressures are not yet there. But Ithink another year of accelerating prices relative to nominal wagesmight be a problem.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the wage models don't have inthem the ratio of imports to domestic demand, if you're going to do itthat way. Because that's clearly what's doing that.MR. KELLEY. Manley, excuse me for interrupting you, butwent further than that. He said there will be no inflationpressures generated by wage pressures. He made that flat statement.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I think that's right.MR. BLACK. Well, one thing to bear in mind is that hehave beentaking a big share of the business down there. Yesterday, I talked tohim and he closed the conversation by saying "I'm getting extremelyworried about inflation."MR. JOHNSON. He is.MR. KELLEY. That's a fast turnaround in two weeks.MR. BLACK. He doesn't expect his own or his associates'[wages to go up], but he's worried about the inflationary pressuresemanating elsewhere with no increases in salaries or wages for his ownpeople. That's one of the problems.MR. JOHNSON. Right, he is.MR. BLACK.MR. JOHNSON. No, he is very responsible; I respect hisjudgment. So, on the wage front, once again I say there's nothingyet, but you do get the feeling that something is out there. At thesame time, I think all of the strong good feelings going on now are acumulative effect of the positive growth we've seen in the past. Andwhere we go from here, I think, is going to be the lagged response towhat we've been doing over the last 6 months or so. And so we've gotto be careful. I do think that probably the risks are still more onthe upside than the downside as well. But I think that we need to bevery careful from this point on that we pay attention to the lags thatare taking place in the forward-looking markets where we have beeneffective in my opinion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Turning to the District, Mr. Chairman, I thinkit's safe to say, in summary, that our grassroots contacts don't-27-6/29-30/88really see any slowing in the expansion, in contrast to what thenational figures seem to be showing. There are widespread reports ofextremely high levels of capacity operation in textiles, furniture,chemicals, paper--that sort of thing; difficulty in hiring workers;upward pressure on wages--and our most concrete example is in the caseof the fast food industries where they have had to push their wages upwell above the minimum in a number of places; and also reports ofshortages of chemicals in certain areas. For example,and his suppliers of certain [raw materials] that he usesput him on quotas so he can't produce enough to satisfy his demand.In the case of housing, all of you in Washington are familiarwith what has happened around here. They can't keep up with demand.And pretty much the same sort of thing has happened in the Richmond,Charlotte, Greensboro, Raleigh, Chapel Hill, and Durham areas, wherethe economy is really booming. Home prices in Washington in the lastcouple of years have gone up about 1/3 and pretty much the same sortof thing is true in Richmond. That's what they seem to feel, but Ithink Frank is right in saying the statistics do show some slowingthere.Insofar as our particular projections are concerned, there'snot a lot of difference in what we've projected and what the Boardstaff has done, except that we do expect more inflation next year thanthey have put in [their forecast]. Interestingly enough, Tom Melzerand I ended up with exactly the same amount of additional inflationfor next year. The most important thing, I think, in the staff'sanalysis is their assumption that we need to have some tighteningactions in order to bring about the results that they're projecting.An analysis we have conducted at our own Bank reaches the same sort ofconclusion. My guess is that if there's going to be an error, I wouldcome out about where Jerry Corrigan and some of the rest of you did:that the Board staff's forecast--and ours as well--might be actuallyforecasting less inflation than we're apt really to have.At the rate we're going, the Greenbook shows a very smoothtransition from this expansion driven by domestic demand toward onedriven by foreign demand. Except for a brief upswing in the thirdquarter, the rate of growth in gross private domestic purchases isexpected to slow down significantly as the result of a weakening inconsumer demand and business fixed investment. And, of course, that'sa perfectly plausible scenario, and it would be a very excellent oneif it works out. But, as I'm sure everyone would have to agree, it'sfar from a safe bet. I guess we would conclude that business fixedinvestment in particular, given the high levels of capacityutilization, is apt to be somewhat stronger than we're thinking. So,in short, while we think the Greenbook forecast is very reasonable andvery defensible, that's probably the best that we could hope for; andour fears are that we're not going to do that well on the inflationside.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Let me start with the labor issue. We don'thave any specific information, at least that I've generated, on it.But in the Fourth District, particularly in Cleveland and Pittsburgh,we have very large manufacturing firms where over a period of years-28-6/29-30/88I've heard a number of them say directly that "We've learned ourlesson with respect to wages and inflation and we won't repeat thatmistake." I think that might explain partially why you see lags theway you see them. People--labor and management--are still working inCleveland to insure that they gain market share and retain jobs.However, I don't think that can go on forever and we're liable to seea snapback rather quickly when we get to that limit. But I don't haveany information from these people that we're at that limit today. Ihaven't asked specifically, but the fact that they haven't broughtthis up in conversations, I think, is indicative that they're notoverly concerned at this particular point in time.Overall, the District continues to be very strong in capitalgoods and also very strong in exports. The stainless steel stripindicator, which is something that I casually follow, was up around 35percent in terms of new orders against a 5-year average in the last 3months. Lead times haven't lengthened, however. The price increasein the last 18 months in that particular product has been 80 percent.And exports in stainless, at least from this company, are up 65percent. So a lot of things are working now correctly in theDistrict.Some aren't working out so well. As in other Districts,retail sales seem a little softer and construction is softer. I guessI'm a little uncomfortable in analyzing, or going through what seemsto be kind of a Phillip's curve framework here, when we talk aboutresource constraints versus inflation. I think Governor Johnson putit back on the track. Our concerns, or at least mine, focus aroundthe fact that we have had a couple of years of 4 percent inflation.We don't seem to be making much progress toward [reducing] it. And Ithink that's the real focus, at least in my view, for monetary policy.As we look ahead, even the Board staff's forecast, with a substantialtightening in it, produces another 4 percent next year at the veryminimum. The Board staff's forecast on CPI ex energy and ex food is 5percent. So that leaves me with the position that says I think wehave to be very concerned about inflation. I don't know how much wemay have to move again; I'm not sure how much we really have moved inthe past 6 months. I know where interest rates are, but I don't knowhow much the market did to put them there versus policy moves. So, Ithink what it boils down to is that expectations are important for usright now. And what we signal to the markets, I think, is important.I'm not sure of the magnitudes that we ought to be signaling, but Icertainly would err on the side of moving earlier rather than later.So, I see strengths across the board but not a boom; and I do continueto worry about the errors on the international side being somewhathigher in terms of real growth than we think at this point in time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that in the last 6 months we'vehad a rather noticeable shift, at least on the part of the staff. Ifelt that 6 months ago the staff were not sure about the Board's andthe FOMC's resolve on inflation. And I'm very appreciative of thefact that the staff have read this resolve of the FOMC in regard toinflation and that they have given us a monetary policy projectionthat's somewhat consistent with that. As I look at the Greenbooknumbers, I don't focus on the number you focus on, which is real GNPtargeting. I'm somewhat like Lee Hoskins and Manley Johnson in that-29-6/29-30/88regard. But there is one number here in the Greenbook that I dobelieve is a very desirable forecast, and that's nominal GNP. And Ipoint out to you that our nominal GNP numbers in the forecast show thekind of decline that seems to me is consistent with our ultimategoals. It just seems to me it's somewhat dangerous for us in a policycontext to be focusing on real GNP when we can focus on nominal GNP.When you look at the numbers there, you see that after 1984 we've onlyhad one year in which the nominal GNP has been in the 7 percent range,and that was 1987. All right, we have in the staff forecast a 6.7 for1988 and a 6.0 for 1989. It seems to me that if we can have aforecast bringing nominal GNP back down to the 4.5 percent that we hadin 1986, that the right medicine is the monetary policy that bringsthat nominal GNP on down. I don't see how we get into trouble if webring the nominal consistently down. So I'm somewhat satisfied withthat kind of a policy background.I'm going to hand out some charts here in regard to commodityprices. I do that somewhat reluctantly because I do not believecommodity prices are as good a signal as exchange rates are. I justbelieve that it's more politic to talk about commodity prices than itis to talk about exchange rates. And I think in some ways we'retalking about the same thing. But, since the staff did get theexperimental index into their chart show, I thought at least we oughtto have a little background in regard to that experimental index.Now, first of all, the experimental index was designed to show theflow-through capabilities of commodity prices to the producer priceindex and to the consumer price index. And this index is aconsumption-weighted index. Now, the chart that you have is a chartof the index without oil. A consumption-weighted index has oil very,very high; whether we're doing it or the IMF is doing it or anyoneelse is doing it, we end up getting very high weights for oil.What our staff work has shown--and there has been someexcellent work on the part of the Board's staff in this regard--isthat year-over-year rates of change in commodity prices have beensuccessful in leading changes in the rate of change in the CPI on thesame year-over-year basis, and that most commodity indices tend to dothat with a 7- to 9-month lead time, which seems to be superior towhat the leading index does for the real economy. So, the first pagethat I've shown you there is this commodity index without oil in it.As you can see, this index has shown a downward movement and now isshowing an upward jag. That upward jag is the drought effect. Now, Idon't know what this index would have looked like without the drought.I can only suspect what it might have looked like. The second pageshows the full index--I mean the index as it was designed. And theyear-over-year rate of change clearly shows a turning point in thisindex which would be consistent with the CPI year-over-year rate ofchange peaking about September of 1987. If this proves not to be thecase, then this constitutes a clear false signal. I don't know; itmay very well have constituted a false signal because we have the fullindex saying one thing and the index without oil saying somethingelse. So, I think it's a very uncertain case.Ed Boehne gave us some data on the CPI and the PPI; and thereagain, I tend to look at the year-over-year rates of change. The CPIyear-over-year peaked out at 4.6 or 4.7 last fall; it was down to 4.4in December; it crept on down to 3.9 and stalled. I'm somewhatsuspicious that the index may move back up above 4 again. With the-30-6/29-30/88drought effects on food prices, I think that's quite likely. Now, thelast page shows the commodity index, the full index with 1982consumption weights. This one just happens to have a strange base ofJanuary 1986 in it. But for those of you who would understand whatthat might mean for some of us, that index gives some indication thatmonetary policy was successful in holding the deflationary environmentthat was occurring in 1986. It seems to me it does give some evidenceof that, although the recent trend in 1988 is very suspicious; ifyou're a chartist and you draw the lines from 1988, you can say wehave a problem. And, of course, I think we ought to lean against thatwind by [adopting] the monetary policy prescription that the staff hasoutlined.Now exchange rates, it seems to me, are showing somethingelse in regards to the scarcity of money. I will not dwell on thatitem, but I would point out that even the staff, who apparentlybelieve that the exchange rate in December '88--if I read the reportcorrectly--will be about the same as it was in December '87--. Isthat correct, Ted?MR. TRUMAN. No, I think it's down a little, to 4 percent.MR. ANGELL. Well, I thought we had had a 7 percent rise fromDecember and you're projecting a 7-1/2 percent fall from June to theend of the year. So it's approximately--MR. TRUMAN. I think you're probably right as far as Decemberis concerned. You may remember that October, November, December had aconsiderable decline in it. So from the December level you'reprobably right, but from the aggregate in the fourth quarter--MR. ANGELL. Okay, I'm just saying--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They were talking about a 7-1/2 percentannual rate of decline.MR. TRUMAN. Annual rate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So it's half from June to the end of theyear, I guess.MR. ANGELL. Well, okay. Whatever your projection is, I'mcomfortable with the decided change that that shows. It does seem tome that exchange rates do respond to real monetary scarcities. And Ithink the automatic gold standard always worked if everyone wanted tomake it work because it did alter the monetary growth paths forcountries with balance-of-trade deficits.I don't know about the drought. Some people seem to thinkthat the drought is going to add to inflationary forces. I thinkthere's a danger there that has to be guarded against. But I thinkthe drought can possibly have deflationary impacts in the long run ifwe get past these first 6 months of it. What Gary Stern said lastnight struck me: that for those people in the Midwest where thatdrought is concentrated, there is a feeling that does have somethingto do with expectations.-31-6/29-30/88One other thing I would mention is in regard to defensespending. I picked up anecdotal evidence which says that there aremany small defense contractors around the nation who are not permittedto make any bids for any government contracts or to engage in any newprojects of any kind due to the fact that they're dealing with arepresentative or lobbyist in Washington who is tainted. And Iunderstand this to be a rather widespread phenomenon.The final comment I'd make is in regard to the money markets.It just seems to me that in the last five months the money markets andbond markets have responded so well to the policy moves we've made.Some of you may not think they were policy moves, but it does seem tome that we've been attempting to lower the growth path of the monetaryaggregates, and I would consider that to be a policy move. I thinkthe bond markets have behaved so well because they have seen usresponding in a pattern that they didn't expect and I think theybelieve that our timing has been appropriate. And I think it'simportant that we keep in mind the kind of timing that we've had. Itseems to me that the Chairman has indicated a very [unintelligible] incarrying out the FOMC's views in regard to the tilts we've placed in[the directive]. And I guess I'd expect that to continue. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect toeconomic activity, particularly in its relation to the Tenth District,as you know, we're dominated by agriculture, energy, mining, andmanufacturing. Three of those activities--agriculture, energy, andmining--have been at very low levels. Agriculture has revived in thesense that it's on the recovery path, with evidence such asagricultural land prices continuing to increase 4 to 5 percent in aquarter, for example. Having in mind the impact of the drought,however, it isn't clear that that's going to continue. And if thedrought does worsen--and that's a very iffy situation in the sensethat a week or two of rain could wipe out virtually any impact of thedrought in our District and would turn the pessimism back to optimism;and I think agriculture would continue on the recovery track.Energy, on the other hand, is flat because of OPEC'sindecision and the softening of oil prices. Drilling rigs havedecreased in total numbers over the last month or two, althoughthey're still about 8 percent or so above year-ago levels. Mining isin a recovery stage, but certainly not very brisk. Manufacturing isdominated largely by the auto and aircraft industry in the TenthDistrict. Because of production cutbacks, most auto plants--the onesthat haven't been closed--are operating on two shifts. But that's farfrom being flat-out production. Aircraft, on the other hand, isbooming--from the standpoint that both commercial as well as militaryorders are very great. And as a result, that industry is looking up.With respect to your question about wage inflation or priceinflation generally, we simply do not have any good evidence that hasemerged that would suggest that that's present now, although I wouldagree with those who suggest that the feeling is right under thesurface. People we talk to keep talking about inflation, althoughthey can present no real evidence that it's accelerating. It seems tome that it may be one of those situations in which things have gottenbetter, both nationwide and in my District. And as things look pretty-32-6/29-30/88good then--and we can't stand prosperity--you begin to look for thosethings that can destroy what you think is good today. And that may bewhat we're experiencing right now. The real risk, obviously, is thatit becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. We do see some wage increasesin the public employment sector and particularly in the health [care]sector. Nurses, for example, are in very short supply nationally.Their wage demands are astronomical and they quite likely are going toget them simply because of the shortage in the supply of nurses.With regard to the Greenbook forecast and the outlook for thenext six quarters, we don't have any great divergence from the viewthat has been presented by the staff. I think our view would be thatinflation would be a bit less in the remainder of 1988 but wouldindeed be greater than the staff forecast for the year 1989 as awhole--roughly 1/2 of a percentage point fourth-quarter over fourth-quarter. Some of that comes from the projected impact of the droughton prices. Our view is that there will be an uptick; it won't be aheavy impact unless the drought worsens very much in 1988. I thinkthe staff would say that that would all kind of roll out early in1989, but we think there will be an uptick in 1988; we see thatcontinuing in 1989. And as a result, inflation from that componentalone would be a bit higher than the staff forecast. But by and largewe'd accept that forecast as being reasonable. I would agree with theearlier statement of Jerry Corrigan that the risk is on the upside andmonetary policy will become a bit tight. Inflation will rear its uglyhead. Vigilance! I quit.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. Thank you. Well, let me start with a reportfrom my district, which goes all the way from Dulles airport toConstitution Avenue.MR. BLACK. Also a part of ours!MR. HELLER. Also part, or a subsector. The unemploymentrate in the area is 1-1/2 percent, which is almost on [unintelligible]with the Japanese conditions, depending on your view. I haven'tnoticed any strike activity--that doesn't mean it isn't going on--butpeople seem to have some trouble hiring. As far as wage pressures areconcerned, my own wage hasn't changed for 1-1/2 years but the Boardseems to--MS. SEGER. It won't change next year either.MR. HELLER. It won't change next year either, thank you.But the President seems to have some trouble filling empty seats onthe Board. But, after a year and a half search, he seems to havesucceeded now, although there are still some obstacles in the way.Now, let me point to the national picture. I think the onlyforecast I can really follow is the Greenbook forecast. And while I'ma bit more optimistic than the Greenbook forecast, I think there aresome features in it that are already feeling pessimistic. TheGreenbook has the growth rate dipping a year from now--that's thesecond quarter of 1989--to 1.7 percent. Domestic purchases at thattime will be growing at a rate of 0.3 percent; the unemployment rateis up to 5.8 -5.9 percent; investment is growing only at 1 or 2-33-6/29-30/88percent; both the personal as well as the industrial structures aresolidly in the minus column; the Federal Government is solidly in theminus column; capacity utilization is dropping. With all thathappening, plus the low monetary growth that we've seen in the lastyear--and as I pointed out yesterday, we're still below the bottom endof last year's target cone--I don't see the big surge in inflationthat some people expect. Governor Johnson has already pointed outvery clearly what I think is happening: that past monetary policyreally has helped to break that inflationary impetus that we have seenbuilding up. Governor Angell, I think, said the same thing. Theyield curve is flattening, long rates are coming down, the dollar isgoing up, and you see two sort of opposing trends in commoditymarkets. On the one hand, you have the effect of the drought; on theother hand [unintelligible] prices have been dropping very sharply inthe last couple of weeks and that's often a fairly good inflationindicator, too. So, to sum up, I think we are already on slowingtrends. We see the results of the tightness of policies that weinstituted last year and in the early part of this year. And I wouldexpect that inflationary expectations are on a downward trend. Thankyou.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, let me, if I may for just amoment, bring a slightly different point of view to this thing. Mymain concern is that we need to have a good economy in 1989 andforward from there. I'm asking myself what is liable to be theeconomic forecast forward from the second quarter of next year. Andthe reason for this is I think it's very important that the nextPresident, whoever he is [unintelligible]--[Secretary's note: The transcript of Mr. Kelley's remarksends in mid-sentence; in addition, there is no record of Ms. Seger'scomments on the economy. However, a general statement of their viewsis contained in their dissents from the policy decision at thismeeting. Those dissents were included in the policy record of themeeting that was published several days after the following meeting.The transcript resumes with Mr. Kohn's report on the long-run policyalternatives.]MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don?MR. ANGELL. Yes. Don, in some ways my question arose andyou partially answered it [in your report]. The lower [projected]inflation, with a 1.4 percent M2 growth rate in 1989, followed by 2.4percent in 1990 and then a Treasury bill rate in 1990 of 9.2 percent,is so inconceivable to me. I just wondered: is it conceivable to you?MR. KOHN. Well, the relationship is conceivable. In fact,these things are derived from cranking them through the money demandmodel. The M2, Treasury bill, and nominal GNP relationships impliedare derived from cranking them through the Board staff's models of M2demand. Now, whether the underlying strategy for monetary policy iscredible, I think I'll leave that to the Committee. But therelationships in here are credible, entirely credible. I don't have-34-6/29-30/88any problem with seeing the change in interest rates going with thechange in GNP and the change in money.MR. ANGELL. My comment would be that your model doesn't fitthe financial world that I've learned to experience, and I would thinkthat a Treasury bill rate of 5.2 percent would be more consistent in1990 with that kind of M2 growth.MR. KOHN. Well,--MR. HELLER. But Don was still applying monetary restraint atthat moment. Right?MR. KOHN. Yes.MR. HELLER. You're still stepping on the brakes and thatproduces the high interest rates.MR. ANGELL. Yes, but the yield curve in that situation wouldbe so inverted.MR. KOHN. Inverted?MR. ANGELL. It has to be an inverted yield curve unless the-MR. BLACK. I think there's no explanation.MR. ANGELL. Unless inflation is accelerating.MR. KOHN. I think it's not--I don't have the outlook for thelong-bond rate--MR. BLACK. That's where the challenge is.MR. KOHN. We would not have [the long-bond rate] increasingto the same extent as the Treasury bill rate; increases would besmaller. Whether the yield curve would actually be inverted at thattime under these circumstances in the models, I'm not sure. But wehave had situations like 1987 when we had very low money growth andrising interest rates. Your point, I gather, is one of inflationexpectations and where real interest rates are and where nominalinterest rates are. And I think if there were a real break--if themarkets saw this, believed it, and inflation expectations took asubstantial decline--then you might have a point. I'm not sure thatthe interest rate thing--MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. KOHN. I'm not sure that money demand would be that muchdifferent but, surely, the long bond would be considerably different.And then it would be a question of whether money holders trade offtheir savings deposits and time deposits.MR. ANGELL. You probably haven't yet incorporated acommodity index inflation movement within your model, have you--with afeedback?-35-6/29-30/88MR. KOHN. No.MR. ANGELL. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any further questions beforewe do another run around the table?MR. BLACK. Don, you used an interesting term that I don'tremember right now, but I think you really said you assumedexpectations weren't rational in this low growth--MR. KOHN. In our models, the expectations, as Mike Prellsaid yesterday, are backward looking. And then you have laborcontracts and what not. Some things change slowly in those models;wage rates change slowly, as do prices to a certain extent in responseto changes in output gaps, unemployment rates, and that sort of thing.So that's the reason why the lags are so long and the unemploymentrate has to get so high to get this immediate, relatively short-run,effect for a 1990 inflation rate. If the expectations change morerapidly, then you wouldn't have to have quite as much restraint.MR. BLACK. What was that term you used? I want to rememberthat.MR. KOHN. I can't remember it.MR. BLACK. It was an interesting one; I should have jottedit down.MR. KOHN. Well, maybe we can talk later; I'm not sure whatyou're--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Lee.MR. HOSKINS. When I match up the Greenbook with alternativeIII, the implication under alternative III is that we're shooting for5 percent M2 growth. So the question is: What is the Greenbookprojection under that alternative?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The projection is 4 percent.MR. KOHN. Yes, the projection under the Greenbook assumptionis 4 percent. I think you're right--the markets probably will takethe midpoint.MR. HOSKINS. Yes, I'm trying to match the two up.MR. KOHN. Yes.MR. HOSKINS. You have a midpoint of 5 percent and I'm askingwhat the Greenbook forecast would look like under a 5 percent M2.MR. KOHN. Oh, I see. It would be--MR. HOSKINS. Because that's how the markets would translate-36-6/29-30/88MR. KOHN. The Greenbook forecast under a 5 percent M2 wouldbe something between the baseline and the stable interest rateforecast that Mike gave yesterday. That is, we'd have more M2,somewhat lower interest rates, and everything that went with that.But the 5 percent M2 would be consistent with some further rise ininterest rates from where we are now, but not quite as much as we havein the Greenbook forecast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Don? Let me addsomething to what Don has been saying. In one sense, we're looking atmonetary policy in the short run as sort of the crucial thing to bediscussed at this meeting. But, in a sense, this is the more relevantissue. If you go back to the 1960s, and especially the 1970s, myrecollection is that toward the latter part of the 1970s we still hadthis acceleration of inflation expectations. You remember MiltonFriedman used to draw the lines where the top of the highs ofinflation were always successively higher and the bottoms of the lowswere always successively higher. Despite that, until very late in the1970s--I suspect really the middle of 1979--inflation expectationsreally never took hold. Long-term nominal bond yields wereexceptionally low. All of a sudden the markets got the message andlong-term rates went up, I think, 450 basis points between mid-1979and early 1980.MR. JOHNSON. They never got up above the short rates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, they never did; but what I think wewere looking at was that inflation expectations really found their waydirectly into the long end of the market.MR. JOHNSON. I guess what I'm saying is they never roseabove the funds rate or short--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I'm not sure that that's relevantto this issue, because [the definition of] inflation expectations inthis context really has to be: what is the inflation premium embodiedin the long-term interest rate? It's certainly the case that thestructure of the yield curve is relevant, but not to this type ofissue. The reason I raise the issue is that everyone's expectationwas that we couldn't break the inflation psychology. And, indeed,this Board--or the FOMC--went through the torture of the damned in theyears immediately subsequent to that to get inflation expectations outof long-term bonds; and it hasn't fully succeeded. The long-termnominal yields are still reflecting a degree of inflation that is agood deal higher than in the 1970s and the 1960s. This suggests thatthe market, having come down dramatically with respect to inflation,is going to do it in two loops--meaning, in effect, that inflation iscoming back a little.And if it starts going back down in the early 1990s--leavingout the issue of not getting to 5 percent--that probably will bringthe long-term yields down in a nominal sense. And this suggests to methat the more important decision that the Committee has to make is onthis specific issue. I think we ought to decide whether we believethat money supply is working or whether we believe it's no longer arelevant consideration. But unless we are willing to abandon allhopes of the monetary aggregates coming back as key elements withinthe financial system, the more I look at the numbers I can't quite buy-37-6/29-30/88your lower inflation thing because I'm not sure it would work. Ithink that what would happen is that if we squeezed to that point, theeconomy would go into recession and political pressures wouldoverwhelm us.But certainly, I must say that alternative III looks likesomething which is, as far as I'm concerned, probably a minimum typeof adjustment from current M2 ranges. Well, having already spoken,let me just say that I would opt for no change in 1988 but alternativeIII for the 1989 figures. Do you think we have time to go aroundbefore the coffee gets cold? Let's try. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. As for alternative II, I don't like quibblingwith half a percentage point in these numbers. So the question isalternative III versus alternative I. I come out this way: I preferthat we do alternative III, but I prefer to make that decision nextFebruary. Just like a year ago, I preferred that we make the decisioncloser to the time because I believe it's important to havecredibility. And I would certainly want the language of the Humphrey-Hawkins report to indicate that we anticipate doing that. But Ireally prefer that we not announce one now because I believe there issomething in the neighborhood of a 20 percent chance that we will beback into a commodity price deflation prior to the beginning of 1989.And if that's the case I wouldn't want to make the move. So--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are we required to announce--MR. JOHNSON. Yes.MR. BERNARD. Preliminary ranges.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We actually have to do it.MR. ANGELL. We have to announce the preliminaries. Well,I'm going to vote for alternative I, but there's an 80 percent chancethat I'll want to be at III next February.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Reaffirm the '88 ranges; alternativeIII for '89.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Mr. Angell] are you reaffirming '88?MR. ANGELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I would strongly favor alternative III for 1989and I don't have any problem with our current targets for 1988. Onething we might want to consider for 1988 is to go 4-1/2 to 7-1/2,which would narrow the M2 range to 3 points. You clearly have thevisibility that I think we'd be comfortable with. And for M3, 5 to 8because that looks reasonable as well. And I might point out that thestaff has indicated that, due to different income and interestelasticities, it makes sense to have a little higher range for M3.So, I think we could stick basically with the substance of what wehave for 1988, but just narrow the range a little.-38-6/29-30/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know, the ability for us to hold toa whole range for a year for no other reason than credibility is ofvalue in and of itself.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think that's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's not that I would disagree with youon that necessarily, but I think there is the question of whether ornot we really would want to do that.MR. PARRY. Well, we would be holding to the range. We'dactually be narrowing it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We'd be narrowing it, yes.MR. PARRY. I wouldn't want to change the midpoint of M2.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. I agree with your prescription, Mr. Chairman,which is where most people have come out. There's one observation I'dlike to make, though. I think there's one big weakness with thispractice of setting one-year ranges for the aggregates, and that isthat it doesn't really commit us to doing anything beyond that year inthis. Governor Angell suggested a while ago that it is important thatwe target some nominal variable. He mentioned nominal GNP. I thinkit's a point, although certainly one can't be sure that it's a bettervariable to target than would be M2. [I'd suggest that you] announce,when you give your testimony, that our intention is to move further inthe years beyond. If you look at the chart showing velocity of M2 inthe Bluebook, that looks pretty darn constant over a period of 30years. It's true that it jumped around more in the '80s, but it looksremarkably stable for an economic variable. And I would like to seeyou say that our intention is, given past evidence, and with a zerorate of change in velocity, to bring that down in the early '90s toabout 3 percent--which I would interpret to be the long-run potentialof the economy--or whatever you can get the Committee to agree to andfeel comfortable about in saying something beyond '89. I think thatwould be very helpful to the markets. And I would certainly favorsomething of that sort.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I, too, agree with youranalysis, and I would reaffirm the 1988 targets and opt foralternative III for 1989. I think it's very important that we send asignal to the financial markets and to the public that we're on ourpath of trying to reduce core inflation. I don't think thatalternative III really represents a very restrictive monetary policyand would throw us into a tailspin in the economy. I don't likealternative II because I think that those half percentages indicate adegree of precision that we really don't have. So, I strongly favoralternative III.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Ditto!-39-6/29-30/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You want to expand that?MR. PARRY. He wants coffee!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I think I can live with alternative III. DonKohn pointed out, though, that there is some risk that expectationaladjustments will take place a certain way. We can find ourselvesgoing backward at some point. And I think there's some risk that wemight get ourselves in a situation where expectations do take effectand we end up with lower interest rates instead of rising interestrates; at some point we're going to get a velocity movement that'sgoing to be in the opposite direction of what we anticipate. To hit a5 percent nominal GNP you're going to have to compensate for apotential decline in velocity growth--I don't think that's totally outof the picture as a possibility--for me to feel completely comfortablewith alternative III; that's why I like a 5-1/2 percent midpoint.It doesn't bother me that we ratchet the targets down a halfpercentage point a year; we've been doing that for some time. As amatter of fact, we didn't even move them for a while, and a halfpercentage point was always viewed in the markets as a reasonableamount of progress. I must admit that, barring that scenario that Ipointed out, the upper end of the alternative III range seems to giveyou plenty of room. And maybe we do want to give that kind of messageto the markets. But simply because I am unsure about where we mightbe next February--. I would hate to end up having to back off nextFebruary.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Am I correct that you would expect tohave to back off only if interest rates were lower, which would meanprobably that inflation expectations are lower? And the market effectof backing--, there is no reason why we can't back up.GOVERNOR JOHNSON. No. We can back up.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the whole purpose of theexercise.GOVERNOR JOHNSON. I think that is right. I am just a littleconcerned at this point that a signal of stronger medicine of thatdegree to come might put us in that situation; but I could go with it.I am a little more comfortable with waiting as well, but I'd ratherdemonstrate a ratcheting down of the target than just hanging with thecurrent one, I think--a little unlike Governor Angell. But I can livewith III; I just think there's a risk of us backing up some.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Well, alternative III doesn't achieve theobjective that I'm looking for over time, which is to ratchet down therate of inflation. It leaves us with a midpoint that would be moreinflationary than the Greenbook forecast, which is still at 4 percent.So, if I were to pick a number, I would certainly look at somethinglike 2 to 6 percent, to focus it around what is consistent with theGreenbook; and 1 to 5 percent might even be preferable. If we aregoing to use something like III, then I think we ought to make it-40-6/29-30/88explicit in your public statement that we are going to shoot for thelower end of that target range. Otherwise, the implication is thatit's 5 percent. An alternative to that would be to narrow the range--leave the bottom end at 3 percent and pull the top end down to 6percent. I can live with 1988 the way it is, but I think it'simportant to signal the markets that we're serious out in 1989. Ithink we'll get some benefits out of that without having to pay aprice in terms of short-term interest rates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So are you coming out for III or not?MR. HOSKINS. Are we voting now?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I only wanted to--MR. HOSKINS. I'd come out for III if we could make eitherone of those two adjustments.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. I'm for maintaining the current 1988 ranges andthe 1989 ranges that go with II, essentially for the same reasons thatGovernor Johnson expressed. I think we should proceed slowly andsave, if you will, some of that ammunition for the final determinationof the ranges in February. I'd rather keep going forward at thatpoint, like Governor Angell was saying, than having to backtrack earlynext year and then going to a higher range some time next year. Ithink it is more important for us to meet our targets and to show thatwe want to make some continuing progress.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Well, I will "ditto" Governor Heller exactly. Iwould reaffirm '88 and go for II at this time for '89, for the reasonshe just articulated.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I'd maintain the '88 ranges and I'd be in favorof alternative III for '89. If I were fine tuning at all, I wouldwiden the ranges when we are going through a period of someuncertainty, but the latter is beginning to clarify. This might be anopportunity to narrow the range again and perhaps go to 3-1/2 to 7. Idon't feel strongly about that; I can live with III.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I am in favor of maintaining the existing rangesfor '88 and in keeping with my position this time last year, I thinkthat it makes sense to maintain the same ranges for '89 because we dohave another crack at this early next year, and it makes a lot ofsense to keep our powder dry. And if we need to tighten further, Iwould certainly go to II or III; but in the meantime, I don't thinkthe markets, as a matter of fact, think we are paying much attentionto the monetary aggregates at the moment. We keep saying we aren't,so I don't know how it is that we are supposed to send this tremendousmessage to the financial markets by knocking these ranges downsubstantially at this point.-41-6/29-30/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would reaffirm 1988; I canaccept alternative III for 1989. However, I would prefer to maintainthe current 4 to 8 range for 1989 for the time being, with theappropriate language in your testimony that another look at thebeginning of this upcoming year is something that we would lookforward to.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Your view is] similar to GovernorAngell's?MR. GUFFEY. It's somewhat similar, yes. The record of ourability to forecast has not been terribly good over time. And thefact that we are looking out 6 quarters, to me [unintelligible]. I'drather keep the flexibility and look again in February.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I favor sticking with what we have for '88 andalternative III for '89. And I'm inclined to agree with what Marthasaid about the market impact. I don't think the markets place a lotof weight on this. I think we are heading in the right direction andwe ought to do that; but in the final analysis, if we had to violatethe ranges in either direction I suspect as a Committee we probablywould. And I suspect that's how the market probably perceives this.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, I have nothing to add. I'd keep the rangeswe have for this year and go for alternative III for next year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I'd stay where we are for '88, alternative IIIfor '89.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. I've always been uncomfortable with setting arange for the year in the middle of the preceding year. I am verysympathetic to the idea that we keep the present range at this pointfor 1989 and tell Congress that, if we are thinking in February as wethink today, that we'd probably reduce it. But I think our ability toforecast velocity is so limited, that to try to set a range for 1989in June of 1988--that is something. We've always done it that way;but, at the same time I know that once we set it in the middle of yearone, it is difficult to revise it in the middle of year two. Itdevelops a certain inertia and people get concerned about what wouldhappen to our image, and so on. It seems to me that if we get into apattern of keeping the existing range, and telling the Congress we'dbe more comfortable setting the subsequent year's range in February,that we'd be better off in the long run.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's vote first on 1988. Unless I'mmistaken, it seems we have unanimity to reaffirm, but let's put thatto a vote.-42-6/29-30/88MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesGovernor Heller YesPresident Hoskins YesGovernor Johnson YesGovernor Kelley YesPresident Parry YesGovernor Seger YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me ask a factual question on the1989 ranges. Do we have the custom of assuming that people are votingon I, II, and III as representative averages? Do we do this or what?MR. ANGELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, in fairness, you have 6people who have clearly shown that they favor alternative III. Eventhough I don't, I can vote for it; I'm not going to vote no. On thatgesture, I think it would be a mistake.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I'm asking: Is the procedure hereone in which one puts up a proposition on alternative III and asks yesor no? Is that the way it is run?MR. ANGELL. It seems to me--MR. JOHNSON. I agree with Governor Angell. I amuncomfortable with alternative III, but I would not want to record avote against it, knowing there's a majority for it. I would like toshow more unanimity than that.MR. HELLER. How about half way--3-1/4 to 7-1/4?MR. JOHNSON. We've already been polled; we know where westand.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I make a suggestion? As I'velistened, there really is not disagreement here. What the issuereally rests on is the forecasting ability of this group for a periodthat far ahead. Why can't I capture that in language in my testimony?So, I'd say that this is the intention, but recognize that it will berevised, as it has to be, in February.MR. HELLER. Like President Morris said: a) it is verydifficult to go back on what we have done; b)--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, basically I'm saying that nomatter how you do it, it is an intention that inevitably will bereviewed. And I presume that this is not locked in concrete, as itshouldn't be.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If you took the case that GovernorJohnson cited, where something happened between now and February suchthat you had lower rather than higher interest rates, in thosecircumstances, I'd have no trouble at all myself with changing thetargets in February.-43-6/29-30/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It would be appropriate.MR. ANGELL. I think there's just a little loss incredibiliity in doing that.MR. HELLER. Then we are moving in the wrong direction. Inthat sense, it sends bad signals to the market, especially if you makesome progress and you're getting lower interest rates. And then yousay, well, now we are going to increase our monetary growth.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me say what I have to say.MR. HELLER. I'd be very reluctant to reverse myself lateron, having voted for it now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If we go for alternative III and itturns out to have to be reversed, too, you would be in the sameposition. You are not going to tell me that--GOVERNOR ANGELL. I prefer III to II.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we do this: Let's vote on III,with the understanding that the language [in my testimony] will try tocapture the reservations that people have indicated.MR. HOSKINS. Those reservations are on both the high and lowsides.MR ANGELL. [Laughing] Well, you mean just one!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Laughing] He's got severalreservations! We are voting on alternative III.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesGovernor Heller YesPresident Hoskins YesGovernor Johnson YesGovernor Kelley YesPresident Parry YesGovernor Seger No, reluctantlyMR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, there is directive language thatgoes with these alternatives that is pretty straightforward. You cando it after the coffee break, if you prefer that. The language is onpage 8.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can we reconvene? Jerry Corrigan has aninteresting idea that he broached at the coffee break. I would likegeneral views on it, as it would solve some of the problems we werediscussing on the 1989 targets. Jerry.-44-6/29-30/88VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In listening to the conversation, Imust confess that I was a little struck with the comments that WayneAngell, Bob Heller, Frank Morris, Manley Johnson, and Martha Segerwere making about the year-forward targets, as we are required underthe law to stipulate in July. The thought that I mentioned to theChairman was that, in connection with his testimony, he wouldobviously state that the Committee established the 1989 targets asthey were just voted. He would then go through his usual song anddance about uncertainties, but he would take that song and dance onestep further and specifically say that, indeed, the Committee wasimpressed with how much these uncertainties have increased, ifanything, over time. Consistent with that, in the future theCommittee may well show a strong tendency in July to merely restatethe current year's targets for the following year. That would notnecessarily always be the case, but there would be a strong tendencyin that direction, simply as a further manifestation of theuncertainties that arise in trying to state the targets that far inadvance.SPEAKER(?). Very good.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The advantage of that occurs in theevent that we are in a position next February, for example, where thetypes of occurrences that have been expressed here do evolve and weare required to change. What we have done, in effect, while adheringto the requirements of the statute, is basically establish the notionthat setting the 1989 ranges is clearly a problem in July 1988, andthe fact that it turned out to be a problem in June or July of 1988isn't that much of a surprise. That gives us, I think, a reasonablebasis to change, which could be captured if we were to be very vaguein the report and in my testimony, but I gather that really isinappropriate, given the Humphrey-Hawkins statute language. Jerry'snotion, within the statutory language, creates the type ofconditionality which I think that Wayne and Don and a few others haveindicated.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I have two problems with that. Oneis that you would be going into next year without having set any long-run targets.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry; let me restate it. WhatJerry is recommending is that we are actually stating the targets--specifically, alternative III--and instead of having some languagearound it about uncertainty and how the targets may be changed, thatwe stipulate that henceforth, starting in July 1989, we would assumethat the then-current ranges would be automatically extended into thesubsequent year but be subject to review in February.MR. BLACK. My other problem is more serious. And that is,that I would like to see us state tentative targets over the long runthat tell the market what we have often said in the past--that we wantto get these aggregates down to the point that we've gotnoninflationary growth. To me, [the approach recommended by JerryCorrigan] would show less resolve than I think [is desirable].MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, I think what Jerry and the othersare getting at is valid, but I'd like to suggest a slightly differentwrinkle as to how to achieve it, which I think gets around a potential-45-6/29-30/88difficulty. I would rather say that the uncertainty has increased andthat it has become increasingly difficult to make judgments; that wewill make our best estimate in July, but the [congressional]committees ought to understand that we may be changing or revising inFebruary more than in the past. I think there is an advantage insaying it that way because it tends to be more in the spirit of thestatute. Some years ago--I've forgotten exactly when it was--wedidn't send up in July ranges for the following year, and SenatorProxmire said we weren't following [the statute] by what we weredoing. This way, if you say that in the future we are just going tocontinue the current ranges into the next year, I think someone couldsay to you that what you're really doing, in effect, is revising thestatute. If you go the other way and say we'll give it our besteffort, but you ought to realize it is highly preliminary and almostroutinely you might expect changes in February, then you do it more inthe spirit of the statute, and I think it accomplishes the same thing.MR. PARRY. I think I would agree with Ed; I don't like thesuggestion that we indicate that we might be very likely to continuethe prior year's target in July. I think we go through a very seriousexercise here. It is clear that the staff has done that and I thinkstaff at each of our Banks has done that as well. if we are going todo it in a serious way, I think we ought to pay some attention to it.You know, we just don't have to do much work if what we're going to domost of the time is indicate that we are going to retain the currentyear's target for the next year. I don't see any virtue in that. Ihink Congress ought to realize that we are trying to do the best wecan and be aware that, at times, we may change it in one direction oranother come February.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In the context of this furtherdiscussion, let me just read--and throw into the well--two paragraphssuggested by Don Kohn. The first is: "The Committee will bereconsidering the ranges in early 1989 and recognizes that they couldbe changed, depending on conditions at that time." Anotheralternative is: "It was understood that all these ranges wereprovisional and that they would be reviewed in early 1989 in the lightof intervening developments." At any rate, those are two moresuggestions.MR. ANGELL. I like Don Kohn's second suggestion best of all.I would prefer that we not make it seem as if we are really all thatuncertain about these. I don't like the qualifications that mightmake it seem we are not going to stick with them. I prefer to havesomething very simple, like Don Kohn's second suggestion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Don Kohn's second one, I must admit--MR. HELLER. Can you read it again?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It was understood that all these rangesare provisional and that they would be reviewed in early 1989 in thelight of intervening developments.SPEAKER(?). Isn't that what we always say?MR. HELLER. I think, Mr. Chairman, that the problem will goaway anyhow, now that we're getting them down to a range--you know,-46-6/29-30/88the midpoint is 5 percent--which Professor Friedman has alwaysadvocated as a permanent growth range from now until eternity. So, Ithink in the near-term future we won't have these problems any more.SPEAKER(?). Is that Ben Friedman? [LAUGHTER]MR. HELLER. We can go back to a one-day meeting![LAUGHTER]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anyone have any objections to Don'slanguage?MR. MELZER. The adjective "provisional" could be confusingbecause we talk about the provisional range for debt all the time.SPEAKER(?). How about "tentative"?SPEAKER(?). How about "preliminary"?SPEAKER(?). The statute says preliminary.SPEAKER(?). I like the word provisional.MR. MELZER. It is a good word. I am just pointing out thatwe also use it in another context all the time for the debt range.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is that a problem?MR. BERNARD. The previous sentence that comes right beforethis has to do with debt. The way it was drafted was: "The Committeeprovisionally set the associated monitoring range for growth in totaldomestic nonfinancial debt"--SPEAKER(?). Take that one out.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't you read the whole paragraph?MR. BERNARD. The paragraph for 1989 with the alternative IIIranges--it's at the bottom of page 18 in the Bluebook or, if you'relooking at the other document, it would be page 3, lines 56 to 60--would read as follows: "For 1989, the Committee agreed on tentativeranges for monetary growth measured from the fourth quarter of 1988 tothe fourth quarter of 1989 of 3 to 7 percent for M2 and 3-1/2 to 7-1/2percent for M3. The Committee set the associated monitoring range forgrowth in total domestic nonfinancial debt at 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent.It was understood that all these ranges were provisional and that theywould be reviewed in early 1989 in the light of interveningdevelopments."There's another paragraph on M1. It reads: "With respect toM1, the Committee reaffirmed its decision in February not to establisha specific target for 1988 and also decided not to set a tentativerange for 1989. The behavior of this aggregate in relation toeconomic activity and prices will continue to be evaluated in thelight of the behavior of its velocity, developments in the economy andfinancial markets, and the nature of emerging price pressures."-47-6/29-30/88MR. JOHNSON. I would like to ask one more question.[Unintelligible] I don't have any problem with that, but I'd like toclarify one more thing with Don Kohn. I should have asked thisearlier, but it is not going to change anything. Going back andlooking at the [unintelligible], the staff forecast is 6 percentnominal for 1989--MR. KOHN. It's 6-1/2 percent, I think.SPEAKER(?). 6-1/2.MR. JOHNSON. That's what I said--around 6. The centraltendency of the FOMC members is around 6. The midpoint on thisalternative III is 5 percent. Anybody who looks at that is going tosay, well, the trend rate of M2 velocity is zero, and thatautomatically means that the Fed is targeting higher interest rates.Is that going to be obvious to people?MR. KOHN. It's not really that obvious. I think it wouldimply some small increase in interest rates, but it depends on whathappens over the second half of this year. It is very hard to sayuntil you know what happens in the second half of this year what thevelocity would be next year, because whatever might happen in thesecond half, interest rates have a [unintelligible]. It's notnecessarily--MR. JOHNSON. But they can draw that conclusion from what hasalready happened.MR. KOHN. It is close. I think if rates were held aboutsteady here, with the staff's GNP forecast you'd probably getsomething on the order of 5-1/2 percent [M2 growth] next year. So,it would be a small increase in velocity, just with the lagged effectsof what we've done through yesterday. At least that's what the modelssay. It is not that obvious--especially with 4 points in the range.MR. JOHNSON. I didn't want anything obvious. I would beuncomfortable with somebody looking at the range and seeing a biginterest rate increase just to get the velocity number. Okay.MR. MELZER. On that M1 sentence--again, this is just adrafting issue, but we are saying that the behavior in relation toeconomic activity and prices will be evaluated in light of economicdevelopments and emerging price pressures. Somehow it seems redundantto me. It's not a big point, but I think we could do a better jobdrafting this.MR. KOHN. You could just take out "in relation to economicactivity and prices." One question is whether the Committee wants toshorten this thing at all. We felt that this had been repeatedsufficiently.MR. MELZER. That probably is a good way to fix it, Don.MR. KOHN. [Unintelligible] repeat this rationale so maybethis aggregate will continue to be evaluated in the light of itsvelocity.-48-6/29-30/88[CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Kohn.]MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I make a comment on that? We willbe discussing, probably in both the testimony and the report,something that captures the discussions we had on the monetary base--what it is that we concluded--and I might also mention the focus onfuture research relative to that. Let me just raise a couple issueshere. When you look at the number of pieces of information that willbe coming out in the next several weeks, we are going to beconfronted, I think, with a lot of potential changes that we cannoteffectively foresee. That includes the resolution of what is anextraordinary rise in the exchange rate, which really is something ofa surprise and has to be a part of anything we are consideringrelative to what we are going to do with respect to policy. As aconsequence of that, I think we should have a telephone conference ina couple of weeks--after the employment data, and probably after thePPI data, are released--to review whatever it is that we agree totoday. I suggest that because I don't think that I would feelcomfortable with a directive covering the next six weeks, given aneconomy with a capability of doing a lot of things that are shiftingall over. In that context, and listening to the economic forecast, Iwould opt for asymmetric language toward tightness and I very muchthink that it would be appropriate to add an additional $50 million tothe borrowing, which would bring total borrowings up to about the $600million level. I would opt for that, if for no other reason than, asI understand it, that we probably need to be at that level to reaffirmthe 7-1/2 percent funds rate we have in the market currently, and thatis where people in the market essentially expect it to be. My concernis that we not be perceived to be reversing policy; and I think thatputting that sort of posture forward gives us the flexibility todecide, under whatever conditions exist in a couple of weeks, eitherto move or not to move thereafter. Mr. Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I have two issues that I am trying to balancehere. One is how I foresee the risks in the economy and inflation,and the other is that we snugged just a week ago. Taking those twoissues into account, I would prefer that we maintain the existingdegree of pressure on reserve positions. I would have an asymmetricdirective on the side of tightening. Under alternative B, I wouldround down those halves so that instead of 5-1/2 percent for M2 Iwould make it 5 percent, and instead of 3-1/2 percent for M1, I wouldmake it 3 percent. I think your advice about having a telephone callis well taken. On the business of being worried about whether thefunds rate is 7-1/2 or 7-3/8 or 7-5/8 percent, again, I think we oughtnot peg that so tightly. I have no problem with borrowed reserves at$550 to $600 million or something like that. But I don't think weshould worry that much about whether the federal funds rate goes up aneighth or down an eighth. I think it'll be good to get back to ourpre-October 1987 posture on that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I would support what you have in mind. I don'tperceive the move on the telephone call--I guess it was last week--orwhat you're proposing now, as really pegging the funds rate. What Iperceive it to be is an intelligent move which the market really has-49-6/29-30/88discounted--and perhaps it has discounted more tightening than, infact, we've undertaken. Not only has it discounted it, but it hasdiscounted it very constructively, if you will, in terms of howmarkets are performing. I think we would all generally agree thatwe're in an environment where probably more [tightening] will benecessary. I perceive what you're suggesting here is that we takeadvantage of that and just validate a rate and a policy expectationthat's already discounted in the market. And on that basis I would doit. In terms of the policy record, I don't know how we couldcommunicate it in such a way that it doesn't appear that the Committeehas in two successive weeks here taken two further tightening actions.There's probably a way to handle it, in terms of words, so it doesn'tcome across that way. I think that would be desirable. And I wouldfavor the asymmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. Mr. Boehne said it pretty well. There is goodreason to maintain the current posture, especially in view of the highdollar that we're seeing at the present time. If you see a markedturnaround in markets, international or domestic, then I'd say in twoor three weeks, or whenever that occurs, we can have a conference calland change our policy posture as may be appropriate at that particulartime. So, I'd be for the $550 million borrowing assumption and aconference call. I don't know whether a conference call means we areasymmetric or not. I think I'd rather have the Committee take actionthan have the Desk automatically do it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I don't think the Desk is justbasically a [unintelligible]. The asymmetric language indicates thedirection in which the Desk would be leaning without necessarilyacting.MR. HELLER. Yes. As long as that's before it happens andthe phone call is not a reaffirmation of action. That's what I'd liketo see. I'd be glad to go along with the asymmetrical language, witha phone call.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Just for clarification: Is that [telephone]meeting a conference or is it a vote?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It could be either. It is a question ofwhether something of great significance happens or if we agree thatnothing has happened. It's only that it is possible that we may get asignificant move in the exchange rate; we may get some verysignificant data which may change the psychology of the market as aconsequence of the payroll data. We've got the PPI coming out,amongst a lot of other figures. So, it's a type of period when Ithink it's useful for the Committee to be a little more active becausethere are crucial decisions to be made. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I guess the real question iswhether we've done enough up until now. If you look at the realactivity signs, I guess that would say probably we have; but if youlook at the recent behavior of the aggregates--unless that's anaberration of some sort--that says we haven't. My guess is that we-50-6/29-30/88haven't done quite enough yet, so I was thinking in terms of thatlevel of borrowed reserves that would be associated with an expectedfederal funds rate of 7-3/4 percent. But I could live with whatyou're suggesting, with an asymmetric directive and the understandingthat we get together in a couple of weeks and take a look at it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I guess my preference would be for alternative"C", because I think all of the analysis we have seen over the lasttwo days would support it very strongly. As a fallback position,though, I think I could see taking it in a couple of bites. I mustadmit that a move up to $600 million on borrowing is not quite thesize of bite I had in mind; but if we were to make some move now andthen agree to talk about this in a couple of weeks, I certainly couldgo along with that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, on the basis of the forecast,my preference when I came into the meeting was for some slighttightening--and by slight I mean something around $100 millionadditional to the borrowing target. That would be somewhere between"B" and "C". But in light of the uncertainties that you see in theadditional data that will be coming in, I don't have any strongobjection to doing it in stages. I would like to point out, though,that in my mind there is a problem with that, in the sense that if wekeep doing this in small bites and we keep responding to individualpieces of information, we're taking a shorter-term view than I thinkthe Committee should be taking. I think that we need to be moreforward-looking and not seem to be reacting to individual pieces ofinformation. I think that's what the markets are doing at the moment.They're focusing on very short-term considerations, and I think weought to be more forward-looking.The other thing I would say, I think Tom Melzer was saying aswell. We ought to take advantage of the seasonal pressures that arein the market and do pretty much what we did last time--that is, takeadvantage of what the market is doing with respect to the federalfunds rate. But the bottom line is that I would go with yoursuggestion. And I would certainly want to have an asymmetricaldirective.With respect to the directive, if I may, I would like to maketwo other suggestions. Since the focus of this discussion thismorning seems to be on inflationary pressures, it would seem to melogical to put that phrase "indications of inflationary pressures"first in the directive. In a more general sense, the language in thedirective keeps talking about--and we've used this for a long time--the strength of the business expansion and I wonder whether itwouldn't be better, given my predilection for a longer-term view, tosay the strength of the forecast for the business outlook rather thanexpansion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't know whether we shouldn't try toembody that in the 1989 question. It's a little too sensitive tocapture in the operational paragraph because that paragraph isessentially the short-term instruction to the Desk. And I was-51-6/29-30/88wondering whether or not we can't capture what you're trying to do inthe Humphrey-Hawkins report itself.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, that would help. Even though it'sshort-term and is a direction for the Desk, I still think it canembody that other concept.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sorry--[could you repeat that?]MR. FORRESTAL. Even though this is a short-term directive tothe Desk, I think you still can embody that longer-term forecast andoutlook in that language, but I don't feel strongly about that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think you can but the trouble is youmay be putting a lot more in there than we need. However, I think wecan catch the philosophy you're suggesting because it's certainly thephilosophy of the Committee. And we could capture that in the report.President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I agree with the direction you'resuggesting, but I might get there a slightly different way. I wonderif there hasn't been enough movement in the rates that a change in thediscount rate would be appropriate. I think I understand thetremendous sensitivity about that, but I wonder if it couldn't beexplained as rather a technical move, perhaps a following move, atthis point. And if the Board members were to do that, then theborrowing level would be adjusted accordingly. If you were notcomfortable with that, then I would agree with the increase in theborrowing level to $600 million with asymmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just take a minute on that. Onething we do have to avoid is an international ratcheting game betweenthe United States, the Germans, and the Japanese. We are incontinuing consultation with them and we are all trying to avoid thatsequence. I'm not certain they would agree at this stage that, with amove on the discount rate, we would not trigger a set of circumstances[that would lead to a ratcheting of rates]. First, if we change thediscount rate, which the markets are not expecting, we'd probably havethe dollar go up 3 yen and 3 pfennigs pretty quickly. And I thinkthat would almost automatically require that the Bundesbank match itbecause they are under severe political pressure with the exchangerate weakening for them. So, one of the things that we have to becareful about--and I might add one of the reasons why I think we haveto calibrate in the way that we are--is that we have to be verycareful not to trigger an international competitive spiral. I thinkthat is not an inconceivable risk here.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, this gets us into an awkwardposition with regard to our boards of directors. When we first sentin our recommended increase in the discount rate, we had in mind ahalf point increase in the federal funds rate, which we virtually haveachieved. That would suggest that we really ought to withdraw ourrecommendation, which is hard to explain to them because we can'treally tell them what the System has done at the Open Market level.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is a---52-6/29-30/88MR. BLACK. It gets into a ticklish position. We didwithdraw our first one for that very reason. We had gotten up towhere we wanted to go, so we withdrew it and then decided it needed togo more.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But what may solve the problem--we canhandle it, I think, if I announce in my testimony what we have done atthat point.MR. BLACK. Sure, that would be very helpful. I've beendebating what I would say to them because I can't really tell themwhat I know.MR. PARRY. Except you can say that money market rates havemoved to the level--MR. BLACK. As I say, the market assumes that the System hastightened.MR. HOSKINS. Why not have a following discount rate move?If we believe the discount rate should be roughly in line with otherrates, then we could probably get by with having it move up. Myconcern is that if we move ahead on the funds rate and we leave thediscount rate behind, it's going to get more difficult to raise thatrate the further forward we go. And I have some concerns that we'rejust dropping that rate as any kind of a useful tool at all.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. At some point we're going to have to dosomething.MR. JOHNSON. Yes. I was going to say--at some point I thinkif we decide that we have to lock in the structure, obviously that'swhat you want to do. I think there's still enough uncertainty outthere, at least on my part, that I wouldn't want to lock that floorin. But there will be a point, obviously, when that needs to be done.MR. BLACK. And therein lies another problem for thedirectors because, under our new procedures, if we haven't gotten arecommendation in, they are not going to be in that first wave. Andthat's going to be very disappointing to them.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Should that event come, we will try tobe--MR. BLACK. I think it will be very helpful to give them achance to join.MR. JOHNSON. It might be useful if they understood that, tosome extent, movements in the funds rate were embodying what theirpreferences were.MR. BLACK. Well, that's what we really told them.MR. JOHNSON. I think if they can understand that, then theyshouldn't be disappointed on the discount rate--as long as we'regetting it done one way or the other.-53-6/29-30/88MR. BLACK. I don't think they are all unduly disappointed,but it's awfully hard to tell them the full rationale for yourrecommendation when you really can't tell them what the Open MarketCommittee has decided.MS. SEGER. Maybe we ought to consider announcing promptlywhat we do; then you could tell them.MR. BLACK. That would solve that particular problem, Martha.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And create others. President Stern.MR. STERN. I like your suggestion, Mr. Chairman. To me, thekey thing at this point is the asymmetrical directive. I don't feelpersonally that it's necessary to do much immediately, but as I notedearlier--and many of us discussed this--I think the risks are on theside of more inflation looking down the road. And I would like to bepositioned to address that if and when it's appropriate. I certainlycan support raising the borrowing target to $600 million associatedwith alternative B. I don't view that as having much of an effect oneway or the other at this point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. I'm pretty much where Gary Stern is. I wouldprefer not to make a further move at this point and to have asymmetriclanguage. But I'm comfortable with your suggestion and would be happyto support it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I'm in favor of maintaining the present degree ofreserve pressure with asymmetric language, and reconvening viatelephone in the next two or three weeks. In fact, it seems to me wecould even wait until that time to put the extra $50 million in thetarget because, as I understand it, the fed funds rate is runningright around 8 percent at the moment.MR. STERNLIGHT. This is on the statement date today; it was8 percent earlier today.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry, what was that?MR. JOHNSON. Statement date.MR. STERNLIGHT. Today is the quarter-end statement date.Funds were trading earlier in an 8 percent area, even a little higher.We did some early repurchase agreements and the funds rate came downbelow the 8 percent level the last I heard. It is still pretty high.MS. SEGER. It has been up close to 8 percent even beforetoday, though, hasn't it?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, yesterday.MS. SEGER. Thanks.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, that's the end of that.-54-6/29-30/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I assume that with $600 million we willdrift back to 7-1/2 percent.MR. STERNLIGHT. When we get past the quarter-end pressures,I would expect that, certainly.MS. SEGER. I guess I don't have that much faith in theaccuracy of our models.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Since I'd be between "B" and "C"anyway, I'm quite comfortable with the formulation that you put on thetable, Mr. Chairman.MR. JOHNSON. Maybe I should--is there anybody else?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, go ahead.MR. JOHNSON. I'm sort of like Gary Stern, Mike Kelley, BobHeller and others who have said they would like no change at thispoint but that the risks are asymmetric. My view is that that's wherethe greatest probability is. My preference would be generally nochange, but subject to review at some point with the probability thatwe might move. However, the Chairman has indicated a willingness togo $50 million additional on the borrowing, and I think if therereally is a risk of the funds rate settling back below the 7-1/2percent, I can live with going with $600 million now to avoid that.I think the funds rate is important. I've never viewed thisas targeting fed funds unless you leave it stable all the time. Myview is that you want to move it, but you want to give a message withthat funds rate, and I guess you should be willing to move it as youneed to. So, I think the 7-1/2 has a significant message, andbasically I think the markets have discounted it, as Tom Melzer says.And I wouldn't want to see them get a different impression from that.So, if in fact going to $600 million means a 7-1/2 percent funds rate,roughly, I can support that. I can also support the asymmetriclanguage, but I would want to make sure that that doesn't mean it'sautomatic. I think that the conference call should be purely forreview, and there's no automatic move on borrowing at that stage. Wemay actually feel totally differently when we review the evidence. Aslong as that's well understood, I think I can support this directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I, too, would agree that yourproposal is reasonable and quite acceptable, with one proviso,however--that $600 million does indeed mean 7-1/2 percent and notgreatly over that level. My point is that it seems to me the nextstep in the tightening process quite likely is the discount rate. Andin my own view, it would be an inappropriate action to tighten furthernow. As a result, your proposal of going to $600 million, if thatreally means a funds rate of about 7-1/2 percent and not greatlyhigher than that, is very acceptable to me.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think President Hoskins is next.-55-6/29-30/88MR. HOSKINS. Yes, I'm ready. I guess since a $200 [millionincrease in the borrowing target] made the markets happy, maybe weought to consider that again! But I don't think there's much supportfor that. To try to reduce inflation at all in 1989, I think we wouldhave to move at least 50 basis points before the end of the thirdquarter. That would imply a "C" path to me. A trade-off obviouslyfor the "C" path, given what Peter Sternlight said yesterday withrespect to a discount rate move causing the funds rate to rise, wouldbe living with a "B" path with a discount rate increase.I have some reservations similar to President Forrestal inrespect to reacting, or appearing to react, to incoming information onan every two-week basis. I think the market has been doing that and Ithink we should try to set a tone of a little more stability thanthat. I also am concerned that this tit-for-tat kind of followingmarket rates up may not get us out in front of inflation. It's liketrying to nibble it to death, it seems to me. And it's not clear tome from our moves to date that we've tightened significantly. If youlook at the monetary aggregates, which is the point Bob Black made,you could make a case that we haven't changed much at all. If youlook at bank credit, we had two months of pretty strong growthrelative to the last 6 months. So, the concern would be that if themarkets are moving rates, while we're allowing them to go up, in fact,we're providing more reserves than--MR. JOHNSON. You've got a point on the reserve thing, but onthe rates, the funds rate has basically led all the other short rates.It's higher than the T-bill, commercial paper rates, and everythingelse. Your point on reserves is well taken, but we've certainly beenahead on the short rate issue. Some of that could be the supplyproblem but--MR. HOSKINS. Yes. It's just very difficult for me tountangle. I think you understand what I'm concerned about--that it'snot obvious to me that we're ahead of the game all the time. So Iguess my preference would be for "C". But I think if we were to movewith the $50 million now and seriously consider $100 million if thedata that you're concerned about come out to support that kind ofmove, then I could live with your suggestion.MR. HELLER. Another $100 million then or--MR. HOSKINS. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Borrowing of $550, $600 million--how importantis that? Borrowing of $600 million with a 7-1/2 percent fed fundsrate is a return to what we decided not to do. I just don'tunderstand how we could do that. We voted to follow a borrowingtarget, and the present level of our borrowing target is $550 million.And if we tighten, we tighten. Now of all the times to choose to tellthe markets we're tightening, this is the lousiest time I have everheard of. I mean, the markets have received so well what we've done.It has been an immaculate arrangement of achieving objectives. And Idon't see how we're going to go in here and do this. I'm reluctant tohave to vote "no". But in the past I've gone along, and every timeI've been sorry. We did this last September. We had a deal; we said-56-6/29-30/88what we'll do is increase the borrowing. But we didn't do it. Andthen the markets discovered it 3 weeks later and the timing was justas bad as it could be. I just don't understand why we can't maintainpresent borrowing pressures; then we will know what we're doing.There will be no misunderstanding. Why not have a conference call inthe meantime if something happens? I don't know what the dollar isgoing to do, but if the dollar rises and continues to rise--sometimesif you're in the financial marketplace and you want to go bet againstwhat the market's doing you can go ahead and do it if you like. Thisdollar might have more [room] to run up than it has to go down. If itdoes, it would seem to me that it could very well get that much moretop heavy, that much more over where the trade requirement is. And Iwant to have some ammunition to do it when it's time to do it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're trying to say that going from$550 million to $600 million is going to do all that?MR. ANGELL. I'm saying that going to $600 million is eithergoing to cause us to abandon borrowing targeting and make it be 7-1/2percent or--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, no; leave the 7-1/2 out. I'm tryingto follow you as to why going from $550 million to $600 million isgoing to create all the problems you're suggesting.MR. ANGELL. Well, if it's not a problem, then there's noproblem leaving it at its current level. If $50 million isn'timportant, there's no problem leaving it at $550 million; and thenwhen we have our conference call, let's go to $700 million if we needto.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, it's a legitimate question as towhether you want to be at $550 or $600 million. But the presumptionthat you're creating is that going from $550 to $600 million is goingto create some crucial unwinding, which strikes me as rather unlikely.MR. ANGELL. Oh, I believe it is. I believe the long bondmarket is poised; I think it has accepted what we've done so far in amarvelous way--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But there's no--MR. ANGELL. But I think to tighten at this moment in timewith nothing out there--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's not true that nothing is outthere. What is out there are potentials of inventory accumulation; infact, the May figures that just came in today do show a bit moreinventory accumulation than I thought we were getting. The crucialquestion I think we ought to ask is: What happens if we're wrong?Supposing that we go to $600 million and that's the wrong judgment, inretrospect. What's the down side? And the down side strikes me asreally quite minimal at this point, because I don't think anybody isperceiving the issue of a significant weakening occurring in theeconomy at these rates. We haven't even started really seriousinventory accumulation. If we had an overhang of inventories I couldreadily imagine this whole thing tilting over. One extraordinaryaspect of the success that we have had to date--namely the tilting of-57-6/29-30/88the yield curve--is the fact that we are getting a lower long-termbond rate and hence, more effective demand coming from those areas ofinvestment; it's the investment parts of the economy which reflectlong-term interest rates. And we've got short-term rates where theyprobably are beginning to bite on the inventory picture. That strikesme as about right.MR. ANGELL. But I see the inventory thing just the opposite.It seems to me that tightening is going to accumulate moreinventories, not less inventories.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well--MR. JOHNSON. Involuntary--MR. ANGELL. Because you're going to slow down final demand.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but if the tightness has movedlong-term rates down, there's far more final demand that sits in thelong-term bond market than sits in the short end.MR. ANGELL. But it has occurred because our tightening hasmade sense to the markets.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, and there's every reason.MR. HELLER. I think it has effected a slowing in theeconomy.MR. ANGELL. And this week is not the time to tell themarkets we're tightening.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But wait a second. The markets believeimplicitly in the fact that we are in the process of tightening in agradual way. If we put $50 million into the borrowing, it's just notcredible to me that that can have any significant effect other than toreinforce the market's view that we're gradually tightening. We'vebeen gradual and very responsible in this.MR. JOHNSON. I think I know exactly what you mean, Wayne. Ithink what Wayne is saying is this: If the record of that $50 millionchange is announced to the market as a further tightening move, eventhough the funds rate may not move at all from where it is, that wouldbe [a concern to him]. Is that what you're saying, Wayne? Obviously,if it doesn't move the funds rate, in my opinion, it's not a furthertightening. But I think you're saying you don't want to be seen onrecord as having raised the borrowing target at this point.MR. ANGELL. That's right. In other words, if we really wentto $600 million and the existing fed funds rate reflects $600 million,I have no problem. But my understanding is that Peter and Don havebeen following a $550 million target. And if you change a $550million target to $600 million, the best Fed watchers know that we'vesnugged. Does anybody disagree with that? The best Fed watchers knowwe've snugged.MR. JOHNSON. Sure.-58-6/29-30/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not on $50 million, they wouldn't.MR. ANGELL. They do.MR. HELLER. I think the last time they did.MR. ANGELL. They already know we did. The best watchersknow we snugged. And then [do we want] to do it again and to havethem say we did it again with this timing and possibly the dollarwhere it is? I'm ready to go to $700 million when we need to or I'mready to go to a discount rate change if we need to.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the problem is that you don't wantto go to $700 million. I could turn the arguments around and be onthe other side of this thing if you start to talk about $700 million,because what we do now is basically in advance of events. I think wehave been ahead of the power curve. We have been surprisingly,successfully, ahead of what is an emerging inflationary process. Infact, I think it is very difficult to find a period such as this inwhich Fed policy has done as much as it has. The one thing I justabsolutely find unacceptable is that we throw away any of the gainsthat we have made. And the notion that we are moving into a periodwhere the the economy is still quite strong, and we decide to wait andsee, strikes me as risking at this point the loss of what we'veaccomplished since we started to tighten.MR. ANGELL. You mean to say that staying at $550 million,which would maintain the existing arrangement, and having a telephoneconference call in 2 weeks, or 1 week if we need to, is different fromgoing wherever you want to go at that time--whether it's $600 or $650or $700 million?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, because what it basically does isit reaffirms the asymmetry of our approach toward this particularmarket, which the financial markets have very clearly indicated isexceptionally appropriate policy. And it is terribly important forthe adjustment process to keep that in place.MR. JOHNSON. I think we need some clarification, though, onwhat $550 million and $600 million mean.MR. KELLEY. That's right.MR. JOHNSON. Before we get too deep into this. To the Deskand to Don, what does $550 million mean? Is $550 million going tocause the funds rate to settle back down below 7-1/2 percent?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it's terribly hard to say, GovernorJohnson. When the Committee had its conference call on June 22, wewere looking at funds rates that had come up to 7-3/8 to 7-1/2percent; and we thought then that putting in place a $550 millionwould tend to validate and accept that. Over the final week of themonth, we've gotten higher funds rates with these quarter-endpressures. In the period that ended yesterday, we ended up withborrowing at $520 million: we never did get even the modest bulge thatwe thought we'd get on the final day. And I guess the funds rateaveraged about 7.57 or 7.58 percent for the 2 weeks--I don't know, Idon't have the statement.-59-6/29-30/88MR. KOHN. 7.58 percent.MR. STERNLIGHT. My guess would be that as these quarter-endpressures fade, the funds rate will get back toward something likewhat we looked at in mid-June--if we stayed at $550 million that we'dget back to 7-1/2 percent or a shade under. So I feel comfortablesaying that with $600 million it'd likely be around 7-1/2 percent, butI couldn't argue strongly that it would not be 7-1/2 percent or ashade over also.MR. ANGELL. But, Peter, the question that I have here is: Ifwe stay at $550 million, will any reputable Fed watchers say we'veloosened?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Just keep the question.MR. ANGELL. No, if we stay at $550 million, will any--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me rephrase the question.MR. ANGELL. No, I want the answer to my question.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'll answer it; I will say "no."MR. ANGELL. Okay, I agree with your answer.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, I'm delighted. Let me ask youthis: What do you think is the probability of having to go to $600million or more?MR. ANGELL. 50/50.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What do you think the probability ofhaving to go below $550 million directly from here is?MR. ANGELL. 15 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It strikes me, therefore, that if youtake that literally, the chances are higher that we'll go up from hererather than down.MR. ANGELL. That's why I want to have a tilt policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but the point is that if that is infact the case, the risks are very clear; and one has much more cloutper unit of action by moving in advance. I must admit I'm reallytrying to listen to your argument and I'm having difficulty with it,because there has been a general thrust of policy here which has beenextraordinarily successful. And I think what the additional $50million is doing is essentially ratifying that. When they ask me, doI think the world is going to come to an end at $550 million, well,obviously not. Looking at what the markets know or what they don'tknow, I'm not even certain who will catch the $50 million or not catchit. If they do catch the $50 million, will they consider the factthat we have tightened to be something negative? That, I stronglysuggest, is probably untrue. The markets in this context cannotperceive of a further slight tightening of the targets as beingnegative. I really can't [see it].-60-6/29-30/88MR. ANGELL. Well--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Remember this economy--MR. ANGELL. That's the reason we have a 12-member group--because some people might see it differently.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think we've conveyed our points.I will take it out on a tennis court and see if--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I feel sorry for that ball!MR. HOSKINS. I would like to make just one comment. We arealways discussing this in terms of the risks of having to move it upanother notch. But we don't discuss the notion of suppose we went upto $700 million, would we be willing to risk bringing the rates backdown? In that context, we're some times following. I think if wethought about it another way and said yes, we can move it down as wellas up--the idea being that maybe you do get out in front, and if youhave made a mistake, then you'd be willing to--MR. ANGELL. Well,--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me answer that, since I'm on theother side of this issue. If we were to go to $700 million right now,I think we would be putting too much upward pressure on the exchangerate and I think that would create international problems which havethe same order of magnitude as the discount rate. So, while I willargue the other side of this, I think I would also argue against thatfor the reasons I suggested. We still haven't heard from PresidentsBoykin or Morris. If they have any inclination--MR. BOYKIN. I would go with your prescription.MR. MORRIS. I will too, Mr. Chairman. I would add on thediscount rate that it seems to me that we ought to reserve action onthe discount rate to have something in the closet that we can bringout to cope with a sharply declining dollar. I'd remind you that thelast rally phase for the dollar lasted six weeks. Maybe this will bemore prolonged; I rather doubt it.MR. JOHNSON. It has been depreciating since the beginning ofthe year, practically. This recent surge is shorter, but the netdepreciation from the beginning of the year is what Ted?MR. TRUMAN. Oh, it's 11 or 12 percent.MR. JOHNSON 11 or 12 percent.MR. CROSS. Well, it depends on against what [thedepreciation is measured].[Secretary's note: Several people spoke at once and theircomments were unintelligible.]MR. ANGELL. Well, Frank, what are you going to do when thedollar is falling and the price of gold is soaring? And those thingsare there; then what do we do? Increase the discount rate?-61-6/29-30/88MR. MORRIS. Yes. I think it's a very useful instrument forthat kind of a situation because it's an instrument that's veryvisible to people abroad. And I think we could act without reallyfundamentally changing our monetary policy and still get some bang tothe buck. Whereas if we go on aligning the discount rate to the fundsrate and we do run into such a period, we don't have anything to usein that kind of a situation except intervention. I think we couldsupport intervention with a rise in the discount rate; that would bevery useful in that context if it happens.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other comments or is everyonegetting hungry?MR. HELLER. Yes, I have one more comment. I think it wasMr. Forrestal who suggested a slight re-ordering in the operationalparagraph. Wouldn't it be appropriate on the bottom of page 19 in thelast sentence, "taking account of" to move that "conditions infinancial markets" [further down in the list] to be together with thereference to the foreign exchange markets? So that would read on thenext page "developments in foreign exchange and domestic financialmarkets". That's not our top concern clearly and I'm open to whetheryou want inflation first or the business expansion first. I'd behappy to go along with Mr. Forrestal to put inflation first, businessexpansion second, and then the financial and markets together.MR. KELLEY. I'd like to associate myself with that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other comments relative to thatcomment?MR. MELZER. I think it's a good idea.SPEAKER(?). Yes, inflation ought to be first.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let's vote. Let's put that in andlet's stipulate for a vote that $50 million increase in borrowing andgoing asymmetric. I guess the word slightly is relevant. Would youread that as revised?MR. BERNARD. It would read, "In the implementation of policyfor the immediate future, the Committee seeks to increase slightly theexisting degree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking account of"--inflation first?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do we do inflation first?SPEAKER(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's do inflation.MR. BERNARD. "Taking account of indications of inflationarypressures, the strength of the business expansion, developments inforeign exchange and domestic financial markets, and the behavior ofthe monetary aggregates, somewhat greater reserve restraint would orslightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable in theintermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expectedto be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from Junethrough September at annual rates of about"--someone suggested 5 but-62-6/29-30/88"B" is 5-1/2--"about 5-1/2 percent and 7 percent, respectively. TheChairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to theManager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during theperiod before the next meeting are likely to be associated with afederal funds rate persistently outside a range of 5 to 9 percent."MR. KELLEY. I have a comment before we vote, if I may, forclarification.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Pardon?MR. KELLEY. Before we vote--. As Norm just read it, thethird line there would read that we were increasing pressure, whichwould be associated with alternative "C". The $50 million estimatefalls far short, in my view, of alternative "C". And I would not usethat word.MR. GUFFEY. It should be maintaining.MR. KELLEY. I would use maintain as being better associatedwith a $50 million increase.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What's everyone's view?MR. HELLER. Good point. I agree with that.MR. ANGELL. I don't agree with that.SPEAKER(?). We have in previous meetings.MR. JOHNSON. We're only trying to clarify--MR. ANGELL. We've always done it. We've always done itslightly on this, on that, on a $50 million change.MR. KELLEY. I would start having problems with using thelanguage connected with alternative "C" and also using asymmetriclanguage.MR. JOHNSON. I was going to say something along the samelines. We are changing the borrowing number, that is true. And thatnormally has been associated, as Governor Angell says, with slightly.MR. ANGELL. Slightly.MR. JOHNSON. However, some people have a different viewabout how you measure reserve pressures. And if we're saying it's notgoing to change the funds rate--we're only changing borrowing pressureand the funds rate basically stays stable around 7-1/2 percent--totalreserve pressures are not really changed in the market. All we havedone is change the borrowing target; total reserves would be the same.MR. BOEHNE. I wonder if a better way to do it would be tothink of a borrowing target of $550 to $600 million and whether it's$600 million or $550 million depends on where the funds rate is. Andthen use the language to maintain about the existing degree ofpressure.-63-6/29-30/88MR. ANGELL. Well, now, I could go with that.MR. HELLER. That's also good.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, we can do that or we can basicallyconsolidate the previous $50 million into this language in some way.In other words--MR. HELLER. But that's really taken [into account]; evenmaintain means consolidating.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. KOHN. May I ask for a little clarification? I readPresident Boehne's language as really going to a funds rate target--MR. GUFFEY. Yes, it sounds that way.MR. BOEHNE. That's where you are anyway; let's don't--MR. KOHN. Well,--MR. BOEHNE. You want the funds rate at 7-1/2 percent--that'swhat people are saying.MR. PARRY. I don't interpret it that way.MR. GUFFEY. The borrowing level itself is not published.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's correct, it is not.MR. GUFFEY. It has to be interpreted by market participants.I thought that your proposal incorporated the underlying assumptionthat going to $600 million gives you a 7-1/2 percent funds rate,roughly. That seems acceptable to me and that translates in my mindto maintain the current--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we say "about maintaining"then. The about seems to capture most everybody's view of it.MR. ANGELL. Say "about"? About what? How's that read?MR. PARRY. I've got to ask a question then. If we do thatand we go to $600 million, is there a side constraint on that?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sorry, is there a what?MR. PARRY. Is there a side constraint on that? In otherwords, if the fed funds rate does turn out to be 7-5/8 percent, isthat a problem?MS. SEGER. Or 8-1/4.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, we have decided on going to aborrowing target.MR. PARRY. We're on a borrowing target?-64-6/29-30/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We're on a borrowing target, yes.MR. ANGELL. But you're not going to like my explanation ofmy vote if you do it that way, because I'm going to say that themaintain wasn't what we did. Otherwise, I can't explain my vote.MR. HOSKINS. He would have no way to communicate that, whenhe dissents on this. How's anyone going to know why he dissentedunless he spells it out?MR. ANGELL. Unless I tell something you don't want me totell.MR. HOSKINS. Yes. Well, you'd have to spell it out.MR. KOHN. I think it is the case, Mr. Chairman--let's see ifPeter agrees with me--that whatever we think funds are today oryesterday or the day before, that our view would be that if you stated$550 million, funds would be just a tick lower, practicallyimperceptibly, but perhaps a little more perceptibly than if you wereat $600 million. I think it is a slight firming relative to whatwould persist if we kept the $550 million and it's--MR. ANGELL. Well, let's go to $565 million then.MR. PARRY. Are there things to say that there has been some--?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Look, I think we're getting--MR. KOHN. It's splitting [hairs].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We are getting a little silly,gentlemen.MR. BLACK. If you abstract from this, special pressures arefactors that would push the federal funds rate up. We have, by going$50 million higher, done a slight tightening. How's that? And Ithink it ought to reflect that.MR. PARRY. Now you're talking about doing a little more.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it's got to have--MR. MELZER. What did this two-week period that just endedcome in at?MR. KOHN. 7.58 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. 7.58 percent?MR. KOHN. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the average?MR. MELZER. No--I mean in terms of borrowing?MR. KOHN(?). $520 million.-65-6/29-30/88MR. BLACK. $520 million.MR. JOHNSON. This argument really wouldn't develop if we hadasymmetric language and decided to discretely move, but later. We arearguing about angels on the head of a pin here.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We really are.MR. HOSKINS. Angels? Or devils?MR. HELLER. What if you make it a very slight increase?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a word less than slight?MR. BOEHNE. Very slight.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, that's fine-tuning to the pointwe're really--. Slight means very slight; slight means slight.MR. ANGELL. Slight is the proper word to go to $600 million.MR. BOEHNE. Slight's great.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It is; really, it is. Let me put itthis way: there may be some of you who have troubles. You shouldn'treally, because it really is slight. I must say to you, I sympathizewith the problem you're raising, but I really don't know how you getit less than slight.SPEAKER(?). Maintain.MR. MORRIS. And then it does--MR. BLACK. Some of us have been suspected of slighter than--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The directive has been read. May Irequest that we vote?MR. HOSKINS. Is it at $600 million with slight?MR. FORRESTAL. Increase slightly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. Does anyone wish it to be re-readfor clarification?MS. SEGER. Are you ending up with "increase" or are youending up with "maintain"?MR. FORRESTAL. Increase slightly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Right. Go ahead with the vote.-66-6/29-30/88MR. BERNARD.Chairman GreenspanVice Chairman CorriganGovernor AngellPresident BlackPresident ForrestalGovernor HellerPresident HoskinsGovernor JohnsonGovernor KelleyPresident ParryGovernor SegerYesYesNoYesYesYesYes, reluctantlyYesNoYesNoCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The only thing remaining on our scheduleis the confirmation for the date of the next meeting, Tuesday, August16th.END OF MEETING-67-