Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 17, 1988A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 17, 1988, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBlackForrestalHellerHoskinsJohnsonKelleyParrySegerMessrs. Guffey, Keehn, Melzer, and Morris, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, andMinneapolis, respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Kohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryBradfield, General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, R.Davis, Lindsey,Siegman, Simpson, and Slifman, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account5/17/88Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Wajid, Assistant to Governor Heller, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Whitesell, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs,Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum,and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of St. Louis, Kansas City, Philadelphia,Minneapolis, Dallas, and Chicago, respectivelyMr. Fieleke and Ms. Lovett, Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of Boston and New York, respectivelyMs. Rosenbaum, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank ofAtlantaTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meetingof May 17, 1988[Secretary's note: No transcript exists for the first part ofthis meeting, which included staff reports and a discussion of theeconomic outlook. The texts of the staff reports are contained in theAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have a little problem with theBrazilian negotiations, which has diverted Jerry Corrigan for a shortwhile. He'll be back, but he asks for us to get started in any event.I was listening rather closely to the discussion we have had, and itstrikes me that there is fairly general uniformity of views as to whatis happening to the economy. And I think that Governor Heller's viewthat what we are looking at is the elimination of the negatives asdistinct from accumulation of the positives is exactly right. The onething we have to be a little careful about is that we recognize thatat some point, whenever you get a situation which is as uniformlypositive as this, it turns. It's only a question of when it turns.The thing that's bothering me slightly about the outlook as I look atit--not in the negative sense but in the confirmation sense--is that,at this particular stage in the cycle, if we are running into the typeof acceleration and inflationary process which is at the forefront ofour concerns, I think we should now begin to get some significantinventory accumulation. We have all the forces in place for it:namely, intermediate prices beginning to move and general awareness ofaggregate demand. Yet we are not seeing either; nor is there anacceleration of the types of commodity prices which tend to bereflective of imbalance in supply and demand. I'm not arguing for thecommodity price explanation on the inflation side--where GovernorAngell is coming from--but we have not had yet the secondary follow-through on metals prices and other prices, which have sincestabilized, not as an indicator of inflation but, I think, as anindicator of the fact that this thing is not yet accumulating. Myguess is it probably will, but I don't think the evidence is here asyet that it has. And the data we have on lead times, while higher,don't yet suggest the type of tightness that we see in a lot ofindividual industries. This is a process that I fear is going tocreate a fairly substantial acceleration at some time, but it isn't atthe moment--or at least it hasn't. I'd be very curious--for those ofyou who have very specific insights on this, I would appreciate youraddressing this issue very specifically, if you would, during themonetary discussion. I don't think there is any question that thenext move that we have to make is on the upside. And the onlyquestion, basically, is whether we do it now or we do it before thenext FOMC meeting on the basis of certain contingencies. The thing Ifeel a little uncomfortable with is the answer to this question: If weweren't meeting today, on this particular date, would we be moving orwould we be waiting a couple of weeks or so? The reason I raise thequestion is that there is a market expectation which extrapolatesitself from what we do. In other words, if we start to move sharply,then the expectation jumps very quickly. I'm a little concerned thatif we move too fast, we can get significantly ahead of the curve, ashas been said. And there is a stock market out there that I thinkcould get pretty shabby. We could get confidence reversed.So, where I come out at the moment is basically for either:alternative B with asymmetrical language toward tightening, with a5/17/88fairly explicit expectation that at the appropriate point we wouldmove up; or going up $100 million now on borrowing, also with thatasymmetrical language, because I think the question really gets to anissue of whether we go up $100 million or $200 million before the nextFOMC meeting. My own preference would be for "B" with asymmetricallanguage implying almost certainly moving sometime during theintermeeting period. But I don't think there are any particulardangers if we were to raise borrowing $100 million now. Frankly, Ithink going $200 million now, on top of what we have done already, isgetting to the edge of being a little risky on the rapidity of themovement implicit in that and the extent to which there can be marketextrapolations which occur as a consequence. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I'm sort of following up where I left off onthe tail end of the last discussion. I'd like to throw my hat in thering and concur with what the Chairman just said. When I came intothis meeting, I guess my feeling was even a little more moderate thanthat; although I generally tend to be--. When I walked into the lastmeeting I was for no change and the discussion convinced me that weneeded to move. This time, I came into the meeting basically feelingthat we just had voted for a $100 million increase in the borrowingaverage at the last FOMC meeting and we have made another $100 millionincrease in the borrowing average, which has just occurred. And themarkets have really just absorbed this move, I think. It would beunusual, and probably a little risky, to immediately hit the marketagain here at this meeting with another $100 million or more, orsomething like alternative C, just as the market has absorbed--and Ithink favorably absorbed--our last move. So, I guess where I wasprepared to come out was something like no change, with asymmetriclanguage that provides the flexibility to move toward a tighter policyof maybe another $100 million increase in the borrowing average duringthis next intermeeting period, which I think would probably be likely.The important issue would be the timing. I still tend to favor thatapproach, although I guess I could actually support a $100 millionmove now. But I still think that it would be important to have thediscretion about the timing on filtering that into the market ratherthan moving immediately at this meeting since we've just now absorbeda $100 million move on borrowing. I would be strongly against goingfor alternative C for a couple of reasons. One, I think this would bea shock to the markets; they are not prepared to absorb that, and Ithink they would even wonder what they're missing that we know. Ithink we have better information, but I don't see the kind of evidencethat supports that kind of move. Secondly, I think it would raiseimmediately in the markets an anticipation of an imminent discountrate move. Going up $200 million on the borrowing from this point--taking borrowings up to a $600 million average, which would take thefunds rate up probably into the range of 7-1/2 percent plus, maybe7-3/4 percent--would immediately raise expectations of a move on thediscount rate. That's something I would like to avoid. I'm notagainst ultimately moving on the discount rate if we have to, but Ithink the discount rate ought to be used mainly as an extra piece ofammunition, as an important symbol for an even more serious situation,if it arises. I would prefer that it not be simply a technicaladjustment to what has already taken place in the markets. Then welose the effectiveness of what we might want to do with a discountrate move later. So, I would prefer not to create those expectationsof an imminent move in the market. We have leeway to do that still,but I think that we have to be very cautious.5/17/88So my preference, once again, would be no change, withasymmetric language and the understanding that there probably would bean imminent move timed sometime within this next intermeeting period.But I'd leave it up to the Chairman and the Desk to determine that. A$100 million move now would be reasonable, but I would still preferthat the Desk remain very sensitive to how that was filtered into themarkets, given the fact that they've just now absorbed a $100 millionincrease in borrowings in the last few days. I don't know exactlywhere that puts me in terms of "A", "B", and "C"; maybe I should saythat it's probably somewhere around "B". Although I guess mypreference is "B" with asymmetric language, I could live with a "B"that would involve a $100 million borrowing move, with somesensitivity on the Desk's part.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think in about 95 percentof the meetings I've attended in the last 20 years it would have beenperfectly appropriate to make a proposal for no change in the existingpolicy, in the light of uncertainties that existed at the time. And Ithink that's one reason why we've always tended to lag. I'mparticularly concerned, given our present structure of meetings. Wewent to this eight-meeting system back at the time when we weresupposedly controlling M1 and, therefore, there was less need forfrequent consultation. I think that ought to be reconsidered if weare really on an interest rate control system, even though there was alot of sentiment against it expressed at the last meeting. To haveour next meeting at the end of June involves a long intermeetinginterval in this kind of situation. That doesn't mean that I disagreewith your recommendation that we sort of hedge our position here--gohalf way, with the idea that we'll look at the incoming data in thenext couple of weeks, and perhaps decide to go whole hog. I wouldsuggest that the proper time would be to have a meeting after the neworders figures are out. If my thesis is right--that we have a head ofsteam building in the manufacturing sector--then that ought to bereflected in pretty strong orders figures. And if they're not strong,that would be a signal for--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We should pick that up in the purchasingmanagers' survey; it's probably more sensitive than most publishedfigures.MR. MORRIS. That's right; if you wanted to wait two weeksyou'd pick that up.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You get the lead times, and you get aqualitative sense of the issue you are raising.MR. MORRIS. In terms of approaching it this way and hedgingour position--moving half way and reconsidering in a couple of weeks--that makes good sense to me. But, if we weren't going to reconsider,I would prefer to go whole hog right now.MR. ANGELL. Does whole hog mean "C" or--MR. MORRIS. Whole hog means "C", yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.5/17/88MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, you asked us to commentspecifically about inventories. I think that there probably is someindication of accumulated inventories that are imported goods, andthat's in response to higher prices. With regard to other goods, myrecollection of that period in the late '70s when that occurred isthat that is a bit of a lagging factor. What usually happens is thatwe get some pickup in the price indexes and that begins to fuelexpectations; and we don't get the really rapid accumulation ofinventories until somewhat later. And if that, in fact, is correct, Ithink maybe waiting for that as an indicator might be a littledangerous.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But this is the later; we are there now.We have already had this. Of course, we're in May and about to getinto June. We just haven't seen what has been happening in the data.Historically, it would be happening just about now.MR. PARRY. Is that right?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. PARRY. Well, I thought there was more of a delay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't think so.MR. PARRY. In any case, as I see the developments,particularly the ones we've mentioned--unemployment, capacityutilization, M2, the positioning in the aggregates--it seems to methat there is a very strong case to support Bluebook alternative C.In fact, I can't imagine a more convincing case being put before usthan the one that was put before us by the staff. There was generalagreement with the staff's forecast; some questioning about it. Butit seems to me that it is explicit in the staff's forecast that if wedelay in taking action, we're going to pay a price later--conceivably,based upon what we know, in terms of having to move even moreaggressively. I know it has been mentioned that we've moved twicerecently. Those two moves of 1/4 of a percentage point just don't domuch. And I remember earlier times when, to get any significantimpacts on the economy, one would have had to move a lot more than a1/4 of a point. So, my clear recommendation would be Bluebookalternative C. I could see as something of a compromise that we moveborrowings up maybe a $100 million now. But I would hope that wewould have specific plans to talk or reconvene in a couple of weeks tosee what the intervening two weeks or so bring in terms of data,because I think that, unless they show weakness, we should then moveagain.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. With regard to policy, I think the timingquestion is a very difficult one, as you suggested. The markets--certainly the stock market and maybe the bond market as well--probablyare vulnerable if we move too far too fast. On the other hand,they're vulnerable if we delay too long. I don't know what theprecise, perfect timing for this kind of action is. What I thinkabout is our longer-term goal and the point I tried to make earlier:that whatever is likely to happen on the wage and price side, itdoesn't seem to me that there's going to be any deceleration next year5/17/88 -5-unless we act. I think it is time for some further action, and Iwould be in favor of your second alternative, which is to go $100million now, with an asymmetric directive, and expect that thatprobably will not be a big shock to the markets. In fact, dependingon circumstances, it could be welcomed. And then what happens afterthat depends on the data that come in.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, everything we've talkedabout this morning--the forecast, the employment and unemploymentnumbers, and the potential wage and price pressures--clearly andpretty uniformly indicates, I think, that the risk is on the upsideand that we are worried about inflation. But, I don't interpret thelast two actions we took recently as being unsubstantial. So, mypreference would be to wait before we take any further action and letthose two actions work their way through the economy. After all, thelatest action was just a little while ago. Now, if we hadn't takenthose actions, I'd be of a different mind. But, at the moment, mystrong preference is to wait--perhaps not very long--maybe three orfour weeks, or something like that. So, I would like to stay where weare with $400 million in borrowing, but with an asymmetricaldirective. I would be prepared to support an alternative which wouldmove it up $100 million, to $500 million, with a symmetricaldirective. But I would have a real problem with moving all the way toalternative C at this point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I'd like to start by sort of recapping what Isee in worldwide inflation rates. I think we are looking at asituation where, for one reason or another, the inflation rates of twoof the major economies out there are moving up toward ours, instead ofours moving down toward theirs. And that seems to me to be a realloss in ground. There are reasons for that; they have exceeded theirmonetary growth rate targets, partly in defense of the dollar. Thosemonetary growth rates seem to be giving the kind of impetus tospending in those economies that we would expect. And I don't seethat going away any time very soon. So, worldwide, we have apotential trend that is discouraging. In terms of our own inflationrate--just to reiterate what I said earlier--we have been stalled at arate that I think is too high for most of us, at least as stated interms of our objective, which is price stability. Even if the staffforecast is in error, in the sense that it's too strong on theeconomy, it seems to me we're still faced with the prospect ofinflation staying at current levels or rising. And if our objectiveis price stability, then we ought to begin to pursue that objectiveaggressively.With respect to movements, and the size of movements inpolicy actions, I think there are several issues that surround thisdiscussion. One is the credibility of policy. Policy credibilitymeans that markets believe you're going to do what you say you'll do.I find it difficult to believe that markets believe our rhetoric aboutprice stability when the long bond rate is over 9 percent. I don'tknow what happened to it this morning, but I suspect that if I wereadvising people in the market, as I did a year or so ago, I'd say thatthe economy looks stronger than I thought, and that we would see a5/17/88rise in inflation and, therefore, a rise in interest rates. And Iwould expect the bond market to be selling off. Back on thecredibility issue: if we move now, and convincingly, it seems to methat we will have a peak in interest rates that is lower than if wewait and go forward in incremental steps. A second point aboutcredibility is the issue of confusion in the public and, perhaps, inour own minds. If we react with small moves to noisy data that comeout monthly, then I think the public doesn't understand fully whatwe're trying to do. More importantly, I think it convinces us that wehave more ability to control economic activity than we really do. Ithink monetary policy is a long-run policy, not a short-run policy.So, I think the markets are not as unsure about us. We have gainedsome credibility; and I think we ought to retain that credibility.And last, I guess I ought to say, given the strength of my statement,that I prefer alternative D. I think I'll end there.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'll record you as "C" because I don'thave [unintelligible] on the other end! President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think we have to balance the notion of wherewe have to go, which I think is some tightening, without beingdisruptive to the markets. The best balancing, from my point of view,would be to raise borrowing $100 million now. When I say now, I don'tmean tomorrow; I would think that we would have to give the Desk somediscretion to work it in over the next week or 10 days. I would havean asymmetrical directive that would stack the deck some in thedirection of tightening, but still wait to see incoming information.I guess that puts me at kind of "B", "C+", with an asymmetricdirective.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. I'd like to get back to the middle of the targetrange for the monetary aggregates--not do it instantly, but gradually.I fully agree with the Chairman's views: alternative B with asymmetriclanguage and $100 million on borrowing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you mean $100 million at some pointbetween--MR. HELLER. At some point--you feed it in slowly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I too would join those who have aconcern about upward interest rate movement. However, it seems to methat the risk is on the upside, and there's enough room to takeanother cut at some restraint without disrupting the markets. As aresult, I would like to associate with those who would opt for a B-Calternative, which is the $500 million on borrowing; but I'd alsoinclude in that asymmetrical language toward further restraint. WhenI focus on moving from the $400 million to $500 million, I would justnote that seasonal credit has taken its normal track and has increasedrather dramatically since our last meeting from something less than$100 million to--I don't know what it was at the close of this period,but at times it was over $200 million. If you have a $400 millionobjective for borrowing, and over $200 million of that is seasonal,you really are depending upon how you view the seasonal--whether it's5/17/88sensitive to interest rate levels or not. I really believe thatmoving to $500 million rather promptly is not a major move, given themakeup of the borrowing level of $500 million. As a result, going to$500 million then, with asymmetrical language, would permit us to moveon toward the C alternative depending upon what incoming informationwe may have in two weeks. That would be my prescription.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I think the question that was asked for thosewho want to wait is: What are you waiting to see? I think it is agood question. I'm very sympathetic with the notion that we can givemisleading signals in regard to what it is that it appears we arefocusing on when we make the move. It does seem to me that if thestaff forecast is accurate, at some point in time the discount ratechange would be a part of such a move. And I point out that if thatwere to take place, of course, it could take place at any point intime between Open Market Committee meetings. If there are factorsthat would make us think that we would need that much of a change, itseems to me we ought not rule that out. So, I don't see that today isnecessarily the time to move. But I would have a strong preference asto what kind of signals we use. I happen to like something inalternative C very, very well. And what I like in alternative C arethe M2 growth paths. Frankly, I would like for us to look at thosevery carefully, and, if I thought we could wait, do nothing now inregard to a borrowing target move. That would be acceptable to mebecause I don't think we know at this stage what has happened on themoney growth that would be anticipated from the moves we have made.Certainly, April was a month we knew wasn't going to give us veryclear readings on the monetary aggregates; May looks like it might beconsistent with "C"; and if June doesn't follow that path, frankly,I'd like to have that be the factor that would cause us to make amove. I say that in keeping with my view that we will be able toachieve our movement to price level stability if we do not allow theexchange value of the dollar to fall further. I believe that analternative C growth path of the monetary aggregates would beconsistent with a stable dollar in the short-term horizon, and I'dlike to have that kind of restraint. But I certainly feel comfortablein having the Chairman--he has shown already that he is responsive tothese forces and that we could make this move as we see some morealternatives. So, it's okay with me to have a strong tilt in thedirective and to have no change today in the borrowing target,provided there is some assurance that we will be ready to act if thosemonetary growth rates do not return to what I thought was the verygood path that we had in 1987. Hindsight says that wasn't too bad.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I feel a little ambivalent,certainly not regarding the direction, but regarding the question oftiming. We have talked about that a lot. Ed Boehne phrased it muchthe way I would. I would not move on the borrowing today, because Ithink it would be pretty quick after the last move and might perhapssignal a little more to the markets than we would intend. And we wantto do this in an orderly way. So, I would bring the level up by $100million as soon as we think the markets can accommodate that; I don'tknow whether that's a week or two weeks, something like that.Certainly, I'd be in favor of asymmetric language with an upward bias5/17/88in the policy directive. And I think it's not only possible, but verylikely, that we will move on the second $100 million before the nextmeeting of the Committee. Whether we do that at a conference call orleave that entirely to you, I'm indifferent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I'm in favor of "B", including the idea of adding$100 million to the borrowing target eventually, for many of thereasons that the Chairman mentioned. The main reason is, again, thatwe have had these two tightening moves in very recent weeks and I'mnot sure that the markets have fully digested those moves. I'd bevery surprised if the real economy has taken them into account or ifthe monetary aggregates have begun to reflect them. Also, as Imentioned before, I think we ought to pay some attention to the stockmarket. I think there is a lot of nervousness still there, at leastamong a lot of institutions. In many cases, institutions and smallinvestors have taken a walk. I haven't heard anyone mention thethrift industry, but I think that that's a disaster area, andsomething we have to pay attention to. Bob Boykin, I'm sure, canspeak to that, as can a number of us; and too much tightening toosoon, I think, would make it a greater disaster. I can't imagine thatthe LDC debt situation would improve dramatically if we tighten toomuch. Also, as I read that table on the growth of the monetaryaggregates, it seems to me that those aggregates are expected to slowwhether we go with "B" or "C". And I still think that some inventorycorrection is in the cards. I don't know when it will be--I'm notthat smart; but I think there is some excess there that is going to beworked off. In fact, when interest rates get higher, it just givesbusiness people stronger incentive to run with less inventory. Icould live with the asymmetric language as well. I think thatsummarizes it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the staff has made anexcellent case in its forecast for an early move. It's true we havemade a couple of moves recently, and I think they have been timely andvery appropriate. But I remember so many times sitting around thistable when this was the apparent stage of a business cycle wheretraditionally we have made our largest mistakes. So I think we oughtto move now. I think you've given us wise counsel in suggesting wehold that $100 million increase in the borrowed reserve figure; and Iwould buy that, with an asymmetric directive. I'd like to get rid ofthat language about the unusual flexibility. I think that's undulyfuzzy and just confuses people. And I'd like to keep open that optionthat we would go the other $100 million if, after two or three weeks,it looks as if we need to. In short, "B".CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, when Bob Forrestal spoke a fewminutes ago I wish that I had been the next one on the list and Icould have simply said "me too." I think that it's a time to wait,given the evidence to date and the two recent moves, which I agreewere not insignificant. I would be in favor of "B" and keeping thesame borrowing for now, with asymmetrical language. But, as Bob5/17/88suggested, I'd be comfortable with going an additional $100 millionnow with symmetrical language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I agree with the position that has been statedby you, Mr. Chairman, and others. I'm a "B-", "C+", however youcharacterize it, with the $100 million increase in borrowing. I guessI would be inclined to move sooner rather than later on the $100million. If I had the real courage of my convictions, as Lee Hoskinsdoes, I would really like to line up with him. I guess I just don'thave that much courage, given the situation I have down there in theSouthwest. But, I think he makes a very, very good point that policy,and what it is that we can do, has to be viewed in the longer run.And I think when we temporize and rationalize some of the short-runproblems we think would result from taking actions, that's not reallycommunicated and tends to compound the problems over the longer range.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, my instincts probably are thesame, but I think that for financial market reasons, if nothing else,I'd be willing to sneak up on it. To me, that would mean do the $100million now with asymmetric language, although I could live with anarrangement in which you and Peter have some flexibility in terms ofedging that $100 million in. But, certainly, I feel very stronglythat we should get that first $100 million in promptly. I think thatthe two changes in policy that have been made in the last severalweeks or so clearly have been viewed favorably by the markets as anindication that we are indeed prepared to respond to these conditions.But I agree with Bob Parry that, insofar as the economy is concerned,I doubt that they've done much of anything. I think that Don Kohnmade that point in a way, earlier on, when he pointed out that nominaland real interest rates--even after those moves--are precious littledifferent from what they were a year ago. And in the interveningyear, the economy has grown at a rate that simply won't workprospectively. I also have a nagging fear here--I don't know what thestaff's views on this are--that because of these highly mobile moneyand capital markets on a worldwide basis, that it may take a higherlevel of interest rates to achieve a given degree of restraint in thereal world. And if that were the case, our problems that lie ahead,especially in the context of Governor Seger's comments about thriftsand a lot of other things, would be all the more difficult and all themore damaging. It is precisely for that reason that I feel sostrongly that moving now is the right thing to do. I agree withcomments made by Governor Johnson, I think before the coffee break,and by Lee Hoskins a few minutes ago: that we've got to avoid finetuning here; the broad thrust of developments over the next six orseven quarters is what we have to keep in mind. And that, too, saysto me that we ought to move now. I also agree with Governor Johnsonon the discount rate question. In the situation that we have rightnow--where we're on the upside of the cycle and where we don't have toworry about frictional levels of borrowings--I don't see that there isthe same kind of prejudice for a discount rate [increase] that therewas on the downside, where we run into that frictional borrowingsproblem. So, I don't see that there is any presumption whatsoever, atleast in my judgment, that if we moved--perhaps even as far as a full-blown "C"--that that would create a strong bias toward having to move5/17/88the discount rate. Indeed, at the phase of things that we're in, likeGovernor Johnson, I personally--not that I have a final say on thediscount rate--would try to keep our powder dry on the discount rateand work through the market as much as possible. I think that doestwo things: One, it minimizes the dangers of market disruptions; andsecondly, it leaves us in a stronger position if something reallyadverse develops in the next month or two, or whatever. To summarize,Mr. Chairman, I would do the $100 million now, with an asymmetricdirective. That's it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I've followed the moves that have been taken,but my sense is that, in effect, they are rather small followingmoves. I think at some point we're going to have to step out in frontof this situation if everything we've heard today is correct. Andthat's going to take something more on the order of alternative C.The timing issue has been talked about. I would guess--and again, Mr.Chairman, I think you did the right thing by moving within yourlatitude--that if you had the benefit of all this discussion you mighthave moved it a full 50 basis points, and we wouldn't get into twoincrements of 25 basis points. Because of this view that I think wehave to get in front and make a strong statement, I would favor "C";but I could certainly accept a "B" with asymmetrical language--$100million now and $100 million later.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I tabulate the results, everyone herebelieves, as best I can judge, that the next moves are higher. Theonly thing that basically differs here is whether we move now or movein a short period. What I would like to suggest is that, if I'vewritten down correctly what I heard from everybody, there seems to bea consensus for alternative B and asymmetrical language, with a fairlystrong willingness--desire, if I can put it that way--to giveinstructions to the Chairman and the Desk to move before the nextperiod. I would interpret that to mean that, unless we see eventswhich clearly are contrary to the general consensus of the outlook asone hears it today, it's almost an automatic increase. There is astrong, and I think convincing, case that is being made that we shouldnot, under any conditions, allow ourselves to get behind the powercurve on this question. And I would say further--in line with theissue Frank raised about the frequency of meetings--that shouldanything of moment arise that suggests the need to have a telephonemeeting, I think we should. That would substitute for having to cometo grips with this rescheduling question. I don't think there's anydoubt that we are in a very sensitive policy period; and I think thatclose discussion and judgments are probably going to be needed atintervals shorter than our scheduled FOMC meetings. So, what I'd liketo suggest, and I hope that Norm would find the appropriate language--I'm sorry, there's one thing I did forget. Unfortunately, I only gotfrom President Black his judgment about that sentence; we did not getany other appraisals on leaving that sentence in or dropping it out.I think we'll go around on that question before we take our vote.Normand, why don't you just--MR. BERNARD.Vice Chairman Corrigan Out-10-5/17/88MR. JOHNSON. Before we do, [please read the sentence].MR. BERNARD. The Committee agrees that the current morenormal approach to open market operations remains appropriate; stillsensitive conditions in financial markets and uncertainties in theeconomic outlook may continue to call for some flexibility inoperations.MR. HOSKINS. What about the 5 to 9 percent or 4 to 8percent? Do you want to do that at the same time or not?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, no. In a certain sense--MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that 5 to 9 percent would be moreappropriate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. 5 to 9 percent is clearly--MR. HOSKINS. I just wanted to bring it up and make sure wedidn't--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but 5 to 9 percent is in both "B"and "C"; so it's automatic.MR. BERNARD.Governor Angell OutPresident Forrestal OutGovernor Heller OutPresident Hoskins OutGovernor Johnson InGovernor Kelley OutPresident Parry OutGovernor Seger InCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's clearly [the preference of] themajority for it to be out. Anyhow, what I'd like to do is have avote. Why don't you--MR. BERNARD. Do you want me to try to read this?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I can't; I've never been able to readhis writing so--MR. BERNARD. I'll give it a try. Unless maybe it would bebetter--MR. KOHN. Or do you want me to? Sometimes I can't read mywriting either. By the way, Mr. Chairman, I think it could behandled, if you wanted to, by just having the maintain and then thetilt in the sentence. But it would be understood, and made clear inthe policy record, that the Committee expected to move. But if youwanted to state something more clearly in the operational paragraph,my suggestion is as follows: Taking account of conditions in financialmarkets, the strength of the business expansion, indications ofinflationary pressures, developments in foreign exchange markets, aswell as the behavior of the monetary aggregates, the Committeeexpected that a slight increase in the degree of pressure on reservepositions would be appropriate in the weeks ahead. Depending on-11-5/17/88further developments in these factors, somewhat greater reserverestraint would or slightly lesser reserve restraint might--and thenyou'd have to be clear with the end of that tilt--be acceptable laterin the intermeeting period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry, I think you're putting the--MR. KOHN. So, the first sentence has maintain in it; andthen, taking out the sentence in brackets, the second sentence saystaking account of all those things the Committee expects that a slightincrease in the degree of pressure on reserve positions will beappropriate in the weeks ahead. So, I presume that that means ifthose things don't come in the way we expect, it wouldn't be[appropriate].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. In other words, it's a fairlystrong asymmetrical statement?MR. KOHN. Well, no; it's a statement actually stronger thanthat. It says we expect that a firmer--MR. HELLER. It's drifting up.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The timing.MR. STERNLIGHT. And the maintain would only be initially.MR. KOHN. Right; it says "in the implementation of policyfor the immediate future the Committee seeks to maintain the degree ofpressure on reserve positions."MR. BLACK. Initially; maintain initially.MR. KOHN. Initially, okay. And then, taking account of allthese things, the Committee expects that a slight increase in thedegree of pressure on reserve positions will be appropriate in theweeks ahead.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not will be, would be.MR. KOHN. Would be, okay. I had would originally.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Because there is, in effect, acontingency here.MR. JOHNSON. We could be surprised. The subjunctive isright; that's correct.MR. KOHN. And then I have depending on further developmentsin these factors--[that's not] the right word, I'll think of anotherword--somewhat greater reserve restraint would or slightly lesserreserve restraint might also be acceptable later in the intermeetingperiod.also?MR. ANGELL. So you have a preponderance of a move and a tilt-12-5/17/88MR. KOHN. A strong supposition of a move unless things weresurprising, and then the possibility of [a further move], but there'sa tilt in the possibility.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody object strongly to thatlanguage?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I have trouble with it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How would you rephrase it?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would have the first sentence saythe Committee seeks to increase slightly the degree of pressure onreserves.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But that's not what the majority is.MR. ANGELL. Majority.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I understand that, but you asked mewhat I would prefer. That's what I prefer.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh, okay. I'm asking the question ofwhether I've captured the sense of the majority.MR. HELLER. Yes, that's good.MR. JOHNSON. It did mine.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that that's a very appropriateresponse. And as I understand it then, that almost means that wewould expect maybe a telephone conference call if we don't do it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I would not say expect; I would sayif we don't, that would require one.MR. ANGELL. There would be a telephone conference.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It requires a telephone conference.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, could I ask for some estimate ofthe length of time before we move?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Two weeks.MR. BLACK. At the most?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, I guess it all depends on how onelistens to things, but I had the sense that there was a majority ofpeople who wanted some tightening, say, in the next couple of weeks.And it would seem to me one way to do that would be to say in theimplementation of policy etc., the Committee seeks to increaseslightly the degree of pressure on reserve positions in the immediateweeks ahead.-13-5/17/88MR. ANGELL. But, Ed, the count was four people who favoredan immediate tightening.MR. BOEHNE. But it's not immediate; it's spread over thenext couple of weeks.MR. ANGELL. No, no. I'm just talking about a count of thevoting members.MR. BOEHNE. Oh.MR. ANGELL. There were four members.MR. BOEHNE. But I think if you counted the people who wanteda tightening immediately, plus those who are willing to have someflexibility over the next week or two, you would have a majority.And, therefore, if you are a little vague about whether you do itright away or within the next--MR. HELLER. Are you talking about the Committee or the wholegroup?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. He's talking about all the participants.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I didn't keep that accurate a score.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think you're correct on the totalCommittee [participants].MR. BOEHNE. I see.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't think it comes out that way [forthe voting members].MR. BOEHNE. All right.MR. KELLEY. Six; and six are voters.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unless I'm mistaken.MR. HOSKINS. Can we poll for a $100 million over the nexttwo weeks and then--MR. ANGELL. Sure.MR. HOSKINS. Of the voting members?MR. JOHNSON. We can certainly clarify that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. We might as well because we arevery explicit on exactly what the difference is. We can do that. So,let me tell you what the language is and what the actual differenceis. The question basically is the issue of $100 million now or $100million in, say, two weeks, unless some event occurs. That's what thedifference basically is in this particular group. Would that be theview?MR. BLACK. That's right.-14-5/17/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In either event, there is asymmetriclanguage in the directive over and above this. Okay, why don't youpoll on that very specific question.MR. BERNARD. Okay. $100 million now versus $100 million intwo weeks.Chairman GreenspanVice Chairman CorriganGovernor AngellPresident BlackPresident ForrestalGovernor HellerPresident HoskinsTwo weeks.Now, but I could live with twoweeks.Two weeks.Now, but I can also live withtwo weeks.Two weeks.Two weeks.Now, but $100 million is notenough.MR. JOHNSON. $100 million is not enough?MR. HELLER. Two weeks ago.MR. BLACK. You haven't ruled out the $200 million, have you?MR. ANGELL. No, no.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, we haven't, because we don't haveenough votes for that to have--MR. BLACK. No, but I mean over time, after you've moved the$100 million, if these contingencies--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, we still have asymmetric language.MR. ANGELL. That's right, so it could be $100 million nowand $100 million [more] before the next meeting.MR. JOHNSON. It's possible to have $200 million within theintermeeting period.MR. BLACK. That's the point I was making.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes; that's correct.MR. BERNARD.Governor JohnsonGovernor KelleyPresident ParryGovernor SegerTwo weeks.Two weeks.Now.Two weeks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the same vote that I got before.So, unless I'm mistaken, that is captured by Don Kohn's language.MR. BOEHNE. Oh, it is captured; it just makes it a littlestronger. It puts it right up front that you intend to tighten withintwo weeks.-15-5/17/88MR. JOHNSON. But that's with [unintelligible] anycontingency. And we want to keep in some contingency; it's not verylikely, but there is a contingency.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know, there's a difference. I thinkwe're pretty clear on what the consensus is. That language is not inthe public domain, in any event, for six weeks; and I don't think thatthere are ambiguities on what the instructions to the Desk andChairman are in this respect. Why don't you read the directive as wenow have it.MR. BERNARD. Mr. Kohn just suggested one additional word atthe start: In the initial implementation of policy, the Committeeseeks to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reservepositions. Taking account of conditions in financial markets, thestrength of the business expansion, indications of inflationarypressures, developments in foreign exchange markets, as well as thebehavior of the monetary aggregates, the Committee expects that aslight increase in the degree of pressure on reserve positions wouldbe appropriate in the weeks ahead. Depending on further developmentsin these factors somewhat greater reserve restraint would beacceptable or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable inthe--MR. KOHN. Thereafter. Mike Prell just suggested--MR. BERNARD. Later weeks of the period?MR. KOHN. Yes, I said later in the intermeeting period.MR. BERNARD. Later in the intermeeting period. And then Iguess we need some numbers on the monetary aggregates. Thecontemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent withgrowth in M2 and M3 over the period from March through June at annualrates of--MR. ANGELL. Let's take the "C" numbers.MR. JOHNSON. There's not enough difference between any ofthem to matter much.MR. ANGELL. I know, but that's--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. 6 to 7 is right; that stays in.MR. ANGELL. March to June?MR. BERNARD. March through June at annual rates of about 6to 7 percent.MR. ANGELL. Why do we use March to June rather than May toJune?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You don't know what May is yet.MR. BERNARD. That's the usual way it has been done.-16-5/17/88MR. ANGELL. Well, I know; but it seems to me that what youalready have behind you, you can't alter. I thought maybe--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That period.MR. ANGELL. How about May to July?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know, really it shouldn't--MR. ANGELL. Really. Because otherwise you convey a mistakenimpression.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Don, is there any reason why?MR. ANGELL. Why not May to July?MR. KOHN. May to July?MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. KOHN. Well, generally we focus on a quarter at a time.We'll be meeting again at the end of June, so I'm not clear why you'dwant to specify--MR. ANGELL. I know. But what we do in June--MR. KOHN. The July growth rate won't--MR. ANGELL. But what we do in June can't affect June'sgrowth rate or even July's growth rate.MR. KELLEY. Just say the intermeeting period.MR. KOHN. But there's very little information that will comein between now and then that will tell us very much about July'smovement.MR. ANGELL. So I'd prefer to say 4 to 6 percent from May toJuly. That would give some indication here of what we're--MR. KOHN. Do you mean April to July?MR. PRELL. Do you mean April to July? Because we don'tknow--MR. ANGELL. Yes, April. Right; that would be a quarter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I suggest that we make that changeat the next FOMC meeting, because you're actually raising moredifficult questions. Let's stay with what we have; let's do 6 to 7percent March to June, but resurrect this issue because I thinkGovernor Angell is raising a quite legitimate question.MR. BERNARD. And the funds range?MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman? I have one question: Did we meanto have maintain initially? We talked about that and I thought wesort of---17-5/17/88MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I thought it was. The way that statementreads there's a lack of contingency in there, but I may have missedsomething.MR. KOHN. The contingency came after "the Committee"; therewas an "initially" in the first sentence, Bob, and then--MR. BLACK. It was; but it wasn't when Norm read it.MR. KOHN. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, he read "initially" the last time.MR. BLACK. He did?MR. JOHNSON. Yes.MR. BLACK. Well, I missed that one, too. I'm sorry, Norm.MR. BERNARD. Yes, it would start "in the initialimplementation of policy".MR. BLACK. Oh! You had it in a different place; that's whyI couldn't find it. I'm sorry--I was looking for it down near the"maintain".MR. KOHN. Governor Johnson, there is a contingency towardthe end; it relates to the remainder of the intermeeting period.MR. JOHNSON. Well, okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We can vote.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesGovernor Heller YesPresident Hoskins NoGovernor Johnson YesGovernor Kelley YesPresident Parry NoGovernor Seger YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody have any objections todiscussing the monetary base over sandwiches?[Short recess]MR. MELZER. [Unintelligible] because I think it tends tosupport [the view] that there is a desirability of having such aconstraint. Now, one argument you can make is one that was in thefollow-up memo I sent around, and I think we've just witnessed it inour discussion. And that is the difficulty of coming to grips with,in effect, targeting interest rates; it is difficult to deal with thatprocess without some tool that enables you to take a longer-term view,-18-5/17/88which I think the constraint does. Don, having complimented you onyour memo, let me just say--I'm not going to criticize--but I can'treally say any better than it was said in that memo why I think thistype of constraint would be desirable. This is on page 10:"Generally, periods of rapid growth in the base in recent years havebeen followed, with a lag, by a tightening of monetary policy. Insome cases (1983, 1986) these have been periods in which the FederalReserve had been easing. Greater attention to the base might havetempered the degree to which policy was previously eased, reducing theneed for subsequent tightening, and damping the cyclical variations ininterest rates, albeit at the expense of somewhat greater short-terminterest rate volatility." I think that in a nut shell makes the caseright there. Again, I'd say that just the short experience I've hadhere on the Committee would tend to support that.With respect to the question of targets versus a constraint,I personally would be much less inclined to adopt a base target. Now,I think you could say that the base might have an advantage in that itis more directly controllable than any of the other aggregates that wepresently target. Its relationship to our ultimate goals of policy isnot better. And I guess I fear, and it's implied in Don's memo, thatif we just decide here today, let's say, to set target ranges for thebase instead of M1, we're actually going to hurt ourselves in theprocess. If it is treated as the other aggregates have been--ineffect, that we set the target but then we're willing to violate it--Ithink that could do more harm than good, frankly, to the credibilityof this process. So, I'm not saying there aren't any circumstancesunder which I would ever favor a base target, but I don't think thisis the right time. I don't think the econometric analysis couldsupport that being the desirable thing to do.With respect to the constraint itself, there's a suggestionof a four-quarter moving average, which troubles me in this sense: Ithink it basically defeats the purpose of what the constraint does,which is to put some real limits on how fast or slowly the base cangrow in any one quarter. Technically, with the 5 to 9 percent thathas been used for demonstration purposes, if you will, with a four-quarter moving average you could have base growth rates of 20 percent,20 percent, -2 percent, -2 percent, and back to 20 percent. Ineffect, you could have the same kind of volatility and still meet theconstraint and, I think, suffer the adverse economic consequences thatthat kind of volatility in base growth occasions. Also, I think thisfour-quarter moving average would have some of the same potentialproblems as an annual target--namely, that if the base grew veryslowly for two or three quarters, or very rapidly for two or threequarters, and you were approaching the end of the four-quarter movingaverage period, you'd be faced with a decision of whether to adjustthe growth abruptly in the base to stay within this constraint, or toignore it. I think our experience has shown us that, typically,that's a hard decision to make. And I think that, too, couldundermine the credibility of this [procedure].I guess there are two points I'd like to make in connectionwith this. When I suggest this 5 to 9 percent range, or whatever, I'mnot saying that it should never be ignored. I think, in practice, itprobably would be observed most of the time. But there could besituations where we choose to ignore it and, as has been pointed out,those situations very likely would be associated with the behavior of-19-5/17/88currency. But that's something we can observe. Our analysis oncurrency has indicated that where there have been aberrations in thegrowth rate, they have tended to be reversed within a quarter or two.But if we had a situation like that, I think it would be related tobroad economic circumstances that we would generally understand andcould explain; and we could very easily justify violating theconstraint. But, in general, I don't think it would be violated. Thefinal point I would like to make is that I agree with the work thatDon and the others did in terms of the nonborrowed base--that from thecontrollability point of view it would have an advantage. I guesswhat I'm not so sure about is whether we lose something in aconceptual sense, because the base is something people are familiarwith. Do we lose something in the conceptual sense to go to a moreesoteric concept like a nonborrowed base? I could live with eitherone, but I prefer the base and not the nonborrowed base; I'd live withthe short-term controllability problem as, over time, I think it canbe controlled. I think that's all I would care to say right now, Mr.Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Kohn.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]MR. HOSKINS. Well, I think the proposal deserves seriousconsideration. I'm not wedded to the base itself. Given theobjections that some of the Board's staff have raised, I think thenonborrowed base would do the same thing that we're trying toaccomplish. I think what we're trying to accomplish with this kind ofa proposal is to tie our hands, to some extent; and in doing so, Ithink we would give some assurance to the markets that, in fact, wewill react in a certain way over time. Another thing we need toaddress is that we would also have to make it public--if it's to workappropriately--to get the markets to do our work for us, as the marketdid when we had a nonborrowed reserve targeting procedure. If we usedthe quarterly average approach, and it looked like the month or twocoming in were going to push the quarter above that constraint, themarket would perceive that and begin to push interest rates up itself.So, [this approach] would allow us to curb the base growth. I thinkwe'd have an override of the FOMC, if conditions warranted. We'd haveto take an explicit vote and that has an advantage too. If you wantedto make that tougher, you could require a two-thirds majority, orsomething of that nature, so that it would be a real constraint on us,a more difficult constraint.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If you can get a majority for the wholeprocedure.MR. HOSKINS. I would suggest, if we have some agreement onit, that we at least look at doing a monitoring of it, if not a range.I know Tom didn't want to put a cone out there, but the market willvery quickly draw parallel lines and also draw a cone. You haveparallel lines, which is basically what you're projecting as a range,and people will start in the middle of those parallel lines and beginto figure when the base is going to bump against either the ceiling orthe bottom end. So, I don't think it is going to be a real issue,whether we put a range in there or not. I think the markets are goingto interpret it correctly as a governor, if we announce it as such and-20-5/17/88if we react that way. So, I think there is some reason for us toconsider this, and maybe even set up the monitoring approach as earlyas the next Humphrey-Hawkins [meeting].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. Well, I have a contrary opinion. I think whatwe have learned in our adventures with M1 is that, if a monetaryaggregate is not predictably related to nominal GNP, it is not auseful indicator for monetary policy. We went through a number ofyears with M1 in which the Committee had to set aside M1 as a target,then later reinstate it, hoping that it would again become apredictable indicator of nominal GNP. And then we finally removed itentirely. I think if you look at Tom's chart at the back of his memo,it's pretty clear to me that, if we had had a monetary base target in1980, we would have had to get rid of the monetary base for theprecise reasons we had to get rid of M1 as a target. If you look atthe growth rate of the monetary base in the fourth quarter of 1982 andthe first quarter of 1983, you'll see that it was running around 12percent--3 percentage points above the top of the limit. Given thefact that the ratio of currency to reserves is about 2-1/2 to 1, itwould have taken an extremely tight monetary policy to push that rateof growth back within the 9 percent ceiling. And I would point outthat the fourth quarter of 1982 was the bottom of the worst recessionwe've had in this country since the 1930s. It's inconceivable to methat this FOMC, or any other FOMC, would have thought it sensible tohave followed a much more restrictive policy in the fourth quarter of1982 and the first quarter of 1983. We already had classically highinterest rates. I don't know what federal funds rate would have beenrequired to push the monetary base growth back to 9 percent, but itobviously would have been a lot higher than 20 percent, because 20percent was not doing it.MR. MELZER. Frank, to some extent, though, there would havebeen reaction to the very slow growth of the base that took place allthe way through 1981 and a good deal of 1982.MR. MORRIS. All right; but your system would require us toreact at this particular time.MR. MELZER. Well, I know; but you can't just pick up onsome--MR. KOHN. If [there had been] some reaction in 1981, youmight not have had the reaction--MR. MELZER. That's all I'm saying.MR. KOHN. Yes, but we can't play with what's--MR. MORRIS. Well, let's take a look at 1986 then. In theyears immediately preceding it, we were within the band; we weren'tway below except for one point in 1984. So, you can't argue in thecase of 1986 that we would have been making up for a big shortfall,because there wasn't a shortfall. Yet, here again, this constraintwould have required us in 1986 to have followed a substantially morerestrictive monetary policy. Now, 1986 was the year in which theaverage unemployment rate was 7 percent; the rate of growth of nominal-21-5/17/88GNP was 2.2 percent; the rate of growth of the GNP deflator was 2.2percent. I submit that anything that indicates that we should havefollowed a severely more restrictive monetary policy in 1986 does notmeet my requirements for a common sense monetary policy. And I thinkthe Committee would have abandoned it again in 1986.MR. MELZER. Frank, do you know what reserves would havegrown at in 1986 to meet the constraint on a quarterly basis? Theanswer is: 9 percent, 14 percent, 13-1/2 percent, and 12 percent. Andthat would have brought us inside the constraint. To me, that is veryhealthy reserve growth, taking into account what currency did. And itmay well have necessitated much less of a reaction in the otherdirection in 1987.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What was the actual reserve growth?MR. MELZER. It was 16 percent for 1986: 9.1 percent in thefirst quarter; 16.6 percent; 19.3 percent; and 19.4 percent.MR. MORRIS. And that is because M1 was growing very rapidly.These two are closely related indicators and they have the samecomponents. You have currency plus the reserves against transactionsdeposits as against currency plus transactions deposits. And they'regoing to tend to move in a fairly similar fashion. The weight ofcurrency is different. But, as you argue, where the base departs istypically where you have unusual growth in deposits. So, you can'texpect M1 to be something we had to get rid of as a target, and themonetary base, which is so closely related, to be something that wouldhave given us a good guide to monetary policy during this period.It's hard for me to conceive that we would have gone through thisperiod and not have been faced with a situation of either discountingthe base as an indicator, or following a policy which, given theeconomic conditions, would have been a policy that was much toorestrictive for the situation.MR. MELZER. Again, Frank, one thing I would point out isthis difference between a constraint and a target. If you weretargeting the base, I don't know that you'd be setting a 4 or, as Doneven mentioned, a 5 percentage point range. And in my mind, there isa big difference. If you widen that range out and you're only tryingto pick up the excesses at the peak, that's a lot different thanrelying on a target. The second thing I would--MR. MORRIS. But doesn't your system require that you try toget below 9 percent once you get above it?MR. MELZER. That's correct. Well--or you wouldn't allow itto get above it.MR. MORRIS. Well, I just think your own evidence suggeststhat it's not a workable guide to monetary policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. I found both papers very interesting and reallyhelpful. I think it would be very confusing to the public at large,and especially to Congress, if we had two different types of monetarycontrol procedures--one a target and the other one a constraint. If-22-5/17/88we ask ourselves why monetary targets were introduced in the firstplace, they were certainly not introduced or requested by Congressbecause they thought those were just some guidelines that we couldflop over and under. There was clearly the intent that they be somekind of constraint, however binding. And if we suddenly introduce asecond set of numbers--one set a constraint and one set a target--Ithink the public legitimately will ask what we are doing. Which onedo you really take seriously? So the confusion that would result, Ithink, would be great. I think it would be useful, however, toinclude the monetary base among the other monetary targets, but I'dtreat it on the same level as the existing targets. And one thingthat's important, too, is what Don Kohn was saying--namely, that thebehavior is likely to change once you introduce it as a target. Forcertain, once you introduce it as a constraint, the old statisticalrelationships probably won't hold anymore. In any case, that's whereI would come out: I'd treat the two the same. I'd be in favor ofhaving something on the short end, and because M1 probably misbehavesa little more than the base, the base is the better candidate at theshort end of the spectrum.MR. MELZER. Well, the only problem I have with that is thatit just puts it in a category of things that don't really impact ourpolicy decisions at all. I don't think the targets have a heck of alot of credibility either within this room or outside this room. AndI think what is proposed has the ability really to influence policyactions, at the extremes, in a very constructive way. And I don'tknow that you get that with what you're suggesting. It would beeasier to explain; there's no doubt about it.MR. HELLER. Well then, let's rename all the targets; let'scall them all constraints or something like that. You know, I takethe range seriously as [the growth rates] get closer to the borders,it influences the way I vote on the current monetary targets. But Idon't take them as an absolute, if all other things would indicategoing the opposite way. As President Morris was saying earlier: Wouldyou go voluntarily into a recession that would otherwise not benecessary only to stick to that constraint? And the answer would beno. Immediately, you already set up these escape clauses too. So, Ithink they are very much the same as the monetary targets; and ifthey're not the same, then we should take the monetary targets asseriously as we take the constraint. I'm in favor of looking at it;among the various options that you have there, I would be stronglyinclined not to call them two different things.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I found both papers very interesting, but I havesome analytic questions that I think are relevant, as far as whetheror not the base should be considered as either a target or aconstraint. The work done by the Board staff suggests that thestatistical properties of the monetary base are superior to those ofother aggregates. The work we have done suggests just the opposite.As a matter of fact, the statistical properties of the base areinferior to those of M2. We have a much larger interest rateelasticity on the monetary base and our income elasticity of M2 issignificantly less than that [for the base]. The difference appearsto be a function of the period of estimation. The period ofestimation in the Board's forecast goes back to the very early 1960s-23-5/17/88and goes through the entire period. We think that the interest rateelasticity has probably increased in recent years and on the basis ofour estimates, which run from 1978 through 1987, we find that the baseactually has inferior statistical properties to M2. In any case, itappears as though there are significant amounts of shifts in thestatistical properties that occur and I'm not sure we've paid enoughattention to those kinds of shifts. They certainly could affect howreliable the monetary base could be as either a current constraint ora target in the period ahead. I guess I'd say that even though therehas been a lot of analytical work done, maybe we ought to do a littlemore.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I have a lot of sympathy with whatTom is trying to do because I think his ultimate objective is toachieve price stability. I don't know how this Committee would voteon that, but I remember several years ago Chairman Volcker asked uswhat we thought the objective was and half of us voted for pricestability alone; half voted the other way; and he didn't vote anddidn't break the tie. But I think that is the ultimate objective, andI hear more and more people around here saying that. And I think Tomis trying to create a constraint that will make us really work towardthat objective and not lose sight of it. But my problem with it isthat even though he thinks this is a constraint, I believe, inpractice, that it really might end up being used like a target. Andour analysis, like Bob Parry's, suggests that M2 is really better forthis in the sense of predicting the level of long-run inflation. Andthat, I think, is the thing we really ought to look at, rather thanhow well it predicts nominal GNP, since I don't think we can peg realvariables over the long run. All we can do is affect the price level.So, what I would like to do is to carry the thing a step further thanTom has, and suggest we think about using total reserves andnonborrowed reserves, or something of that sort, as an operatinginstrument. What we have now is very akin to using free reserves,which has been fraught with problems the whole time. I know thatthere are some institutional changes that will improve this--you couldget rid of the reserve requirements against interbank deposits,[unintelligible] deposits, nonpersonal deposits, all those things.You could have a penalty discount rate. All those things could bedone, assuming you can get the legislation for some of them. In anyevent, if we could work in that direction, then I think we'd havesomething that would really be very useful to us. Of course, one ofthe things we would want to analyze is what this might do to short-term market rates, and I don't think we have a good handle on that.Most people think they would fluctuate a lot more; my instincts tellme that the private market would take care of that. And, even if theyfluctuated more, I don't believe that would be transmitted to long-term rates to the extent that most people seem to be assuming. In anycase, if we could use this as an operating variable instead ofborrowed reserves, or the federal funds rate, or whatever people thinkit is we're using, I think it would be a very efficient way to try toachieve the very thing that Tom is advocating. Now, if it came downto a vote as to whether to do what he suggested or not do it, I wouldsay do what he has suggested. I'd like to take it further than that,but I think it's better than what we now have, because it is aconstraint. And we really don't have many constraints now, given ourwillingness to violate our target ranges on an ad hoc, judgmental,-24-5/17/88basis. And I'd like a little more of a rule in there, a little moreof a road map than we have, to the extent we can do it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I'm very appreciative of the fact that there areso many members of this Committee who place price level stability insuch high regard that they want to find some way to accomplish that[objective]. This proposal, it seems to me, is somewhat deficient inthat regard in that it does not have within it a proposal that, in asense, gets you to price level stability. I guess I see it as a wayto live with 5 percent or 4 percent inflation, because 4 percentinflation can occur while maintaining this kind of constraint, so--MR. MELZER. Wayne, those numbers are simply for the sake ofexample. What I've laid out is a framework. I think it would be upto the Committee to set the bands, so that's quite--MR. ANGELL. Yes. Second, even though I call myself amonetarist, I've always been a discretionary monetarist. And Ibelieve that there are some circumstances--anyone who has read IrvingFisher, I think, would be aware of the fact that once you begintargeting money, and you cause money to be more scarce than itotherwise would be, you can alter the expected rate of inflation. Andwhen you do, you get a shift in the demand for money. Now, it seemsto me, that's exactly what occurred in 1986, with the worldwidedeflation in commodity prices led by the plunging price of oil.Certainly, many of us were mindful of the fact that during that periodof time we were getting some extreme numbers. And I remember in July,August, and September of that year looking very carefully at thecommodity prices, which had turned around, and saying that we ought toput more restraint in place. And yet there were some who felt--and Ithink quite rightly so--that those countries with balance of tradesurpluses were not engaging in action that was sufficient in regard tothe survivability of the third world. And we thought it wasessential, in some ways, to push the Bank of Japan and the Bundesbankto more expansionary programs. And we did this, with some risk, whichmade it necessary for us to follow a very different course of monetarypolicy in 1987. And there were those who were the strict rulemakerswho told us at that point in time how disastrous it was going to be.Now, as it turns out, it wasn't disastrous for us to follow a very lowgrowth path for the monetary base during 1987. It turns out that thatseems to have been exactly the right thing to have done. So, I reallycan't find myself in a rulemaking camp versus a discretion camp. Ifyou want to be discretionary, then you have to ask yourself what youwant to use for discretion. And I've made it very clear thatcommodity prices are very good signals in regard to money growthrates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You have indeed. Mr. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I probably have more sympathyfor this, at this point, than I did the last time we talked but--MR. STERN. That's not saying a lot!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. [Unintelligible] a storm going onhere because my thinking is probably conditioned by my worries that we-25-5/17/88could be making a horrible mistake in monetary policy here. I do havetrouble, as I said before, with the base on a kind of intellectuallevel. A number of comments have been made on technical issues. Butleaving those somewhat technical issues aside, I think what Tom issuggesting here is that there ought to be something--whether or not ithas to be precisely this--something that makes us say "Hey, wait aminute" in a very, very deliberate, aggressive, forceful way. Andthat's what I have more and more sympathy with, even though I mustconfess I can't really warm up to this particular proposal, forsomewhat technical reasons. There are two systematic periods, usingthe numbers that Tom has picked, in which this thing went astray. Onewas in the early 1980s, and the other one, which Governor Angell wasjust talking about, was in 1986. Now, as Frank Morris pointed out,the Committee was aware that everything, including the base, was inthe one case growing very slowly, and in the other case, growing veryrapidly. But the Committee made a conscious decision--not focusing onthe base itself, but on other things that in some sense aresymptomatic of the base--to ignore those. Why did they make thatdecision? I think the answer is, in a sense, quite simple. In theearly 1980s, despite the fact that we were in what turns out to havebeen a hell of a recession, we also still had very high inflationrates. In other words, the adjustment in the inflation process, whileunderway, was by no means finished and by no means locked in. Therewas still some concern that the inflationary momentum of the late1970s, 1980 and 1981, was still a demon that didn't have to just bewounded, but had to be stomped out. And so there was, I think, aconscious decision to be tolerant of those shortfalls. The same wasmore or less true in 1986, in that the very rapid growth in the baseand the other aggregates was in some sense tolerated because, amongother things, the inflation rate, while certainly not zero, was low,partly for oil price reasons, and certainly not rising. And thatleads me to the view that if a procedure like this were to have somefunctional utility, that utility might arise in a context in whichthere was some kind of a relationship between it and what, in fact,was going on with regard to inflation. Now, I don't want to get intothe rules game, either way. But it's clearly one thing if themonetary base, or some other monetary measure, is outside of somerange and the inflation rate is high and/or rising, as opposed to asituation where it's outside and the inflation rate is low and/orfalling. At least in my mind's eye, if something like this were tohave some utility in a policy framework, either implicitly orotherwise, somehow or other you would need to take it one stepfurther.MR. MELZER. Jerry, on those situations you commented on, Iwould just observe that those clearly would be situations, under theway this has been articulated, where the Committee could decide toviolate it, and simply be obligated to explain it. And I think inboth cases--MR. ANGELL. But what would be the money market response ifthe money market knows that we have these guidelines and then wedecide to violate them? Don't you think there would be anexpectational impact upon the money market?MR. MELZER. I think there could be, Wayne. But I thinkwe're talking about a fairly extraordinary period--only two situationsin eight years that might require that.-26-5/17/88MR. ANGELL. Yes, but you see, by March or April of 1986, orby May at least, I presume we already were running up against thatconstraint. And if the marketplace had seen that out there, then thepath of interest rates in April and May would have been affected bymarket expectations of the fact that that was there.MR. MELZER. Well, in a sense, I think that's good. It wouldcause the Committee to think very carefully about whether or not weought to be violating it. If we do, consciously, then we explain it.Right now when we violate a monetary growth range, we get intoexplanations of velocity. I just don't think that that is somethingthat is bought by the public on a broad basis. It just sounds likeyou are talking your way around the issue with technical phrases andso forth.MR. ANGELL. Well, not to the target range; I think that'sright.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Well, as others have said, I sympathize withthe goal that Tom's seeking. If we had a vote today on the pricestability goal, we'd probably get a much larger consensus. I'm notsure if anybody wants to take that, but I think it's critical that--MR. MORRIS. We would have voted differently today.MR. JOHNSON. Well, what I was going to follow up with isthat there's a much more difficult technical issue. Even if you agreeon the goal--if we had 100 percent consensus that price stability iswhat we all wanted, and I think probably almost everybody would saythat today--you'd still have a whole lot of disagreement about whatthat means. Agreeing on the goal is an important first step, but thenyou'd run into all kinds of problems, like: Does that mean that weshould jump with both feet on every big relative price swing? Ifthere's an oil price shock, which is one big relative price in theeconomy obviously as it flows through, it's going to have sometemporary effects. But what do we mean by temporary? It might have atwo-year effect on the price level as it works its way through. Whatare we going to do about that? Does that mean every time one bigrelative price shocks the general price level on a temporary basisthat we run out there and stomp it to death? We would get into allkinds of discussions about timing, about what price stability means,and what we would accept in the form of relative price effects thatcould affect the general price level for a while. But if you run outand try to deal with every relative price effect--like import prices,which we've obviously agreed to absorb to some extent--what are yougoing to do? If you deal with every one of those, you're going to bechasing your tail, I think. If you tighten up against a relativeprice shock, then you're going to potentially overshoot; as thatfilters through the economy, then it's going to create an overreactionon the downside at some point, and then you're going to be trying towork it back up.So, to me, price stability means a long-run concept. Andthat may mean that you're never actually experiencing a perfect levelof price stability where prices are hovering around zero. It has tomean that the mean is somewhat around zero; but even then you'd have-27-5/17/88to admit that you want to accept periods of deflation. And I guess wecould debate whether people think we ought to go through periods ofdeflation in order to keep the mean around zero. You can get into allkinds of difficult debates about what the proper measure of pricestability is. Is it a broad index such as the CPI, PPI, the deflator?What is it? It's a difficult problem. But I still think that a goalof price stability, rather than, say, trying to improve theunemployment rate or maximize real output growth, is a step in theright direction. I think there was a time, probably, when that wasn'tclear; some people would have said there was a Phillip's curve tradeoff and some acceptance of permanent inflation was worthwhile. Idon't think that's true anymore, but I still think there is adifficult problem.Before I get too hung up on the goals, I do want to say onthis specific proposal, though, that I think it would succeed indamping the volatility of the base. Having upper and lower bounds orconstraints, I think, would cause monetary policy to adjust early asyou're approaching the bounds rather than deal with big roller coastereffects, and would probably damp the volatility of the base growth.You'd have a much more stable growth in the base; I think it wouldsucceed in that. But the question would be whether that gets youanything. I think the ultimate issue as to whether this specificproposal would be worthwhile rests on whether the base is a betterinstrument of intermediate policy than any other aggregate or anythingelse we have. Don had indicated that the statistical properties ofthe base make it somewhat equivalent to M2, although Bob Parry'speople debate that. My view is that even if you look at M2, you haveserious money demand problems associated with M2. My big problem isthat I am not convinced that money demand is stable, even in the longrun. Look at what we have experienced over the 1980s. And there havebeen statistical studies in the past that have found long-run breaksin the trend in the money demand in the postwar period. All you haveto do is look back earlier than the postwar period; there were decadeswhen monetary velocity was actually on a declining trend. It onlyturned up in the postwar period. And there have been several detectedstructural breaks in it even since the postwar era. Nobody canpredict when those breaks will occur, and that's the difficultproblem. You can feel very satisfied about the statistical propertiesof the base and all of a sudden there could be some structuraladjustment--a long-term adjustment in the trend rate. Even though itmay stabilize around this new trend rate, you might go two yearstrying to detect it. So, I think there is this fundamental problemwith monetary aggregates. But, in saying that, I think the goal ofpeople who want to target the monetary aggregates is a highlydesirable one. That's why my preference has been to try and look atindicators like the interest spread, in conjunction with commodityprices and exchange rates. These are financial market indicators butthey provide a similar type of goal to what people wanting to targetthe aggregates would want. I'm interested in the interest rate spreadbecause I think that, especially under our operating procedure, that'show money is created and that's how liquidity is provided to thesystem. It's basically the spread between the funds rate and otherrates that creates the lending incentives that take place, and ofcourse, that determines, to some extent, the expansionary effects ofmoney. It creates additional credit in the markets and that feedsback on the base. The way we do it now, we change the funds ratethrough the borrowing target, which changes the interest rate spread,-28-5/17/88which creates new loans and feeds back on the base through reserves.And, you know, I think that that gives you some idea about the thrustof policy. I think that approach--MR. HOSKINS. But don't you think that if you had aconstraint you'd get a different shape in the yield curve? Do youthink the yield curve would look the same as it does now if themarkets were operating with this constraint in mind? I think that'sthe point.MR. JOHNSON. Yes.MR. HOSKINS. And that's clear information. The market isgoing to behave differently if it knows that constraint is there interms of long--MR. JOHNSON. Sure. I guess all I would say is that, yes,the yield curve might change. Obviously, as you got close to theconstraint, long-term rate movements would probably be damped.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think Lee is raising the point that ifthe market believed what we were doing, the long-term rates would belower; hence, the yield spread would tend to be tilted differentlyfrom what it would otherwise be, to say the least.MR. HOSKINS. If they believed that the base was a realconstraint.MR. JOHNSON. It could, but I think still the question isgoing to be whether that aggregate--. You know, you can get all kindsof yield curve relationships associated with that. You might get muchbetter behavior on the long end of the market. But it's not hard toget long bonds to behave well. We could run the fed funds rate up to20 percent today and I can assure you we'd get very good performanceon the long end of the market. I think it's pretty predictable; ifyou create expectations of a recession, you can invert the yield curvequite nicely. But I don't think that's the ultimate goal, unless whatyou want is a level of expansion consistent with price stability--whatever that is, exactly. I don't know exactly what yield curvedetermines that, but it's not a negative slope. It might be close toflat but who knows exactly. I don't know where that leaves me, exceptthat it requires a lot of discretion at the moment. It reallyrequires filtering a lot of information. I think getting the goalright, and maybe even having further debate on fleshing out thesegoals, would allow this process to work even better. You're alwaysgoing to have differing opinions when you have 19 people sittingaround a table. But I've been amazed at how well this process sort offilters all that information into a pretty good consensus. So wheredo we need to go? If we could get the goals down a little better, wewould probably do all right.MR. MELZER. One thing I'd say, Manley, is that there's noway around it: our business is money--whether we like it or not and nomatter how difficult it is. And I think people would generally agreethat inflation is a monetary phenomenon.MR. JOHNSON. I don't disagree with that either.-29-5/17/88MR. MELZER. And, finally, I think in our discussion at thelast meeting, people who have had a lot of experience around thistable kind of spelled out the difficulties we have if we view ourbusiness as being one of interest rates and don't have some kind of acounterbalance based in money and reserves. To do that just becauseof the inherent opportunities--MR. JOHNSON. What I'm saying is that it's a proxy; that'salways been the intermediate target to get to price stability, orwhatever the goal was. Money growth isn't an end in itself; it's onlyan intermediate step toward what your ultimate goal is. I'm justsaying that there are a lot of potential intermediate approaches touse to achieve the same end result. If we all have the same endresult, we could have a slightly different view about what theintermediate steps ought to be but still reach a consensus on policythat would probably make us all happy. The base would probablyperform better; my own indicators would perform better; Wayne'scommodity prices would perform better. I think we would all generallybe happier.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think most of the useful things that can besaid about this really quite excellent paper have been said. Mybottom line is that I'd like to find a rule that would keep us ontrack in terms of good policy. I don't know what that rule is. Idon't think the base is it, largely for the same reasons that I thinkM1 is not it. That doesn't mean we shouldn't keep working at it. ButI don't have enough confidence in this to give up much discretion atall in terms of policy. So, whatever we would like, I think it simplyisn't a reality; so I think we have to continue much as we have been.MR. BLACK. Even if you could find a perfect rule, I doubtthe Committee would vote for it, because it's so much more fun makingad hoc decisions every time.MR. MELZER. And that hurts again.MR. KELLEY. It means you recognize what you saw.MR. BLACK. I mean I'm assuming away that problem; I stillthink we would vote for discretion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Tom, let me ask you to comment on something abit more mundane and workaday. I think how we employ a device such asthis has a lot to do with whether or not it's useful in the firstplace. And I wonder how we could reliably use it without so dilutingit that it becomes punchless. As I look back four quarters, and alsoinclude the current quarter, I notice that the first month in four outof the five quarters grossly exceeds the parameters on the upside.Then are those--MR. MELZER. Where are you looking?MR. KELLEY. Well, I have a chart here that the Board's staffputs out on annualized growth rates on a month-by-month basis; it-30-5/17/88doesn't go back very far but it does go back a year; and it includesApril, so I'm taking the liberty of including this quarter. For somereason--and maybe there is a reason--[monetary growth in] the firstmonth of each quarter, four out of the five times, is way over theparameter. On both sides of the first months, there are much lowerfigures. And I ask myself what we would do if we [were operatingunder] your proposal. It says that no quarter would be permittedeither to exceed the upper limit or fall below the lower limit. Well,in four of the last five quarters--taking the liberty of includingthis one--you have a huge number in the first month, which kind ofcomes out of the blue, because it follows two much lower months, andthen in turn, is followed by two much lower months. And I ask myselfwhat would we be liable to do if we sat down at this table when wejust got a brand new figure that was way over [the upper limit] in thelight of the pattern we have seen here in the last year or so. Howcould we protect ourselves against that phenomenon?MR. MELZER. What the proposal envisions is the averagegrowth rate for the next quarter from the prior quarter's average.Are you looking at growth rates, Mike?MR. KELLEY. Yes.MR. MELZER. Okay. So, first of all, what would the firstmonth in one of those quarters you were talking about imply in termsof level for the average of the quarter?MR. HELLER. Yes, Mike is saying you look at the first month,but then you're really--MR. MELZER. Well, let me put it in the context of where weare right now.MR. KELLEY. If you look at the first month, it's like thekind of thing that Peter deals with every day, with regard to themaintenance period. For instance, let's take October: the Octobernumber was 11 percent on an annualized basis. It was followed byNovember at 6.9 percent and December at 3.1 percent; it averages outfine. But if we had sat down here and looked at that 11 percent inOctober we might have been moved to do something precipitous.MR. MELZER. Well, first of all, I think the staff would havesome ability to project what they expected to happen in terms of thegrowth [vis-a-vis] what we were trying to hit as an average for thequarter. There could be a circumstance where it would require someresponse reasonably early in the quarter. If you look at where we areright now in this quarter, we are probably right at, or preciouslyclose to, the level that would be permitted by a 9 percent upwardbound.MR. KELLEY. April was 12.3 percent.MR. MELZER. Okay. But you just can't look at the monthlygrowth rates; I think you have to look at the level. And, if I lookedat these correctly--I'm looking at the St. Louis base--we are roughlyat where I think a 9 percent constraint would be, or a little belowit. So, you would have to be asking yourself at a meeting like this:Should I be taking a step now to slow that thing down?-31-5/17/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Then what happens on July 1st? In otherwords, suppose you take a specific action that drives it down.MR. MELZER. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. All constraints legally come off as ofthe beginning of the next quarter?MR. MELZER. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Wouldn't you really want more of arolling three-month average rather than an actual quarterly system? Aquarterly system works very much like the maintenance period, whereyou could end up at the end of the period with some crazy stuff goingon.MR. MELZER. I guess to the extent I thought about that partof it, I've just been looking at the average for one quarter inrelation to the average for the next. I would think you could do itwell.MR. KELLEY. That wasn't meant as a criticism, just as aproblem you have to work through if it's going to be useful.MR. MELZER. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I have some considerable sympathy for thisproposal, but I don't think we ought to ask too much of it, in thesense that I don't think it's going to accomplish something that isalways going to have us do the right thing. But the merit I see init, relative to current procedures, is that it does put the monetaryaggregates back into the policy process--in my judgment, in a moremeaningful way. I think it adds some automaticity to our responserelative to the current process, at least at the extremes, and I thinkthat's important. Maybe that's the same thing. The third point Iwould make is that, under some circumstances, I think it will make usless reactive and more anticipatory. And for those reasons, I thinkthat this, at the least, merits a more serious consideration.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anyone else who wishes to make a commentwho hasn't yet?MS. SEGER. I just have one question.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure.MS. SEGER. I read these papers with great interest. Wouldit be possible to run something like this off the shelf? In otherwords, not publicly announce that we're going to change, but actinternally here as if we were trying it for six months, and just sortof simulate what the decision-making process would be?MR. MELZER. Sure. I would think that would be quitepossible, wouldn't you Don? Not to make decisions---32-5/17/88MS. SEGER. [We could try it] between now and, say, the endof the year or something like that; and if it did turn out to havereal working potential, then put it in the Humphrey-Hawkins [report]next February.MR. JOHNSON. The problem is you would never get the market'sresponse to the changes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's what makes it tough to do.MR. JOHNSON. The behavioral adjustments that would takeplace are not there that way.MR. HOSKINS. I think Martha raises a good point. It wouldgive us a chance to take a peek at it when--MS. SEGER. It's better than looking backwards, which is whatyou're doing statisticallyMR. HOSKINS. You're right.MR. JOHNSON. You could at least see when you would be facedwith a decision.MS. SEGER. Yes.MR. HOSKINS. You would be losing half the power. The poweris the market's response to this rule, or this constraint, orgovernor, or band, or whatever you want to call it. That's the powerof it.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, wouldn't we be better off to test itjust for a while, before locking ourselves into a statutoryrequirement or market expectation? I think that makes a lot of sense.MS. SEGER. Well, it's just an idea.MR. BLACK. But, at a minimum, you have to tell the[Congressional] Committee next time in the Humphrey-Hawkins[testimony] that we have either rejected it, or we are looking at itand have not yet decided whether to accept it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I was sitting here keeping score. Tomdid marginally better than the Orioles, but not much.MR. HOSKINS. But he did a lot better than when he firstbrought it up!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. However, I also kept score on thegeneral sympathy for what it is you're trying to do. And I get theimpression that what we're looking for here is more something to keepus off the path of an inadvertent acceleration of inflation. Ifthat's the case, then what we haven't done yet is to evaluate someparticular vehicles that would give us that sort of indication; that'sthe issue Jerry really was raising. Can I suggest that at thisparticular stage we rephrase the problem, not as a Tom Melzer issue,but as an FOMC issue. Let's see whether or not we can look not at theusual targeting characteristics, but strictly at the inflation5/17/88question. To give you an example: if the long-term income velocity ofM2 doesn't show any significant secular trends, it means, effectively,that the GNP price level, the implicit deflator, is a close functionof unit money supply defined in M2. If you go further and substitutecapacity for real GNP, and cyclically adjust the price--if you canactually get that--what you're basically trying to do is to get arelationship between, say, M2 divided by capacity on the one hand--ora bit more exactly, that as a long-term indicator of price, and theinflation rate being the first difference. But, if we could get somegeneral notion--it doesn't have to be on a monthly basis, but just asa basic thrust--I think it would capture some of the issues that we'regrasping for. Heaven knows, I think we are all acutely aware thatchasing interest rates, ultimately, is going to throw us off the cliffat the end. And, while there is no real strong support for Tom onthis issue, I think starting from where he started and expanding fromthere may get us something that we might find particularly useful.Now, I just suggest that. Does anybody have any notions as to wherewe go from here, granting that we don't like this specific proposal?MR. BLACK. I think you're right, Mr. Chairman; that's theway I viewed it. I tried to take it a little farther in the directionthat I thought it ought to go, which nobody else will agree withexcept maybe Tom Melzer and Lee Hoskins. I think that can be veryproductive.MR. MELZER. I think there's an advantage to having somethingin that type of equation that relates to what we do day-to-day incarrying out monetary policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, yes; but remember if we have M2 inthat equation, which is what would be in the one I was using, forexample, that's really suggesting the nature of the noninflationary M2target. It's a target which basically diverts itself from nominal GNPand gets away from the business cycle. It's basically looking at thelong-term targets of policy which we view as noninflationary. I thinkwe all know from our analytical work that the relationship betweenprice and money has been a very tough one to grab. In fact, we havecreated such huge lags between money and prices that it gets you towondering whether you're leading the next cycle or lagging theprevious one. And I think that creates difficulties. If we have somelonger-term thrust, at least we know where we're going out of line fortwo years. I don't think we can target any less than that.MR. BLACK. I would like to see us use multiple-year targets,if we can ever get to the point that we could agree on that. I thinkit's an exciting step.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, does anyone have any objection toasking Don to see whether or not he can put his people to work? Ifanyone has any other thoughts to throw in the hopper, it might beuseful.MR. ANGELL. Well, Tom, would you object to paying moreprecise attention to M2 right now? Is there anyone here who believesthat 8 percent growth of M2 is consistent with our price levelstability goals?MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I do; I think it might be.-34-5/17/88MR. BLACK. I don't--not in the long run. I think it's thebest predictor of inflation of any of the aggregates we have now.MR. JOHNSON. I don't know. I mean, you have to tell mewhat's happening on the demand side.MR. ANGELL. I cannot tell you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The question is if M2 velocity secularlyis flat, then you're--MR. JOHNSON. If you make that assumption, I agree with youcompletely. But I'm saying that's one hell of a big "if", becausethat's not what it has been doing the last few years.MR. BLACK. It hasn't been too far from that.MR. JOHNSON. Well, it has been a long way from zero.MR. KOHN. You have to go over a long period of time and youstill get zero but--MR. JOHNSON. Yes, if you go back--MR. KOHN. Over a period of eight years it has beensubstantial--MR. MORRIS. But the problem is that the character of M2 haschanged quite dramatically in recent years.MR. JOHNSON. No doubt about it.MR. MORRIS. It used to be that M2 paid a below-market rate.Now it pays a market rate. And there is no way that you can take theold data on M2 and come up with any conclusions that will permit youto forecast the M2/GNP relationship in the future.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Regrettably, that is a legitimatecriticism.MR. KOHN. Except that our equations on M2 aren't doing thatbadly once we take into account the opportunity cost changes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, why don't we take a shot at it;and we will report back to you and see where we go from there.MR. KOHN. Any and all inputs from Reserve Banks--MR. BLACK. You want to implicate us!MR. JOHNSON. Don, since when has it been doing better?It's been what--a few quarters, right?MR. KOHN. No, no.MR. HELLER. But the demand for money has gone through---35-5/17/88MR. KOHN. The demand equation, once it takes account of theinterest rate changes, hasn't been that far off over the last severalyears. But the velocity changes--MR. JOHNSON. Can you predict the interest rate movements?Because if you can't, you're in big trouble.MR. KOHN. That's the problem, which is what we said--MR. JOHNSON. It just gets you into interest rateforecasting.MR. BLACK. If you can predict the prices, do you need topredict the interest rates?MR. JOHNSON. No. That's my whole point. That's why I'msaying I've been looking at these other indicators that seem to do abetter job than prices.MR. BLACK. I don't always understand these things, butweakly I'd suggest that it is a pretty darn good predictor of theprice level.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, can I terminate this conversationnow, and just suggest that we will report back? If we don't, we'regoing to break all records on the length of an FOMC meeting.MR. MORRIS. I'd say we won't break 1979, Mr. Chairman.MR. ANGELL. October 6th.MR. JOHNSON. How long did that one last?MS. SEGER. Probably three days.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do we have some lunch? We can now gointo our luncheon session.END OF MEETING-36-