Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeFebruary 9-10, 1988A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D. C., starting on Tuesday, February 9, 1988, at 3:00 p.m.,and continuing on Wednesday, February 10, 1988, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneBoykinHellerJohnsonKeehnKelleySegerSternMessrs. Black, Forrestal, Hoskins, and Parry, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Melzer and Morris, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis,and Boston, respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff AdviserMr. Bernard, Assistant SecretaryMrs. Loney, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMr. Bradfield General CounselMr. Patrikis, Deputy General CounselMr. Truman, Economist (International)Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld,Siegman, and Simpson, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account1/ Attended Wednesday session only.2/9-10/88Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Gillum,1 Economist, Division of Monetary AffairsBoard of GovernorsMr. Wascher,1 Economist, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, R. Davis,and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, San Francisco,Richmond, Cleveland, New York, and Atlanta,respectivelyMessrs. McNees and Cacy, Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of Boston and Kansas City, respectivelyMr. Vangel, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of New York1/ Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussionand action on monetary growth ranges for 1988.-2-Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofFebruary 9-10, 1988February 9, 1988--Afternoon Session[Secretary's Note: The meeting began with approval of theminutes of the meetings of December 15-16, 1987, and January 5, 1988.]MESSRS. PRELL & TRUMAN. [Statements--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ted, on this alternative C, what are theinterest rate movements? 3 percent? 2 percent?MR. TRUMAN. Yes, [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for the two gentlemen?SPEAKER(?). Mike, the pattern of inventories is prettycritical for the forecast and I think you've made an effective casethat we are not going to go through what is considered a drasticinventory cycle. But the thing that strikes me is that, really, thisis almost the best of all possible worlds in nonfarm inventories wherethere is basically no cycle. And I wonder if it's more likely thatyou would have a greater reaction in terms of production than whatyou've shown, in which case we might have somewhat weaker growth inthe first half.MR. PRELL. As we see this, we don't believe that theoverhangs are widespread or that they are very large.SPEAKER(?). I agree with you.MR. PRELL. As for automobiles--indeed, the automobileinventory reduction is progressing a bit faster than we hadanticipated, since auto sales in January were stronger than we hadbuilt into our first-quarter forecast.SPEAKER(?). Yes.MR. PRELL. It's conceivable, certainly to the extent thatthere isn't a response early on to any excessive inventoryaccumulation, that we could build up a larger problem, whichsubsequently could give us more of a cycle. [Unintelligible] we'dhave an even more dramatic inventory correction earlier in thisupswing--and we have been through a number of short-run corrections--and, of course, that's a critical ingredient.SPEAKER(?). Following up on that inventory question--thedistinction between manufacturing inventories and retail inventories.I think what you show here in the charts is consistent with theanecdotal evidence that one picks up. However, there's one area whereI, at least, haven't been able to get very much anecdotal evidence.You mentioned it and I've heard it elsewhere. And that is that someof the accumulation in retail inventories was planned--was desired ineffect--to beat higher prices for imports. Could you expound on that?MR. PRELL. Well, I think that's very hard to pin down. Andit isn't just prices, but also perhaps in the case of apparel in the2/9-10/88earlier part of last year, the concerns about quota restrictions. Themore general issue on prices is whether manufacturers, for example,saw the materials input prices increasing very sharply in some cases,and [since] interest rates looked negative in real terms, whether onesaw some effort to accumulate inventories in the manufacturing sector.There was accumulation. It wasn't any faster; in fact, it was slower,than the increase in output. And it's not inconceivable that therecould still be some significant desire to build up inventoriesfurther. We do have some moderate accumulation of manufacturers'stocks. For example, in the latest purchasing managers' report forJanuary, there is explicit comment to the effect that there was somereaction not only to some shortages of goods and the lengthierdelivery times, but also to some anticipatory price increases.MR. HOSKINS. Mike, I don't know whether this is anappropriate question for you, or maybe for later discussion, but ourfirst monetary policy objective states, essentially, that we wantmaximum output without a significant acceleration in inflation. Onecould reverse that and say we want to achieve a deceleration ininflation without significantly damaging employment and output. Didyou choose that assumption or are we to discuss that assumption?MR. PRELL. Well, I suppose that is certainly somethingfundamental to the Committee's decision-making. I don't think we'vemisread how the Committee has behaved in terms of putting asignificant importance on maintaining growth and avoiding increases inunemployment. In terms of overall resource utilization: to haveanything significantly slower than the GNP growth we have wouldbasically bring about some greater degree of slack. It is conjecturalwhether we have precisely captured the desires of the Committee, butultimately, we ended up with a forecast that sort of gave you about asmuch growth as we think you can get without putting enough pressure onthe economy to get a real momentum developing in the inflationprocess.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Mr. Morris.]MR. MORRIS. I have two questions, Mr. Chairman. One, thepart of the forecast I have a problem with is business fixedinvestment. [Given] sustained strength in the manufacturing sector,except maybe in automobiles, the staff is showing the manufacturingindustry operating at higher levels of capacity. That is going toproduce, unfortunately I think, some price strains as the year goeson. The staff projection shows a deceleration in business fixedinvestment against last year. Now, I find that hard to reconcile notonly with normal cyclical patterns but also with the orders figuresfor the past four months. The projection has real plant and equipmentspending up at a 2.9 percent annual rate and nondefense capital goodsup at a 3.5 percent annual rate. These are unusually strongincreases; it would lead me to conclude that I should discount theplant and equipment surveys as being a bit out of date and [not]factor in a bigger increase in fixed investment this year.MR. PRELL. Indeed, the plant and equipment surveys wouldsuggest a stronger year-over-year gain than we have for nominalbusiness fixed investment. Those surveys, as you know, were takenbefore the stock market [developments] were probably fully assessed.The Commerce surveys overlap that. We think this is consistent with2/9-10/88the general output growth path that we have in terms of the usualaccelerator effects. We don't have any particularly favorabledevelopments in .the cost of capital. We think there will be areas ofsignificant strength, and I've tried to relate that to those areas ofcapacity utilization. On the other hand, there are other areas inthis economy, if we are right about the overall level and pattern ofdemand, where the stimulus to investment will not be as great.Obviously, in the financial sector, which is shrinking, they probablyare not going to be buying as many computers and other officeequipment. Demand for office space may be lower. There are drags ina number of sectors of business fixed investment as we see it: theoffice area in general, hotels, and probably areas that we have missedin other commercial construction. So we have balanced these divergentelements in what we think is a forecast that is really consistent withhistorical patterns, given the overall level of growth in final demandand the financial commitments.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know, Mike, there is a problem withthe new orders series, in the sense that these are orders placed atdomestic facilities. And a very big part of the strength is inaircraft orders, a substantial part of which has to be for exports andlong forward 1989-1990 deliveries. There's an awful lot of exportdemand in those numbers as well as, probably, some tilting down in theproportion of imports to domestic purchases. So we probably aregetting an upward bias in both the nondefense capital goods shipmentfigures and the orders figures. I would suspect that when one makesthe types of adjustments on exactly those numbers, one comes out veryclose to where Mike's numbers are coming out.SPEAKER(?). Well, that may be; but I looked at the onlyseries in the capital goods area, that I know of at least, where theydifferentiate domestic and foreign orders--in machine tools. You havethis very big rise in December in machine tool orders; it's almostentirely in domestic orders.MR. PRELL. The question is whether this is indicative ofwhat's going on in domestic demands.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have no evidence of that. What weget is that there is very strong export demand, orders coming in. Wecan see it in--MR. PRELL. I think the Chairman's remarks do raise a veryimportant point on this trade picture. If you look at the nondefensecapital goods orders, the average lead time--when you take out theaircraft, which really has enormous backlogs that will keep them inbusiness well into the 1990s--showed very substantial growth in theearlier part of last year. I think we may have shown this in theGreenbook. But then the fourth-quarter increase wasn't really verygreat. So with that caution--SPEAKER(?). I'm skeptical about that fourth-quarter number.MR. PRELL. It's a volatile series from month-to-month. ButI think, perhaps in terms of its leading indicator value--and itprobably doesn't point very far into the future--that it's one littlehint that there may be some moderation in that area.2/9-10/88SPEAKER(?). Isn't the consensus forecast of the P&E probablyin excess of 5 percent growth? Most forecasts, that I've seen atleast, have much more strength.MR. PRELL. I'd have to look. But I think our BFI forecastis not much out of line with some of the other major ones. Forexample, for our 1988 forecast, we have 4.5 percent--[turning tostaff] is that an annual average? DRI has 5.1; the Bluechipindicators 5.1. They're comparable; it's a very small difference.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Truman?SPEAKER(?). Looking at the long-term interest rates inGermany, real long-term rates are unusually high. Is there some--MR. TRUMAN. Well, I think it's puzzling. If you ask theGermans why they're high, they say that German savers won't acceptinterest rates that are lower than 6 percent because they assume thatthe long-term inflation rate will be much higher than it is currently.No matter how you talk your way around that, that's the answer you getback. And it is true that even during the last year, or a couple ofyears, when [market] interest rates have come down, [rates] havestayed above 6 percent. In fact, this series that we used hereslightly understates the movements in rates, because it's an averageof all longer-term or under ten-year public authority issues. Andsome of it is much less than ten years in maturity. So we have somesluggishness in that series. For example, for the ten-year bonds theyhave outstanding, the rate is above 6 percent, about 6-1/4 percent.It has come down a bit more than that series itself showed recently,but it is still very high. And other than the savings story, somepeople would point to some critical imperfections and cartelization ofthe financial markets in Germany; but it's not much of an explanation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Yes. Since President Hoskins mentioned themonetary policy objectives, I guess I'd like to make even a strongerstatement in regard to that. The way you stated it was somewhatdifferent than it's written. The way you stated it was less offensiveto me than the way it's written. The way it's written is so contraryto everything I believe about what our job is, that it causes me towonder: Have I missed something all these two years or have we hadthis stated before?MS. SEGER. It's the Employment Act of '46.MR. ANGELL. Whatever it is, it seems to me that if that'swhat our objective is, we are always going to be on the edge of adisaster. And I don't know how else to put it. Back on chart 19--andhere again I want the Presidents to realize that I'm very impressedwith the scholarship of this forecast, and I indicated that to thestaff--but I haven't yet seen what happens on chart 19 if we have anunchanged dollar and tighter U.S. monetary policy. Now, I presumethat means that money growth is about like it was in 1987. Is thatapproximately correct?MR. KOHN. For '88 it would be about the same; but for '89 itwould be several percentage points less.2/9-10/88MR. ANGELL. In other words, M2 growth for '88 under thisscenario would be 4 percent?MR. KOHN. Approximately.MR. ANGELL. And what would it be for '89?MR. KOHN. One to two percent I guess--in that area.MR. ANGELL. Oh! I see. That is quite a restrictive path.But what bothers me is the outcome. I disagree with you in regard tothe sign of the result in interest rates. It would seem to me, if youadopted a smaller money growth path and if you had the lower real GNPas detailed here, that the fed funds rate might be 2 to 3 percent lessthan, rather than 2 to 3 percent greater than. Would you comment onthat?SPEAKER(?). I think the exercise involved moving frominterest rates to the impacts on the economy and then back to moneydemand, as measured by standard money demand equations. That is theway it works, and there are lots of ways of cutting this. But,essentially, the slowdown in nominal GNP, which was about 1-1/2percentage points this year--a little less, 1-1/4--is associated withthis kind of interest rate rise on the one hand, and you get the sharpreduction, too, partly because of what Don and his colleagues havebeen saying for quite a while--because of the considerable interestelasticity in the money numbers.MR. ANGELL. Well, apparently it's the model. And I guessfrom time to time that bothers me. The model that you use is notclose to the model of the way I would assume the economy works.MR. KOHN. Ultimately, I think one should differentiatebetween the short-run simulation that's presented here--where you slowmoney growth, interest rates go up, and that slows the demand formoney and the real economy--and the longer-run effect where you mightslow money growth, and ultimately you get the price level down, sothat you would have lower inflation and then would come back to thetrend rate of growth in the economy. In fact, all these models havethat characteristic: that if you slow down money growth, you wouldcome back to, essentially, the trend rate of growth in the economy asa whole. As you may remember in the discussion yesterday [during thestaff briefing to the Board], we had that question about the functionof economic forecasts as a whole. They have that characteristic. Butin the short run, I wouldn't pay much attention to the extent of thetighter monetary policy; but it would give a calibration of what thatkind of monetary policy would produce.MR. ANGELL. I guess that depends upon how soon you expectexpectations to be realized. The model that I would be using wouldhave a different chain of events. It would seem to me--SPEAKER(?). Yes, but just so you could see that in theconsumer prices measure here in 1988. If you thought that there was abig expectational component in the rate of inflation, then withslower, or deliberately slower, monetary growth--of course, it issomething very difficult to capture in the model--you would get much2/9-10/88less nominal GNP. You would then have some feedback effects; in fact,you would have lower interest rates.MR. ANGELL. I consider this to be somewhat important,because if I believed that a fast growth rate of the money stock wouldresult in lower interest rates, I would be very inclined to choosesuch a policy.SPEAKER(?). In the short run.MR. PRELL. Governor Angell, let me just say--I don't want tobe unduly defensive about this assumption--we aren't making this anormative prescription for the Committee. As I tried to emphasize, wesaw the economy and its current position, and looked at this questionof how much room for growth there was. But in a sense, to us, theissues in the forecast and in this context are sort of asymmetrical--we were looking at how much room we felt there was to grow withoutmoving the inflation trend much away from what it has been. That'sall we were trying to communicate with that assumption.MR. ANGELL. But you would admit, wouldn't you Mike, that "C"isn't a very pretty picture?MR. PRELL. Well, for one, I think there is this question ofdynamics in expectational effects. I think we always run into thisquestion when we take into account a tighter policy. It alwaysrequires higher interest rates in the short run. And you have to getthe lower growth to have money balances in line with desired levels,and you could then get some different paths thereafter. But this isour best guess, using our models, of what the difference would be fromthe forecast we have made. And yet it's not prescriptive; it's justtrying to give some sense of the sensitivity of our forecast to theassumptions about exchange rates and monetary growth.MR. ANGELL. Well, it just seems to me that the sounder moneypolicies that we've had in place tend to result in intermediate-terminterest rates coming down and some confidence in regard to thisinstitution. And it seems to me that it's been very beneficial for usand will result in the higher growth path of the monetary aggregates.SPEAKER(?). The 300 basis points tagged on to that scenario--it really does stretch one's macroeconometric credibility.MR. PRELL. It certainly wouldn't put rates out of the rangeof recent years.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I've been in Frank Morris' camp inthinking that expenditures on plant and equipment, along with netexports of goods and services, would be the real driving force in theeconomy. You pointed out that he may have overlooked the foreign partof that. But that would suggest that one of the two, anyway,increases a good deal. I guess the thing that puzzled me so much inthe fourth-quarter figures that were released was the sharp decline inproducers' durable equipment. One of our contacts who specializes inwatching the computer industry attributed this to theAnd he feels2/9-10/88that this is a much weaker pattern of expenditures than we really had.Does that sound sensible?MR. PRELL. There has been a great deal of commentary on thisnumber. 1 think we pointed out, perhaps in the Greenbook, that therewere subsequent shipments data that on the surface looked strongerthan BEA had on this. But the translation, with the limited data theyhave, is a very complicated one. There are shipments of exports aswell as domestic purchases; there are intermediate goods, whichshouldn't show up in the end; there are questions about the seasonalpatterns and the seasonal adjustment that goes into this because oftax law changes. And the P&E number was dragged down by automobilesales, which are not part of the shipments data. So, it's a verycomplicated calculation. And I guess, while we certainly expect it torevise to some degree, it isn't clear that we won't still end up witha decline in P&E in the fourth quarter.MR. BLACK. I guess I still find that hard to believe in viewof what I thought was happening. I know you mentioned in theGreenbook that a good part of this was computer equipment. And that'sthe reason I raise this question aboutThat is different fromthe way most of the other computer companies report the figures. Idon't know whether there is any truth in what this fellow said or not,but he seemed to know what he was talking about. And it confirmed mysuspicions, though I was hoping you could lend some support to thathypothesis.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.They are concernedabout their competitors looking at that Department of Commerce seriesandI guess there are all sorts of rumors about how serious--MR. BLACK. This fellow said he talked toThat probablywas the exact reason; I hadn't thought about that, which is now[unintelligible]--SPEAKER(?). Yes, but I thought the decline was 3.8 percent.If I read this one [correctly,] it's 7.2 percent in the fourthquarter. Where did I get that 3.8?MR. PRELL. The PDE decline was 7 percent. It's 3.6 percentfor total BFI for the fourth quarter. I'd just like to emphasize thatthis seasonal adjustment phenomenon will bounce the numbers around forsome time in the future. Under the old depreciation rules, a companycould buy something in December and get, I guess, a half year'sdepreciation. With tax reform, if you pile too much into the fourthquarter for tax purposes, you are penalized. And so the seasonalfactors in the last several years--as you may recall, we have seenwild fourth quarter-first quarter swings--were probably beginning tocapture that at just the wrong time, when this incentive waseliminated. And that could bounce the numbers around in the future.SPEAKER(?). That's a good point.2/9-10/88SPEAKER(?). [It could affect the] third-quarter/fourth-quarter swing now, because you have the third quarter up about 2.6percent.SPEAKER(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Well, ever since your briefing yesterday, Mike,I've been trying to figure out why I can't understand your point thatwhen the fourth-quarter GNP numbers came out--which showed weakerconsumption spending and greater inventory accumulation than I believeyou had forecast--how now that we have those numbers, you can have anupward revision in the forecast for the first half of the year. Imust say that the arithmetic still flies right by me. So, maybe youcan try once again to convince me of it; I'm sure it's my densitytoday that's doing it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The explanation is the [unintelligible]was unsustainable.SPEAKER(?). It's reversing.MR. PRELL. We don't exactly go into this with a clean slateeach time. There is a certain follow-through from earlier[forecasts]. But I guess we didn't have the feeling that overallproduction growth was going to tail off quite as fast as we had builtin [earlier], just based on the orders trends and the employment dataat the end of the year. We had the sense that consumer spending wasnot falling apart as the year ended. It was looking very weak in theearly fall and didn't show much growth at the end of the year, but itdidn't seem to be falling apart. We surmised from that, andeverything else we could look at, that probably the stock marketpsychological effects were not as great as we might have feared theywould be. This forecast is not a drastic change by any means from ourlast forecast; we're talking two-tenths of a percent on overall GNP.And there is a certain amount of arithmetic momentum in this. I don'tview the change in the first half as being a very great change. As Inoted last time, we perceive the slowing in the first half to comeabout in two ways: either that final demand will be weak and producerswill react really fast to that before inventories build up; or thatinventories would begin to build up and we'd see some adjustment ofproduction in this process. And we sort of got the second [from the]emerging data; final sales in the fourth quarter were somewhatdisappointing. So we have about the same outcome, but there's aslightly different story.MS. SEGER. A second question--maybe this is for Mr. Truman--involves the assumption about the dollar. What is it likely to dothis year? And if that agreement that I thought we struck with theother major nations called for drawing a halt to the dollar's decline,am I supposed to take seriously the forecast of a 10 percent declinein the weighted-average value of the dollar this year, followed by [adecline of] 8 percent next year? I just am not sure how to match thatwith what I thought the basic objectives were.MR. TRUMAN. Well, it's a little less than 10 percent,depending where you start out from.2/9-10/88MS. SEGER. Ten from the fourth quarter?MR. TRUMAN. Yes, but a lot of that you had by the time ofthe December 22 Greenbook. So the change from the average in Januaryis under 10 percent. That is, in fact, one of the reasons why wepresented the last chart here with this middle panel on it. So you'dnot think somehow the dollar is really the problem, the way we set itup was to say, this is what the impact would be--you wouldn't see verymuch difference for 1988. But at a minimum, as I said in my comments,if the dollar is not going to go down, you're not going to get muchdifference [as may be seen] from that chart. And [if] everybody seemshappy with the current account deficit, as we have it, then they'reprobably going to have less than we thought. Then looking forward to1989, you might want to have an easier monetary policy--that's whatthat chart was designed to deal with--where the stronger dollar isbrought about not by any difference in the policy assumption but bywhat the staff sometimes calls a levitation. It's a risky businessforecasting exchange rates, and we have to make some sort ofassumption. I find it more useful to make an assumption thateventually more price adjustment will have to take place. But there'sno reason why it is essential, within the time frame of the forecast,for a lot of adjustment to be in the pipeline. If the world couldstand still why [unintelligible] places we are? That's one of thereasons why we have, on the one hand "more moderate" as we havesometimes said in the past, [unintelligible]. On the other hand, wepresented this alternative scenario for the four quarters.MS. SEGER. I like the idea of alternative scenarios, butlooking at these got me thinking about whether or not our assumptionwas flying in the face of that deal. I have a final question on theestimate for real GNP in the other G-10 countries running below ourforecasted real GNP growth in each year--1988 and 1989. That makes mewonder about our export boom, and whether or not that, in fact, canmaterialize to the extent we are talking about.MR. TRUMAN. Well, that forecast is only slightly differentfrom the one for this year. And the "export boom" itself is only,essentially, the same as we had in 1987.MS. SEGER. Well, at one time, you remember, we werelecturing the other countries to speed their economies so that itwould help us peddle more of our goods overseas.MR. TRUMAN. Apart from Japan, it doesn't seem to havehelped.MS. SEGER. We'd better go to Dale Carnegie. Okay, thankyou.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. [I want to address] the capital expenditureissues that Frank Morris and Bob Black raised in a different way.Looking at the utilization rates on chart 7, some of these rates aregetting pretty high. And I guess the question is: What does historytell us? When do industries, particularly textiles, chemicals, paper,and steel, which are operating at very high levels--and those areaverages for each industry, which suggests that some are operating at2/9-10/88higher levels--begin to move? At some point they're going to begin tolose market share. And my experience is that market share is a verysensitive issue; when they hit that point they begin to spend somemoney. Does history tell us anything about that?MR. PRELL. Well, I don't think history identifies cleartrigger points. Indeed, econometrically, our efforts to identifycapacity utilization effects on investment turn up only modestpositive results on that score. We tried to look beyond anyeconometric evidence, and sift through what stories we could find andconversations with people. I think there is something, as Iindicated, to the story of some hesitancy on the part of somecompanies to expand capacity aggressively. But on the other hand, wecan also uncover stories that, yes, at some plants operating at highlevels of capacity, capacity is being expanded by removingbottlenecks. We are expecting some fairly sizable gains in paper andchemicals.MR. KEEHN(?). Paper is moving?MR. PRELL. Yes. Even a couple of years ago there wereprobably already signs of movement in the paper industry, involvingplans for putting more production [capacity] in service.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I'd like to go back to this question oninventories and distribution of business around the world. Assumingthere's going to be some sort of an inventory cycle of the type youhave forecast, or even greater: Do you have any sense as to whatextent we could take comfort that that's going to result in a greaterslowing in production abroad than domestically--given that we, ofcourse, are importing a lot more than we used to?MR. PRELL. This is a very difficult question. We sortedthrough some of the data and tried to put our finger on how manydollars' worth of imports there are in this inventory overhang. Atleast arithmetically, that appears to be presently in the retailsector; it doesn't amount to a lot of dollars, as best we can assess.It's probably a small proportion and would not be a significantfactor.MR. TRUMAN. To give you an example, I think one number wecame up with was something like $2 billion plus. If we spread thatout over the four quarters, lets say, of 1988, it's well within thenoise factor on the monthly trade numbers. So it may be there; insome sense, it is built into the forecast because we have a lowerlevel of imports in general--that's part of the cost of production.But, in the first half of the year, based on what we know now, it'snot going to show up decisively in the import numbers. And,therefore, we are not going to set off a mini-cycle in the rest of theworld.MR. STERN. Well, on the other side of it, to what extent isour domestic industry going to benefit from that?MR. PRELL. We think the domestic industry, on net, is notgoing to benefit from this. It's a complicated story, but as best we-10-2/9-10/88can tell, it's probably the domestic industry that will experience thegreatest negative effect from the inventory accumulation. If you feltthat there was the beginning of some shipping [unintelligible] intodomestic firms, then the effect is going to be felt more by thedomestic firms, even if the inventories on the shelves have arelatively higher import ingredient. So it's very complicated. And Ithink that, in terms of foreign economic activity, it's probably atmost a second-order factor.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. I was going to ask Ted Truman the samequestion that Governor Seger raised with respect to real growthabroad. I guess Ted has basically answered the question, but if Icould take it just a step further: Since this is basically an export-driven forecast, if countries like Germany and France and Italy,particularly Germany, which has not been very responsive to ourovertures, were to fall short--I don't mean into recession but shortof the growth patterns we expect--is this forecast in serious trouble?I guess I would add that, given the weight of our trade with Japan andCanada, they apparently could carry a lot of it; and I wouldn't expectthem to fall very short. But suppose those other countries did, wouldyou expect the forecast to come--MR. TRUMAN. Well, I wouldn't want to suggest that thedifference between 2 percent growth and zero wouldn't have an effecton our forecast. It would be something on the order of[unintelligible]. If you had 1 percent lower growth throughout thisperiod in G-10 countries, we would say it could produce something like$13 billion, at an annual rate, lower growth of exports in the fourthquarter of 1989. That would be next year against this year. Thatwould have a considerable impact on the forecast. That's relativelysmall, but it would be noticeable in terms of our output, especiallyto the extent that in some sense you have so much external stimulus--one thing that the forecast itself doesn't completely recognize. In asense we have export-led growth here, and some of the income out ofthat is being driven by that growth, and so you have multipliereffects.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I just address that question? It'san interesting question as to whether this is strictly an export-driven growth forecast. Of course, crucial in the numbers is thatfull percentage point decline in the saving rate from the firstquarter to the fourth--if I've got it right--yes, from 5.3 to 4.3percent. That implies basically that consumption levels are higherthan they would otherwise be. And obviously, it's not a netsubtraction from GNP because you have to subtract out the imports thatare a part of it. Nonetheless, if you were just to re-estimate thisforecast with a flat saving rate, a good deal of that recovery in thesecond half would just dissolve. The issue I'd like to address, whichis very crucial to this question, is how comfortable do you feel withthis pattern of your consumption function and the wealth effect onsavings and, thus, how comfortable that we are going back to a 4.3percent saving rate? And is my judgment correct as to what wouldhappen if we don't?MR. PRELL. Let me address that from the way we started thisforecast, rightly or wrongly. If, for example, foreign activity were-11-2/9-10/88to be weaker, and from that we got weaker demand for U.S. production,it would naturally follow that we would tend to have more monetaryexpansion, and initially at least, a movement to lower interest rates.That would produce some offsetting boost to domestic demand. Wehaven't needed to do that, in a sense, to get this kind of growth,because we have the assumptions we do about foreign economic activityand the dollar. As we view the saving rate question, I think pickingout the first quarter probably overstates what we would perceive to bethe movement in consumer behavior. The fourth quarter had a very bigincrease in farm subsidies, and farm proprietors' income was up verysharply. We think that group tends to have a comparatively lowmarginal propensity to consume, so that tended to boost the savingrate. We may also have a somewhat similar phenomenon in the firstquarter, with a big increase in government transfer funds from thesocial security COLA increase. Unless that is spent very rapidly, wewould tend, in the short run, to have a slightly higher saving rate.I think the potential would be a fairly high marginal propensity--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible] COLA on socialsecurity, you have to assume [the marginal propensity to consume] isabout .9.MR. PRELL. Yes, but I think it's a question of just howquickly that occurs. If one looks at the average saving rate for thisyear versus the average for last year--let alone what it was in themiddle couple of quarters last year versus this year--I think there'sa noticeable increase in the saving rate. And it's one that we doview as being generally consistent with the kind of wealth effect thatwe are building in from the stock market. Crudely, the general modelresults would suggest that you might get something on the order of a 1percent higher saving rate for a period of time--well, there would bea gradual adjustment to that. I think we have some reasonable comfortwith the range we're showing--tailing off next year, as it came out inour forecast. We can't really provide any particular explanation forit. The saving rate is to some extent a residual in the forecastingprocess, though it's a check. We don't view it as a reallysignificant movement from what we see in the latter part of this yearto the latter part of next year. But if consumers do retrench, andthey're a very big segment of the economy, then it would take asubstantial offsetting action of some sort to keep the economy on thesame track. So, in that sense, it is really crucial.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, I think I may be on the wrong[speaker's] list. I don't have any questions, but whenever you wantsome comments, I'll be happy to be on that list. So I'll pass on thequestions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any more questions to staff? Well, inthat event, Ed, why don't you begin?MR. BOEHNE. I have several comments on the regional economyas well as the national economy. As far as the regional economy goes,the Mid-Atlantic area is still operating at very high levels ofeconomic activity. But, if one could measure GNP at the regionallevel I think one would see a slowdown in growth. Interestinglyenough, it's more because of supply constraints than it is because of-12-2/9-10/88demand constraints. Labor markets are very tight. I hear comments,particularly in manufacturing, about slower delivery times formaterials. People tell me that the steel industry is not as friendlyas it once was: they don't answer their phone as readily; theshipments from steel companies are slower; and in some cases, theyaren't filling orders completely. So it does seem to me that there'ssome slowing, but not for demand reasons, more for supply reasons. Ido not sense any excessive concern about inventory buildup.But having said that about the current situation, I havenoticed in the last half a month or so, some definite deterioration inthe outlook--again, noticeably in manufacturing. It's hard to saywhy, when they're essentially complaining that they can't get enoughinput. I've tried to probe on this--admittedly not with a trulyrepresentative sample, but with some people--and it's a kind of alogic that says things are so good now they have to get worse. Iguess that's human nature. People tell me that they have seen thiskind of situation before where they can't get parts, and demand isstrong, and price increases seem to come through, and that thatusually is a leading indicator for some downturn. But things seem tobe going very well currently.I suppose on the national economy, I agree with the staffforecast. Actually, I think they've done a really rather commendablejob, given the kind of environment that we are in. If I had anydifferences they'd be a tenth of a point here or there, not worthfocusing on. I would like, however, to get at several larger issuesin the forecast. I think that the staff has made a reasonable casefor reacceleration of economic growth in the second half, and I canbuy that. There clearly are risks on either side. But there wasn't alot of talk about inflation. The emphasis, or the main question now,in current discussions is whether we are going to have a recession orwhether we aren't going to have a recession. It seems to me that onecould make a case, and a reasonable case at that, that we also have athreat of some accelerating inflation. And one could talk about thatin the same context as a recession or no recession.For example, we are getting more price hikes. I hear thiswith more frequency now--again particularly from manufacturers, butalso from retail people--that their suppliers are simply passing onhigher prices with increasing frequency, at least compared to recentyears. We know that we have higher import prices, and that has animpact on domestic competition, particularly in my area. But I thinkit's also true in the national statistics. Labor markets are verytight; and one just gets the sense that we may not be too far fromsome kind of acceleration in wages. I buy off on the inflationforecast, but I think as we go forward it will pay to give someattention to the inflation question and not just overly focus on thisrecession/no recession question.And my final comment is that I think that we are in a periodnow which is different from most of our experience. In the past wetended to worry about whether the economy would grow faster or moreslowly or whether inflation would pick up or not pick up. We have anadditional element in this international adjustment process; and wehave to give, I think, considerable weight in our policy discussionsto that going forward. It just simply has to go forward. I thinkthat this gets me into the discussion for tomorrow, so I'll stop. But-13-2/9-10/88it does seem to me that this is a different element than we have hadin the past.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, it appears to me that the TwelfthDistrict is exhibiting modest but steady growth. Currently availableinformation indicates that retailers experienced a 5 percent growth innominal sales in the final three months of the year versus the sameperiod in 1986. We conducted surveys of retailers about inventorylevels and it was a bit surprising to us that they were generallysatisfied with their inventory levels; and as many indicated that theyhad shortages as indicated that they had excessive levels ofinventories.In the auto area, there's no question that at year-end autodealers had high inventories. But a more recent check at the end ofJanuary indicated that that was pretty well rectified. Based uponwhat we've seen there are few signs, if any, that the Twelfth Districthad weak consumer spending or excessive inventories. However, there'sno question that the numbers for the national level indicatedexcessive inventories in the fourth quarter. I agree with the staffthat we probably are going to see a somewhat unique adjustment to thatinventory picture. I think you can make a strong case that there willbe a more modest inventory correction. One of the things that I thinkis interesting is that real P&E expenditures were weak in Septemberand October and actually picked up in November and December. Andindustrial production actually has been increasing at smaller rates.It would seem to me that this is the beginning of a gradual adjustmentand, therefore, the classic type of adjustment in inventories is notlikely to occur. Also, it looks to me as though manufacturinginventories are in fairly good shape. With respect to autos, Imentioned the District [situation], but it seems to me that at thenational level, auto inventories are not in that bad shape.When we put this all together, our forecast is for growth inthe first half to be about 1 percent or a little less: we have more ofan inventory correction than in the staff's forecast, but not what Iwould consider to be a classic inventory correction. And then, sincewe think that correction is likely to be completed by midyear, ourforecast in the second half is for growth of a little over 3 percent,largely on the strength of that improving net export position. Insum, we have annual fourth-quarter to fourth-quarter growth in GNPwhich is very little different from the staff forecast. But we dohave a pattern of a little more first-half weakness and second-halfstrength.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Mr. Keehn.]MR. KEEHN. Let me just start by saying that our forecast isreally very close to the staff forecast; our contour is terriblyparallel. There really are no differences that are worth talkingabout. Importantly, I certainly view both our forecast and theirs, atleast in the growth perspective, as being a very positive outlook--certainly not negative. I think we are making a shift from aconsumer-driven economy to greater strength on the manufacturing side.And certainly, the improving trade balance is a part of that. Also,from the Midwestern perspective, no one I talk to senses any emergence-14-2/9-10/88 -15-of a recession, as I keep reading about in the Wall Street Journal andthe New York Times.With regard to the District, our growth characteristics arenow very much in parallel with the national numbers. Having lagged solong, we are very much on track right now. Just to hit a couple ofindividual sectors: first, the agricultural part of our District isclearly showing signs of improvement. Land values rose last year, andin the fourth quarter these values stabilized at higher levels; andwe've seen a lot of land transactions--enough purchases taking placeto give confidence in the numbers. Commodity prices are higher, sothe exports are helping that. Farm debt levels are down and, I think,at a much more manageable level. Even the beleaguered equipmentmanufacturers--and this has really been a very tough industry--areshowing signs of light. I'm hearing the first good news out of thatgroup that I've heard for a good many years.We talked about machine tools a little earlier, but one ofour directors operates a very large machine tool company and they areoperating at an 80 percent rate; they are enjoying the best quarterthat they have had since 1982. The import penetration of machinetools, at least from their perspective, is down significantly and theythink the Japanese are on a conscious program to try to curtail theirexports to the United States. In the steel industry, I think therehas been almost a spectacular turnaround, with the industries--certainly in our area--operating at very, very high levels. Deliveryschedules are being lengthened out, and we are hearing increasingcomments about price increases, and this time they're sticking. Thepaper industry--I mentioned that a moment ago as well--is operating atrates over 90 percent, and I am hearing more noise that they'regetting into capital expenditures. On the housing side, we haveseveral directors involved in that and they all say that the Decembernumbers were distorted, probably by weather, and certainly are notreflective of a fundamental change in conditions. The auto industry,which has had high inventories, is going to have lower production thisquarter, but I think to some extent that's a corporate problem. GMand Chrysler are digging out of very high inventories. Ford is not;in fact, their production schedules in the first quarter are going tobe up, not down. So then, as far as growth is concerned, everybody Italked to--though there is a high level of apprehension and concern--certainly does not anticipate, from their own business perspective,anything like a recession.Let me just conclude by picking up on some of Ed Boehne'scomments, because I think they were very appropriate. With regard toinflation, all of the indexes indicate that we are going to continueto experience moderate inflation. But I think some of the storiesdon't match the indicators; I keep hearing more news and more noiseabout price increases that are beginning to stick. In the rawmaterials area, nonferrous metal prices are moving up pretty rapidly.Aluminum and copper--we have talked about those in the past--are much,much higher. Many chemical products that are in short supply[unintelligible]. Also, people that we talked to who buy copper arepaying much more. There are definitely higher prices in theirproduction process.SPEAKERS(?). [Unintelligible--Several speaking at once.]2/9-10/88MR. KEEHN. I mentioned steel a moment ago--one person Italked to said they had an increase in steel prices of 10 percent inJanuary and another 10 percent in February. And some of these pricesare beginning to move through into finished products, as marketconditions permit. Wage rates are certainly not affected. I thinkwage rates are continuing to perform very, very well. While theeconomic outlook seems solid, I must say in regard to the inflationaryoutlook that I think the risks are on the upside rather than on thedownside.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. As I assess the Sixth District, Mr. Chairman,I would have to conclude that conditions are mixed. From our localcontacts we're getting confirmation of things that we are seeingnationally--that is, we have reports of heavy inventory accumulation,particularly at the retail level. There are some indications thatwholesalers of consumer goods are starting to use incentives andpromotions to generate greater retail orders. On the other hand, someof the manufacturers that we talk to report that they're adding toinventories strictly as a precautionary measure, as delivery timeslengthen and capacity pressures intensify in their industries. That'sparticularly true for paper and textiles, and this of course reflectsthe improvement in the tradeable goods area. A lot of thesemanufacturers are also reporting that their uncertainty about thedollar is causing them to hold back on some business fixed investmentor capital expenditures. They got burned at the time that the dollarwas very high and they're reluctant to go into a lot of expensivebusiness fixed investment at the moment. A lot of the manufacturersare also reporting backlogs of up to six to seven weeks in orders. Asfor prices, we get spotty information about them, but in general Iwould say that there's a tendency for price increases to be cominginto the marketplace. In agriculture, we're beginning to have moreand more good news, particularly because of strong demand for cottonand vegetables. Interestingly, some of the areas of the SixthDistrict that have been growing rapidly are now beginning to slow. Inparticular, I find this in the Atlanta metropolitan area where foryears I've been reporting to this group that it has been a go-go, boomkind of situation--partly because of construction--but now othersectors are beginning to see a decline. That's also true in southFlorida, which had been growing quite well, and part of that slowdownis in the services sector.Looking at the national economy, we have virtually nodifference with the staff forecast. I could go through some very,very slight differences in nuance in some components, but basically wehave essentially the same forecast as the Greenbook. On the inflationside, again, we have roughly the same outlook for prices, with perhapsa little more pickup in inflation than the staff toward the end of theyear. I'm a little concerned that import prices might move up alittle more quickly than the forecast would indicate.As I look at the national economy and the forecast, Mr.Chairman, I guess I would have to conclude that the risks are probablyon the downside, but maybe not very strongly. It's possible, as weheard from the chart show, that consumption may not turn around asquickly as we anticipate. Growth abroad may not be as heavy as weexpect and, as I've indicated, some of the regional contacts in my-16-2/9-10/88District are suggesting that capital expenditures may not be quite asstrong as we are forecasting. So, we could have some of theseshortfalls, and I think perhaps that's where the risk is; but by thesame token, I do also agree with the forecast that we are going to seegrowth picking up in the second half of the year.I think in terms of policy, the broader issue that I'd liketo address is my concern about overreacting to the weakness of thefirst half and not taking into sufficient account what might happen inthe second half. In other words, I'd be concerned about extrapolatingthe sluggish activity we hear about right now. I share the view ofothers who have just spoken that weight needs to be given to theinflationary implications for the second half of the year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. As far as the national economy is concerned, Iguess my own view is a little less optimistic than the staff's, mainlybecause I think the first half is going to be a bit weaker. Myintuition is that the inventory correction might be more significantthan they're predicting. I also think we probably have not yet seenthe effects of the stock market decline. I think that's coming. Ialso think we are in the midst of this transition that Ed Boehne hasreferred to--and I don't think that this transition from consumer-ledgrowth to export-led growth needs to go smoothly in each and everyquarter. So, I think we have to be prepared for a certain amount ofbumpiness as we go forward.Let me give you my intuition about it all: in talking topeople around the District, I'd say they're probably, in general,somewhat more optimistic and more positive than I am, although [not]ebullient. But that has been the tenor, I think, for a while now.Part of the reason is that agriculture is clearly doing better. Iwon't go through all the reasons for this, but agriculture is doingbetter and people are starting to observe that that is filtering intomainstreet business in rural communities. Clearly, that will be areversal of what had been going on for a number of prior years. Ithink retail sales, in general out our way, have been better thanexpected. And finally, I just want to report that the major airlinein our District indicates that their cargo business has been quitestrong both to Europe and to the Orient--unusually strong, I'd say.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Tom Melzer.MR. MELZER. In the Eighth District, the fourth-quarter datathat we have are all very strong--quite a bit stronger in any numberof measures, including employment, construction, income and so forth,than the national data. I guess more importantly, for where we arenow in terms of discussing anecdotal information, the sense I get froma major national retailer is that there is some disappointment withtheir sales performance. There is improvement in relation to lastyear, but probably not as much as was being targeted. But I don't getthe sense of an inventory problem in terms of general merchandise.Where I pick that up is more in talking to people in areas likefurniture, consumer durables, appliances. I sense that this is not aproblem yet that has spilled back into the production cycle. Peoplehave not changed production plans based on this, partly because oforder backlogs and the like. But in the major appliances area, one-17-2/9-10/88particular manufacturer is about 9 percent behind where they were ayear ago. By the same token, that same manufacturer indicated thatthey're really seeing a lot of raw material price increases comingthrough, and for the first time since 1984 they're going to try topass that through with a price increase in their products. So, thatreflects some of what we've been hearing elsewhere around the table.Finally in terms of the [national] forecast, I would say ourforecast is quite a bit different in the sense that we are looking formuch slower real growth and modestly higher inflation than the centraltendency. To some extent, I think that's influenced by our assumptionof a monetary policy roughly consistent with last year's. This wasbased on a model using 5 percent money growth. What that shows in1988 is what I would call a reasonable economic performance on alonger-term basis--in the 2 to 2-1/2 percent area real [GNP]--andmaybe 4 to 4-1/2 percent in prices. What our model, andinterpretations of it, would tend to indicate is that trying torespond to the short-term weakness that shows up with very strongmoney growth here would have very little effect in the short run;really a lot of it would pass through into prices looking out intolate 1988 and early 1989. I share the view that has been expressed interms of recognizing the constraint that the external adjustmentprocess puts on policy, and perhaps to some extent, the desirabilityof accepting slower real growth than might have been accepted, say, ayear or two ago.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, it doesn't look as if we have thatmany differences for the year as a whole with the Board staff'sforecast. We are sort of in the same camp--which probably makes youvery nervous, Mike. But I think what's coming out in this discussionis that the shape or the profile is probably more important for policythan taking the year as a whole. Several people have indicated thatthey think the weakness in the first half, as a result of theinventory correction, may be greater than the staff is projecting.Most of my colleagues at Richmond share that feeling. My feeling isthat the staff has it about right. But I think that, in either case,there's a distinct risk that we can have more strength in the latterpart of the year than people in general have been thinking--in view ofthe turnaround in the aggregates, the shape of the decline in interestrates, and also the obvious strength in the industrial sector. So Ithink this is something we ought to bear very closely in mind as weaddress the policy issue because we may have a short-term problem,from the policy standpoint, that is quite different from what we mayhave later in the year. And that will influence what I will say lateron with regard to the various alternatives.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I think the Eleventh District, inmany ways mirrors the national economy, although the plane that we areon is lower than the plane where the national economy is now. We havehad a little improvement, although I think that our uncertaintyremains, and if anything, may be increasing a little. Our employmentgains continue at slightly less than the national rate. Ourconstruction sector remains the weakest sector and that's really nosurprise. Just as an example: for the whole state of Texas in-18-2/9-10/88December, we had permits issued for 100 apartment units, which ispretty much next to nothing.MR. JOHNSON. Did you need them?MR. BOYKIN. However, our manufacturing continues to showsigns of improvement, and that's mostly related to the lower dollar,of course. Construction-related and energy-related manufacturing areexceptions. We think our principal vulnerability is to nationalrecession more so than to the possibility of lower energy prices.Anecdotally, with regard to perceptions and attitudes--which I thinkdo get to be important, certainly at the margin--in terms of howyou're going to [unintelligible] concerned with the condition of ourfinancial institutions, which remains somewhat of a drag. I've hadtwo or three business people visit with me from our small businessadvisory group, and they are concerned because they don't feel thatour financial institutions are in a position to meet their creditneeds. This is a drag in terms of the credit that they need to movealong. I think in many ways our business people are more optimistic,but the timidity of the financial people to make loans is a realconcern. And then the question is: What do we do about it? You talkto the bankers and, of course, they will tell you that there aren'tany good loans out there. There is just not any loan demand.The Southwest plan that we've been reading about--that theFederal Home Loan Bank has to try to do something with savings andloans that are in trouble, a large portion being in Texas--I think isbeing greeted with mixed views. I guess we are coming to the point,or at least I am in my own thinking, [that I'd like to see] any planas long as something would happen as opposed to just talking about it.Now, in talking with savings and loan people and with other investorswho have proposals pending to try to become involved in this, they sayit's extremely difficult to get anything to happen. The fact is thatthey think there seems to be a pretty heavy overlay of politics whenit gets to the Washington level, with respect to getting some of thisrestructuring done. But I think sooner is much better than later.There is a mixed view on whether, if we get a restructuring planworking, it will reduce the effects of the premiums that it costs tofund, which is not only hurting the savings and loans, but certainlyalso the banks. I think hopefully it will help; it certainly will nothurt. Real estate, which I've reported on, we read about. But invisiting with a chairman of savings and loanassociation, his judgment is that there is at least $100 billion ofreally troubled real estate in Texas, if you really face up to it.Now that's one person's [view].MS. SEGER. That's pretty big.MR. BOYKIN. Even in Texas. And it's a lot bigger than itused to be.SPEAKER(?). That's book value, right?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How much of that is directly owned by afinancial institution or de facto owned with those [unintelligible]paper?2/9-10/88MR. BOYKIN. A lot of it. And I don't know whether I saidthis a while ago or not, if I did forgive me--but this same individualtold me that his institution owns 10,000 apartments and they justreassessed their loan portfolio and they're getting ready to ownanother 10,000. You know, that says--SPEAKER(?). But who put those 100 building permits in?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. However, it's alwaysdifficult to follow the Eleventh District. Over the years, we in theTenth District have lagged the national economy, both in personalincome as well as employment growth, generally throughout the cycle.That's true again this time. However, there is some optimism it seemsto me, given [developments in] two or three primary sectors of oureconomy. For example, in agriculture, which has already been spokenof here, land prices are up; commodity prices are up; and exportsappear to be very vigorous and have taken with them the red meatprices, particularly for cattle and hogs. The farmers have recoveredfrom a very low level of activity and they're feeling very good, evenin the middle of the winter with cold weather. I think an importantobservation, which Gary Stern made, is that there are some realpaybacks to the agricultural banks--their outstanding agriculturalcredit--and that is flowing back into main streets of these smallcommunities. Although that sector is not totally reviving, there issome optimism appearing there. On the other hand, in the energysector, apparently because of the lack of any substantive agreementamong OPEC members to control supply, what we saw as an uptick earlyin 1987 in drilling exploration activity has dropped off again in theTenth District. People are simply not willing to commit to financinganother hole--to put down another hole to discover whether there isany more resource there. One of the bright spots, as mentionedearlier, is in the aircraft orders that have been booked, whichimpacted our District rather significantly through Boeing, Beech, andother aircraft manufacturers. It has given some real hope for anuptick in that sector. Commercial construction is winding down in ourDistrict. It should have wound down in Denver, Oklahoma City, andTulsa two years ago, and as a result, there are high vacancy ratesthere. But by and large it's being pretty well managed.On the national level, as far as the forecast is concerned, Ihave no disagreement with the Greenbook. My staff would be a bit morepessimistic than I personally, but the Board staff's forecast is righton, as far as I'm concerned. And I'd like to echo those comments thathave already been made that we don't become overzealous in the firsthalf of the year, or at least the first quarter, in working off theinventories, if indeed that be the case--jockeying monetary policyaround to try to accommodate an unforeseen event. I'll talk a littlemore about that tomorrow.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I guess my main difference with the staffforecast involves the inventory situation. Because I am morepessimistic about whether or not the current levels are consideredexcessive or right on, that makes me have a different point of viewabout what's going to happen to them. I think that there's going to-20-2/9-10/88be a lot more worked off in the first quarter, and also some in thesecond quarter, so I have a significantly weaker first half. In fact,my personal view is that we are going to have a down quarter in thispresent period. Therefore, because I have a lot slower first half, Ialso have been the proud possessor of the low end of the range [of themembers' forecasts] for the whole year, but this isn't my onlydifference. I also think that housing is going to be somewhat weakerin the first half. Also some kinds of construction such as officebuildings and shopping centers, those sorts of things, I think aregoing to be weaker than maybe is implied by the forecast. I thinkthat we have to be paying careful attention to this. Whether or notwe will see what's coming in time to adjust, I think, is certainly anopen question.In connection with an earlier comment about why thesebusinesses aren't expanding their capacity, I had two interestingconversations this week. One was with the chairman of the board of alarge chemical company and one was with the chairman of the board of alarge paper company down In each case, the mainpoint they made about lack of willingness to commit to a major newproject is that there is all this uncertainty about what's going tohappen about public policy. They think people down here operate likewhirling dervishes--you know, they can't keep policy stabilized forvery long. It's impossible for them to plan. They have questionsabout what's going to happen to fiscal policy. You get a cut for acouple of years; then you get tax reform--they're still trying tofigure out what it really means. Based on how they read the deficitnumbers, they are assuming that we will probably get a tax hike; andbecause corporate America is not very popular, they think they willget a big part of that bill passed on to them. It's just very, verydifficult for them to plan. They also have concerns about whereinterest rates are going. They're not talking about whether they'retoo high or too low, but just about the volatility; and it makes ittough for them to do the arithmetic.And finally, in looking at the foreign exchange markets, hereagain the volatility makes life tough for them. They are not assumingthat the dollar is going to stay where it is over the next few years.A number of them were really burned in the late '70s and the early'80s, when they had expanded dramatically based on assumptions ofstrong future growth. And then just as the plants were coming onstream, the growth evaporated. So they were badly injured and, atleast according to my sources, they don't want to get into thatpredicament again. That doesn't suggest that they're not doingcertain kinds of capital spending, because they are; it's much moretargeted to specific kinds of products and toward specific productionproblems, with a big emphasis on getting productivity improvements,rather than--I think the term is [unintelligible] expansion. So, forwhat it's worth, I thought I would pass that along. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Just very briefly, the Fourth District is verysimilar to what the reports were with respect to Philadelphia andChicago. We are strong in terms of steel and chemicals and capitalgoods. And, despite a certain amount of probing around fordifficulties there, we're having a lot of trouble finding any. Toanswer Ed's question about why people are so nervous, even though-21-2/9-10/88things are so good: it's probably because we're always calling them upasking them what's wrong. There's a problem every week, and theythink I know something.SPEAKER(?). You can talk to [unintelligible].SPEAKER(?). You can create a recession.MR. HOSKINS. Yes, all by myself! The only exception,really, is in the state of Ohio, where we had a full percentage pointrise in the unemployment rate in the last couple of months. And, fromwhat we can tell, that's entirely associated with autos and thebuildup there. As for the financial forecast, I wouldn't quibble withthe staff's projection.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, our forecast is higher than thestaff forecast in both real GNP and inflation, primarily because wethink that capital spending is going to be higher this year thanthey're projecting. I think we have a data system in the UnitedStates that is pretty oriented toward the idea that the United Statesis an island--here we sit not knowing how much of this increase ininventories is imported goods and how much is domestic. Theconclusion [with respect to one's forecast] obviously is verydifferent. But we don't know.SPEAKER(?). I think Mike Prell knows but he won't tell us.MR. MORRIS. There's also this issue that was stressedearlier--that we don't know how much of the durable goods orders arefrom domestic origins and how much from foreign. It seems to me thatwe, as an institution that works on these data--perhaps you [Mr.Chairman] might use your good offices to try to see if we could expandthis kind of differentiation in the data, because I think we are goingto need it in the future.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know, we used to have export orders.Ted, didn't we have export orders?MR. TRUMAN. Yes. The problem, as with many of these series,was that the series got to be so bad and unrelated to anything thatyou thought they were predicting. There was a big powwow--in theearly '80s, I think--to figure out what to do with them. The adviceof the staff at the time was either improve them or throw them out.SPEAKER(?). They did the latter?MR. TRUMAN. [Yes.]MR. MORRIS. But I think that was at a time when it wasn'treally as important to us to have these data as it is now. TheGermans and Europeans in general seem to be able to generate numberslike this.MR. TRUMAN. It was one of those series that just did nothave enough---22-2/9-10/88MR. MORRIS. I was kind of [unintelligible] by that as aproposition. The occupancy rate of the New Hampshire hotels is 100percent this week because all of the national press and many politicalpeople have invaded the state. The vacancy rate will start to grownext week and they will again be thinking about whether we are goingto get enough snow to bring the skiers up to New Hampshire. But forthe moment it's booming and you couldn't get a hotel room in NewHampshire. As I've indicated before, we have had a downtrend inmanufacturing employment in New England since December 1984,reflecting a mini-recession in our computer industry. That downtrendhas ended. October-November show the first increases in manufacturingemployment in New England in our computer industry since the end of'84. Given that our unemployment rate is 3 percent, I think the onlyquestion is: Where are they going to find the labor to generate afurther increase in employment? I had thought for a while thatperhaps a slowdown in defense contracting might spin off some skilledlabor that the high-tech industry could use; but I've been disabusedof this notion by our defense industry people who point out thatwhat's happening in the Pentagon now is that they're focusing onslowing down the increase in the number of what they call, inPentagonese, platforms--ships, aircraft, and so on--and focusing onincreasing the electronic capabilities of existing platforms. We'renot much on platforms except for nuclear submarines, which are made inConnecticut. Our primary defense product is defense electronics andthe outlook for that has not been impacted at all by the slowdown inreal defense spending in general. In our area we are still having anoffice building boom. [I saw] a big sign saying 75 percent committed.I inquired as to whether that could possibly be true and I was told itreally is.SPEAKER(?). Boykin needs to know about that.MR. BLACK. [Unintelligible] now 75 percent of the developersare committed.MR. MORRIS. My concern is: When is Boston going to turn intoa Dallas or a Houston? It has to happen sometime, but it appears thatit's still some time off.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As far as the forecast goes, ourforecast again is virtually identical with the staff forecast, sothere's nothing to talk about there. On the anecdotal side, thecommentary that we hear--whether it's from people on our smallbusiness advisory council or on our board of directors or people inbetween--is generally, with some exceptions, along the lines of thekind of thing Ed Boehne was talking about before. But even at thislast meeting of the small business group, I guess it was two weeksago, I was amazed. These guys were talking about their steelshipments being on quotas in upstate New York. And that's--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It would have to be. They shut down thewhole industry.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, that's true. I'll come backto that in a minute. But again, the broad thrust is in the directionof the kind of comments that Ed Boehne referred to earlier. That has-23-2/9-10/88influenced my own thinking, at least at the margin, in the directionof not being overly preoccupied about the prospect of a weak firstquarter or a weak first half. I should add that, on I guess it wasThursday or Friday, I took a poll of a couple dozen economists in theBank, and I asked them whether any of them foresaw a recession. Andevery one of them said no; and that's when I got worried.MS. SEGER. Did they call the last one?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. They haven't been around longenough!MS. SEGER. [Unintelligible].VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That was a tongue-in-cheek remark,Martha. I even said that myself: "That's when I got worried." Butwhat I'm really worried about is not the first quarter or first half.What I'm worried about, as I've said before, is the intermediate-termproblem we have in terms of winding down the external deficits, withall that that implies, without ending up with a serious inflationaryproblem on our hands. I think all the risks in the intermediate termare on the side of more inflation, not less. And I can't find a wayto approximate a transition out of those external deficits that doesnot leave me with that conviction--that the risks over theintermediate term are on the side of more, rather than less,inflation. To complicate the problem, from where we stand right now,in order to achieve that transition, under the very best ofcircumstances we have the equivalent of $4 to $5 billion of unfundedexternal liabilities in the form of the cumulative changes in thecurrent account deficit that are going to occur, almost without adoubt. So, that's where my concerns are. I think the risks of arecession in the near term are there; and we have to guard prudentlyagainst that. But I think we have to keep our eye on the longer-termproblem and the longer-term adjustment, because I don't know of anysurer way to end up with a really nasty recession than to make themistake on the side of ending up with more inflation and not less.So, I'm powerfully influenced by those longer-term considerations.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Longer-term, you're talking 9 to 18months?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm talking even longer than that--perhaps a period of as much as two or three years.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. I largely agree with the staff forecast for thefirst half of 1988, but I do have a couple of doubts on the bounce-back, and the basis for the bounce-back, in the second half. Just toreview a few of those things: the government [sector forecast] for theyear as a whole is a -1.3; consumption is slow; residential structuresare flat; business investment is 1 to 1-1/2 percent; and exportgrowth--which is the driving engine of the economy at the presenttime--is slowing significantly. For instance, if you compare: therewas 23.8 percent growth in the third quarter of 1987 and only 12.8percent growth is forecasted for the third quarter of 1988 which,after all, is the opening quarter for that second half bounce-back.So, I really don't think that the forces that are going to generate-24-2/9-10/88that bounce-back in the second half will be in place. First of all,as the Chairman mentioned already, much of the forecast is based on adrop in the saving rate--something that we really don't want to see,for the reasons that Jerry Corrigan just mentioned. Second, once thatfirst-quarter or first-half slowdown hits, I think there will be a lotof businessmen who will be revising their own forecasts, and thentheir investment decisions, for the second half. Third, the leadingindicators, although they're not all that reliable, have been solidlydown for the last three months. And, finally, nobody has mentioned--Martha Seger was skirting around the issue, I think--politicaluncertainties. Let me do it anyhow. As we get close to the election,the political uncertainties and the new programs that will bediscussed--on the tax side, on the federal government spending side,and in general--will also not be exactly forces that will lead torejuvenation of investment spending before the election. So, planswill get postponed; that's something that we have experienced in[election] years before. Overall for the second half, I would see aweaker economy than the staff sees, and most of the risks there willbe on the downside. I'll leave it at that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. The staff forecast, it seems to me, is in theballpark, although I have very little confidence in our ability to seequarter-by-quarter. That is, I would tend to look at what happens forthe year, and appraise that. The staff probably does better than Iwould in regard to calling these quarter-by-quarter changes; anytime Itry I can't get it right. I think there are some extremecircumstances that make forecasting much more difficult, and some ofthem have been mentioned. We have had sectors of the economy in andout of recession; now we have a dramatic switch in the net exportsarea at the same time that, clearly, consumer spending is altering itspath--the data we have in regard to the use of cash rather thanplastic tend to indicate a different kind of behavior. It seems to methat the Chairman's point on the saving rate--that a 1 percentdifference there is a large number and makes a lot of difference--should be emphasized. I think there are many, many specialdifficulties.I would point out that I did have a chance to go to an area Ithought would have the most dismal [economic conditions] in the UnitedStates, so I decided, with Bob Forrestal's permission, to visit thebranch at New Orleans. I was really quite surprised, Frank, to hearthe number of stories about firms that are headquartered in yourregion that are locating plants in that region. And I guess that'swhat we would come to expect, given the labor market conditions thereversus labor market conditions in your area. So, I think it's veryhard to know how the expansion areas match out; I think we have to becareful to watch it on a week-by-week basis. But I don't think thatwe should let ourselves get scared by those who use some rules ofthumb to tell us about when recessions occur.I think I'll mention commodity prices so that I don't have myreputation damaged in that regard. The precious metals make up a partof what we call reflective indices on commodity prices--that is, theytend to reflect more quickly changing scarcities in money. Andthere's no question that we had some indication there that would seemto me to call for less extreme slow growth in the monetary aggregates'-25-2/9-10/88growth path. So it seems to me that it would be more appropriate forus to target growth above the 3.5 percent or 4 percent range of M2last year. But I would point out to you that even though industrialmetals seem to have gone through their cycle, we do have some evidenceof upward price movements in the nonoil portions of our experimentalindex, which is designed to measure the flow-through effects. Thatincudes a lot of food and fiber, and my concern is that wage ratesseem to be more sensitive to discretionary food and fiber prices thanthey probably are to many other prices. I'm becoming worried that wehave been in a period of exchange rate adjustment, with some importprice increases, for long enough that it's going to be very difficultfor us to go much longer without having a permanently higher inflationrate--one that's just not acceptable. It seems to me that it isimportant for us to be on guard in that regard.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Thank you, sir. I share with many others theview that the staff forecast is a very good one. Not only is theforecast good, but I think it's a very attractive path for theeconomy. I like it a lot. I'd like to just freeze dry it and put iton a shelf and consider it a record. I hope it will happen very closeto that way. But, of course, what we are talking about is where therisks lie in [potential] deviations from the forecast, and I'm not asconfident as some seem to be that they're on the high side. I'm alittle more concerned about the low side. I had a list here I wasgoing to run that was very similar to Governor Heller's and I won'trepeat all of that. I do think that we should keep in mind that thefactors that are going to give us a stronger second half, if we getit, depend to a very substantial degree on interest rates at least aslow as we have and probably lower. And, if we don't get it, I'm notsure whether some of the other indicators that we see that could takeus toward weakness won't gather strength. I have concern about theweakness, the extended weakness, of the aggregates. I think I waspretty comfortable, and maybe complacent about it, for a long time inview of the fact that they had run high in 1985 and 1986 and it seemedto me to be a reasonable catch-up period. But now I'm beginning toget more concerned about it, particularly the weakness we had at thetail end of 1987. It came back, as everyone knows, in January. Now,I may be premature on this, but I'm a little concerned that they'rebeginning to fall back again, and I would worry if that started tohappen.Another key thing in keeping the economy going reasonablywell and achieving this transition that we need to achieve is to keepthis export growth going. I think that's going to be harder to do aswe go along. We may have gotten through the easier part of it.Unless I'm mistaken, it seems to me that this path would take us towhat looks like a surplus, ex-oil, by the end of the forecastingperiod in 1989. Ted, you may want to correct me on that. At anyrate, we're going to be either in surplus, ex-oil, or close to it; andI'm not sure that the rest of the world is going to let us get therewithout some disruption along the way. It's a little harder for me tosee a lower dollar and that strong a real trade pattern. I'm afraidthat something's going to have to give there, and I'm not exactly surewhat it's going to be. But my concern is that it would be on the sideof weakening the economy somewhat. Given the straws in the wind andthe difficulty of achieving that level of continued export growth over-26-2/9-10/88many more quarters out in the future, I fear that the risks may indeedbe somewhat more on the weak side rather than on the strong side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I've been sitting here, choosing to be lastbecause I feel sort of jet lagged. I just got back--well, Jerry didtoo, and he was very articulate, so--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's because I got the earlierflight.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, you did get a little earlier flight. So,I'm not sure I can really get into some of the detail. I don't thinkI need to, because I think all sides of the issue have been discussed.I think the forecast is a perfectly plausible scenario, and I thinkit's well done and carefully detailed. But, as with any forecast, itsproblem is that it's just a forecast and who knows what's going tohappen six months to a year out. My general feeling is that thefundamentals are basically good. You don't see the kind of forces atwork right now, it seems to me, that would lead to the kind of classicinventory correction that some people get hysterical about. I agreewith Bob Parry that you just don't see the kind of price pressures outof whack at this stage that would lead to some serious continuingdeterioration. But at the same time, I think you also have to look atthe evidence that's before you and get the best reading you can fromit. After listening to all this, what I worry about a little I guess,is that we're going to work ourselves into some sort of macho chestbeating--that we've got to hang tough through this--and ignore some ofthe conditions that seem to be developing. I think a lot of what weare seeing has to do with the psychology that develops. I agree withwhat Bob Heller says, that you may get what looks like a temporaryinventory correction underway, but if a very negative psychologybuilds on top of that it can continue, and who knows what will happen.I just don't want us to be asleep at the switch. Our short-termfunction is to try and make sure that we keep things on track. Iagree with what Jerry said--there has to be an external adjustment toget that [outcome] and we can't let aggregate demand surge on us andwaylay the trend that is developing now. But at the same time, wecan't afford a plunge in real spending. I think our whole scenariohangs very fragilely on the saving rate/consumption issue and how realincome develops. So there is a lot of risk to this scenario. If weare not asleep at the switch, I think chances are we will get on theother side of this inventory situation, and the fundamentals willremain good, and we can keep things going at a modest rate withoutinflationary pressures. I agree with what Jerry said--that the long-run view has to be oriented towards keeping our eye on the inflationsituation. I think in the long run that's always the case, especiallywhen the expansion is this mature. I don't want us to fall asleephere.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're sitting here with jet lag. Thatwasn't too bad. If I were actually doing the forecast in greatdetail, I'd come out very close to where the staff comes out. Thetrouble I have with it is that the structure of the economy at thisstage is really quite different from anything I've ever seen. We areseeing an extraordinary imbalance--where we're getting terrific exportnumbers, tremendous pressures coming in the industrial area, and a2/9-10/88sort of mediocre, but not particularly negative, retail market. Withrespect to the inventory data, although I'm not especially concerned,I have a suspicion that there are more imports in those numbers thanany of us suspect. In any event, it's basically in the retail areawhere, in effect, you're looking at the physical volumes; it should bemarked down to factory values; you start doing that and the aggregatephysical relationships don't look all that bad.The real problem with the forecast is--I never recall aforecast where you fine tune from 4 percent down to 1 percent, thenback to 3 percent; it happens that way. Although I could say that thestaff forecast is, in a sense, the most likely scenario, I think thebig surprise is likely to be that the first half will not be as weakas we suspect. And if, in fact, that demand is out there in thesecond half, it also will move up. It will move up becauseinventories will accumulate while we'll find the capital goods marketsbehaving. I just am terribly skeptical of a forecast that has a dipand then turns back up, when we can barely [predict] the directionwhen we are heading in a straight line. So I must say that I'muncomfortable with the outlook, yet there's just no question thatthere is nothing in the order books that appears weak. I have neverseen a situation such as this in which the order books are asunequivocally solid as they are at this stage. Yet, the copper pricedecline strikes me as an indication that there is something weakeningthere; the aluminum price rises have sort of stalled; steel scrapprices are looking a little shabby in a certain sense. It's a funnyoutlook and I just can't for the life of me get a firm hold or acomfortable feeling. So, I come out [with a view] that in manyrespects sort of averages those of the Vice Chairman of the Board andthe Vice Chairman of this Committee. I guess that's where I come out,although I'm not sure you're averageable, gentlemen.It's getting a little late and I think we have come to anormal breaking point. Are there any other things of relevance,looking at my agenda, prior to getting to the aggregates side [of thediscussion]? If not, let's adjourn until early in the morning.[Meeting recessed]-28-2/9-10/88February 10, 1988--Morning SessionMR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, Mr. Kohn. Any questions ofMr. Kohn?MR. JOHNSON. Have you actually tried to project theaggregates off of the Greenbook forecast--just to see what it lookslike with respect to those ranges?MR. KOHN. That's exactly what we did; that's what our 6percent--MR. JOHNSON. Okay, that's where those ranges come from.MR. KOHN. To be very up front about this, what we do is takethe Greenbook forecast and the interest rates implied and see whatmoney growth is implied by that. Then there's an iterative process ofcoming together with the money [growth] and the Greenbook forecast.But, in theory, it's all consistent. There's an effort to make itconsistent.MR. JOHNSON. Looking at the forecast, you sort of have a U-shape in interest rates and you'd think you'd get almost a mirrorimage in the aggregates.MR. KOHN. Well, the problem--MR. JOHNSON. And so it almost looks like a nonlinear targetwe have to accommodate that--MR. KOHN. No one's talking about targeting aggregates, Ithink--quarter-by-quarter, in any case.MR. JOHNSON. True.MR. KOHN. And we do have a situation in which we see moneygrowth relatively strong and velocity falling in the first part of theyear because of the decline in rates. It's not so much in the firsthalf; nearly all of the decline is behind us relative to our forecast.But given the lags in this process, what's left over from October 20thon, in terms of interest rates, would affect M2 growth, particularlyover the first half of 1988. And then most of the increase ininterest rates we have forecast for the second half of 1988 would havesome impact on M2 in the second half of 1988, though it's mostlycrystallized with the impact into 1989. But the whole movement ofopportunity costs isn't very large, given these lags over, say, thesecond half of 1987 to the second half of 1988 and we have to--MR. JOHNSON. So the ranges would accommodate these?MR. KOHN. Absolutely; yes.MR. PARRY. '89 slows down, correct?MR. KOHN. That's right.-29-2/9-10/88MR. PARRY. What was the number for M2?MR. KOHN. We assumed 5 percent M2 growth for '89.MR. PARRY. Fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter?MR. BLACK. Don, what did you say for M1 for '88?MR. KOHN. That would be about 5 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Are you ready to have some commentsnow?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let's first make sure thequestions are behind us.MS. SEGER. I just have one.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Go ahead.MS. SEGER. In regard to the width of the band, if there isall this uncertainty, the honest way to present that--if I rememberfrom Stat 101--is to have the band of uncertainty identified. And ifwe really think we cannot target within these 3 percentage pointranges, I think it would be more honest to bump the range out a pointthan to be below the bottom or exceed the top, because then you couldexplain it as indicative of the uncertainty rather than some sort ofpolicy message.MR. KOHN. I guess the question the Committee would have toanswer is whether the uncertainty is greater now than it has been overthe last 12 or 13 years that ranges have been given. They've beenthree points almost uniformly throughout that period. And I wasarguing that with regard to the interest sensitivity, one source ofuncertainty is that we don't know what's going to happen with the realeconomy, how interest rates are going to move, and then what moneygrowth is consistent with what you want to happen. From thatperspective, I think there probably is a little more uncertainty nowthan there was, say, in the '70s or the early '80s. Or perhaps we nowrealize the degree of uncertainty. Our experiments suggest that theinterest elasticity of M2 is a little higher now than it was 5, 6, 7years ago.MS. SEGER. Well, starting with 1984, it seems to me thatpeople either have been suffering from an undershoot--or rather, twoyears of overshoot followed by last year's undershoot. Now, that'snot going back to the '70s; but certainly, given recent history, itoccurs to me that maybe you would get less trouble with the financialmarket participants if we put this up front.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody else have questions?MR. PARRY. Yes, one more. Part of the answer to GovernorJohnson's question is the fact that you also have a pattern in incomeas well; and since they have opposite signs, in effect, it takes out alittle of the pattern---30-2/9-10/88MR. JOHNSON. You're right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What I'd like to do, if it's feasible,is see if we can get a judgment before your general commentary onwhether anybody feels strongly that we should reinstitute officialtargets for M1 or M1A or anything at this particular stage. If thereare no strong feelings about it, then I would say that you ought toencompass whatever remarks you want to make in a generic commentary.What I hear is that there is no strong change in view and I willassume that to be the case at this stage, unless it gets altered.Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As I look at the 1988 policyhorizon, it seems to me that the most important thing is to do all wecan to try to satisfy ourselves that the economy is on the righttrajectory that will work in the direction of resolving some of thoselonger-term problems of an external nature that I spoke of yesterday.When I look at the staff's forecast or the central tendency of theFOMC Committee members' forecasts, it seems to me that both have thevirtue of being on the right trajectory, in the broader sense of theword trajectory. And in that sense, I don't have great difficulty atall with an outcome that would resemble either the central tendency orthe staff forecast.But as Don Kohn said, we ought to think then about the risksto that kind of an outcome. On the downside, there are two or threethings that pop into my mind. One is the saving rate that was talkedabout yesterday. In that area, again, consistent with this trajectoryargument, I think that we should not resist--indeed, we shouldwelcome--a mild and modest updrift in the saving rate. That is one ofthe things that has to happen as a part of this larger adjustmentprocess. On the other hand, clearly, if the saving rate were to takea leap up, that, in turn, would imply a pattern of consumptionspending that could well be associated with a recession. But I askmyself what could produce a leap in the saving rate rather than adrift. And the generic answer I get is something that shakesconfidence. And of the things that enter my mind that can shakeconfidence, the one that still rings loudly is the financial sector--not necessarily the stock market in the first instance but some kindof further disruption on the financial side. Clearly, there is a riskthere.Another risk is that the trade deficit may not come down. Wecould be confronting that situation as early as Friday if we get a badtrade number in these next series of numbers. Obviously, in thatcase, the likely chain of events is the dollar, interest rates, andthen stock prices. You've got the same kind of Catch-22. The irony,of course, is that if the trade deficit is going to come down it'sgoing to have to come down in the context in which we have at leastslower-than-typical rates of increase in consumer spending. So, thereis a clear risk there.There's another kind of financial risk, and that is some kindof a shock--whether its origins are in Latin America or the unexpecteddemise of a major financial house or something of that nature. Sothere clearly are risks. And the common denominator of them, at leastas I think about it, is not that I see great potential structuralweaknesses in spending, but these risks one way or another end up on-31-2/9-10/88the financial side. The initial event might vary from one case toanother but somehow you always end up there.But I also see risks, and I may be an outlier on this, on theother side altogether--risks that the economy could be stronger thanthe central tendency or the staff forecast. It doesn't take much interms of stronger, and not a lot stronger, consumer spending, andcertainly not much in terms of stronger business fixed investmentspending, to alter that outlook on the other side. In that context, Ibelieve that there is virtually no margin on the upside, because weare that close, in my judgment, to a situation in which theinflationary implications of all of that could be very distasteful,very quickly.Now in some sense, the policy dilemma that is most acute tome is in the immediate context. When I try to balance those risks, Icome to the conclusion, Mr. Chairman, that in the very near term--andby that I mean next week, I suppose--that the balance of the risks isprobably on the downside. But out over the year as a whole, I thinkthey're on the upside. And that makes for a very difficult set ofpolicy choices. It certainly means that, while we have to besensitive to those risks, we can't overreact either way. Indeed, Ithink from a financial market point of view, if we were to act in away that led the markets to conclude that we were on vacation, we'dhave the various financial disruptions that we are trying to avoid inthe first place. Where that brings me, in terms of policy for 1988,is to a comment that Governor Kelley made at the end of the discussionyesterday. I think he said he'd like to freeze dry, or something tothat effect, the staff forecast--a forecast that, in round numbers,implies something like 6 percent growth in nominal GNP--and I agreewith that. In that context, my preference on the aggregates isalternative III. I have a small preference, very small, for amonitoring range for M1. But the key thing about alternative III isthat the midpoint is 6 percent on M2 and M3. That, in turn, implies 0velocity growth for the year as a whole. It seems to me that from thepoint of view of your testimony, and the body english that gets put onpolicy for the year as a whole, that by saying we are assuming 0velocity, in effect, that casts the right kinds of vibes and it alsoleaves the Committee with some flexibility over the year. I thinkthat gives us some latitude to respond to any velocity other than 0.But again, I think it also has the added cosmetic value of being goodgrist for the testimony. So, I'm for alternative III.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Well, I do think that monetary growth targetsare important, and I would like to have them even if the law didn'trequire them. There are conditions that exist or occur during a yearthat are unforeseen that may warrant from time to time acceptinggrowth outside the target ranges. But I think the advantage oftargets is that they do, in a sense, hold us accountable for thosedeviations--that is, whenever we have faster growth than the targets,if it turns out to be a policy mistake, it seems to me we have to bearthat responsibility. And there isn't any question that we aresomewhat on the line right now because M2 has grown outside the targetranges. Our year-over-year growth rate bottomed out for M2 at 3percent--that is before the revisions. The numbers showed 3 percentin the week of January 11th; and 3 percent is quite a way below the 5-32-2/9-10/88percent. It seems to me that it is important, as we go through thisperiod of adjustment of exchange rates--which we know brings pressureon import prices--to make it clear to everyone that our long-runobjective is to get to price level stability. We know what weexperienced with the rebound in oil prices; there is no question thatwe couldn't keep the rate of inflation at a long-run desired levelwhile going through that adjustment. But it seems to me that weshould have these target ranges, and the Chairman's testimonyconcerning them should make clear our long-run objective of pricestability. It seems to me that we ought not to have M2 growth as lowthis second year as we did the first year. In some ways I think tomiss two years in a row, or to plan to miss two years in a row, on thedownside becomes somewhat unacceptable. That is, we have had anexperience of a year in which certain commodity price pressures andexchange rate pressures and conditions in financial markets caused usto believe on a week-to-week basis that monetary policy needed not tobe eased in order to achieve those growth rate targets. But I thinknow we ought to say to ourselves in the second year: What bottom onthe target range can we go with, where we really do mean that weexpect to ease if we go below it? And that bottom of 5 percent,frankly, is too high for me to feel comfortable pledging that I wouldwant to ease if we were at 4-1/2--even though financial markets mightbe somewhat under an adjustment problem, exchange markets might have aproblem, and inflationary fears might be there. I guess I don't wantto put myself in that position of pledging myself to ease under thatcondition. So, I would prefer alternative III. Frankly, as many ofmy colleagues know, I've been flirting somewhat with even 4 to 7percent as the proper range. But I do believe that there areuncertain conditions on the other side and it might be helpful to havea somewhat higher boundary. So I would join the Vice Chairman inbeing willing to go with alternative III.Now, I did do some playing around with the year-endadjustment problem. From time-to-time I have been concerned thatseasonal adjustments at year-end give us a last-quarter base thatseems to be somewhat out of kilter. And I think as a long-run policyI would be happier basing on the last 6 months of the year andbeginning our cone on October 1 rather than basing on the fourthquarter and beginning the cone on November 15th. That would have thesubtle tendency, of course, to cause the cone to be wider, and byyear's end that extra width would be about $11 billion. But it wouldstill give us the narrower 3 percentage point range that we havetalked about. I've kind of flirted with [the view that] maybe 4 to 8percent ought to be right, because that would give us a 6 percentmidpoint; but anything that gives us some move in that direction Icould go with. So, I guess I'll summarize by saying alternative III.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. I could go along with alternative III as well,but the problem that I really have is with the path, as GovernorAngell already started to address. First of all, I think it is veryclear that last year, as Governor Angell pointed out, we consistentlyundershot our short-term targets. We undershot the various targetsthat we established by 1 percent for the lowest undershoot and 3.9percent for the maximum undershoot. I think it's very important thatwe don't do that again this year, because we are getting in the dangerzone on the downside. So, I hope that we draw the bottom half of that-33-2/9-10/88target cone--the lower band--with a very thick pencil and with theintention not to go through it on the bottom side.As far as the base is concerned, I think we again had veryspecial factors at the end of this year, which were very differentfrom the special factors that we had at the end of last year. I thinkthe reasons detailed in the Bluebook, in exhaustive detail, are verycompelling indeed. So I have a lot of sympathy for what GovernorAngell is saying about changing the base period around somewhat. Inparticular, if you look at the chart for M2, for instance, you seethat for the proposed parallel bands for 1988 the upper limits are anexact continuation of the bottom part of last year. So we're sayingthat we are lowering ourselves permanently down for one reason only--and that's the accident that January 1st happens. If we had two-yeartargets, we would now be in a position where we would say, "Well, wehave an awful lot of catching up to do." Or if the [target] year hadbegun in midyear, we would have started out, let's say, in June--that's the time where the point of my argument is better--then againwe would be at the bottom end of the cone and we would probably bearguing that we should be moving more towards the middle of the cone.To ratify permanently the very temporary factors that were in effectat the end of last year, I think, would be a mistake. And I wouldsupport the new target ranges only with the proviso of rebasing.On how to rebase, I think there are two options open to us.One would be to go to the bottom end of last year's target cone--that's roughly where the solid line and the dashed line intersect onthe graph--and start this year's target cone there. So, we would beworking with an area of some overlap instead of zero overlap betweenlast year and this year. The other alternative--one that may be acompromise to what Governor Angell is suggesting--is to base towardsthe second half of 1987, taking a midpoint there. Eyeballing it, youcan see that you are getting a bit of an overlap at least, instead ofvirtually zero overlap. So, with a rebasing proposal along one or theother line, I'd be happy to go along.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, let me say at the outset that Ithink that our course for policy at the moment--of using discretionarypolicy rather than a slavish adherence to any of the aggregates or toany other intermediate target--is quite appropriate. And I don'tparticularly worry greatly if we miss those targets in any given yearif the circumstance requiring that miss is evident to us. On theother hand, we are required by the law, as we all know, to set thesetargets. And I think we need to set them as realistically as possibleso as to avoid, if we can, any shortfall or overshoot in M2 or M3.I said yesterday that I thought that the risks to the economywere on the downside, and I do believe that. But I think that it's avery, very delicate balance. As has been suggested earlier, I thinkthere are also risks on the upside in the economy. I'm prepared tobelieve my own staff's forecast, which places nominal GNP at 5-1/2percent. That suggests to me that the midpoint for the range issomewhat lower than the 5 to 8 percent that we set in July, and even alittle lower than that suggested by the Bluebook in alternative III.So, I would like to propose a wider band--recognizing that this is nottraditional and perhaps doesn't have any precedent. But I would think-34-2/9-10/88that a range of 4 to 8 percent would be appropriate, given theinterest rate elasticity of M2. And I think this kind of a rangewould give us the flexibility to adjust our policy as the year goesalong and we can measure where those risks really lie. At the moment,it seems to me that we hardly have any room with the 5 to 8 percentfor any shortfall in M2 growth. The reason that I would not drop thewhole range is that I think by doing that, people would tend to thinkthat this is a tightening of policy. While we have gotten away fromthe monetary aggregates to some extent, I think that in the climatethis year perhaps more attention is going to be paid to where we setM2 and M3. And I think your testimony is going to take on even moreimportance than it usually does. I wouldn't like to give animplication of tightening, and by keeping 8 percent at the top, Ithink we might avoid or at least mitigate some of that suggestion oftightening. Now, 4-1/2 to 7 percent would be acceptable to me, but mypreference would be 4 to 8 percent, recognizing some of the risks ofthat wider range that Don Kohn has already indicated.I don't know if you want to talk about M3, but I would liketo keep the range at 5 to 8 percent because I think this, too, woulddamp any implication that we are tightening. Or, if you adopted 4 to8 percent for M2 and 5 to 8 percent for M3, the implication oftightening based on the lower M2 range would be damped if you kept M3at 5 to 8 percent. So, in summary, targeting on nominal GNP and usingthe 6 as the midpoint of the 4 to 8 percent range for M2, I think,would give us the kind of flexibility we need on the downside, withoutgiving any implication of tightening to the market. So I would prefera 4 to 8 percent range for M2 and 5 to 8 percent for M3.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I would go for alternative III,but for different reasons than have been expressed. I don't see thenear-term downside risks that Mr. Corrigan talked about. I looked atthose new orders figures for December, and not only were theyexceptionally strong, but the fact that they were that strong twomonths after the stock market crash suggests to me that ourmanufacturing sector is really going to be on a roll in the first halfof this year. And that is highly likely to generate higher spendingon plant and equipment than the staff forecast is indicating. So, Ithink by the time we reach midyear, our problem of softness in theeconomy is going to be way behind us and our concern is going to bethe price pressures generated by a manufacturing sector that is reallybooming. And I think having a slightly lower upside limit on theaggregates might be very helpful for us in that kind of a situation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Well, as I indicated yesterday, Mr. Chairman, Iwas very close to Frank Morris and very close to Jerry. I suppose atthis point I'm a little closer to Frank in that I'm not as sure as mycolleagues in Richmond are that we will have the weakness in the firstpart of the year. But I think there is a distinct risk that by theend of the year the economy will really be rolling and there may bestronger upward pressure on prices and wages than most people are nowexpecting. That would put us in a very difficult situation, and adangerous one I think, given the advanced stage of the expansion. So,my feeling is that reducing the risks of that kind of scenario playing-35-2/9-10/88itself out ought to be one of the principal goals, if not theprincipal goal, of long-run policy. So I would opt for alternativeIII. Ordinarily, I think the Bluebook tends to favor the middlealternative, but I thought this time, Don, you did an excellent job indefending alternative III with your 6 percent midpoint. If theeconomy should be a little weaker in the first part of the year, thenthe 7-1/2 percent limit ought to be enough to accommodate that andalso some downdrift in interest rates. But I think more importantly,dropping the range a full percentage point rather than just 1/2 of apercentage point, as we tentatively decided in July, would send astrong, and I think a very reassuring, signal to the markets and thepublic that the System is looking beyond the immediate softness inbusiness activity towards the potentially more serious threat ofexcessive and rapid inflation later on. And if we voted for that, Ithink you could make that point very strongly in your testimony. Iknow you'd get some flack on that from some members of Congress, but Ithink that would be muted by the recent strength in the aggregates andthe significant drop in interest rates. I think, in the end, we'd bea whole lot better off from the standpoint of political pressure, ifM2 growth didn't come out in the lower half of the range but somewherenear the midpoint. And I think we have a better chance to do thatwith alternative III than with alternative II.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I would also favor alternative III.I think it conveys the right message to financial markets. One thingwe might consider is to have the range for M3 slightly [unintel-ligible]; the elasticities are such that you probably will getstronger growth of M3 than M2. With regard to the base question, Iwould be opposed to the suggestions of Governors Angell and Heller andinstead I would prefer the Kohn cone.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How do you spell that?MR. PARRY. Two different ways.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In which order? President Stern.MR. STERN. However we may decide to tilt policy in the shortrun, it seems to me that in the longer term we have to keep our eye onthe price stability goal. And I think achievement of that isconsistent with some of Mike Prell's language that we touched uponyesterday; in other words, I think that's how you do achieve maximumsustainable growth in employment and output. In the current setting,what I'd like to achieve is a certain continuity in policy at thispoint. And I'd also like to facilitate this transition or adjustmentthat's occurring in the economy that we have discussed--or at leastnot take steps to retard that adjustment by trying to bolster domesticdemand. All of those considerations lead me to alternative III, whichI think works in the direction of price stability and all that goeswith it over time. I think it provides ample room for growth in theeconomy in terms of the outlook that we discussed yesterday at somelength; I also think it is consistent with this transition oradjustment that needs to occur. I might also note that--well, thishas been covered and I won't dwell on it--the midpoint is consistent,I gather, with the Greenbook forecast. Moreover, while it's a littlehard to go through all these numbers with the revisions and so forth,-36-2/9-10/88as I look at growth of M2 and M3 over the last two- or three-yearperiod, on average, they've grown about 7-1/2 percent or maybe a touchmore. It seems to me, at this point in time, that we would not wantto have acceleration beyond that kind of rate of growth. So, I comeout in the alternative III camp as well.MR. JOHNSON. Gary, are you assuming a stable demand formoney? I mean, you have some assumption.MR. STERN. I'm assuming I don't know any less about it todaythan I knew about it in the past; let me put it that way.MR. JOHNSON. But what you're saying is that the uncertaintyis symmetric around zero velocity.MR. STERN. Yes, that's right. I think you might argue,although I'm not about to press it, that last year's shortfall ishistory now and we can't do anything about it. I'm not sure you wantto have much of an acceleration from that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So far it is.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I would favor the 4 to 8 percent alternative;I'd go with alternative II but I would widen M2 to 4 to 8 percent. Ithink the half a point reduction that we already have in thepreliminary numbers sends the right long-term signal. I think afurther reduction now would, in a sense, almost be confusing. Peopleperceive the thrust of policy to be in the opposite direction and Ithink that would be a potentially destabilizing signal. I thinkeverybody knows from my comments over a long period of time that I'vefelt just as strongly as Jerry and others about the long-runinflationary risks, but I think that might be confusing. I think the4 percent lower band on M2 recognizes Jerry's concern; it actuallygives us the latitude to move further in that direction thanalternative III would if we had to. And I don't think the widening ofthe ranges from 3 percentage points to 4 percentage points is really aproblem. I don't think anybody perceives us to be targeting monetaryaggregates anyway; we certainly don't. We take an economic forecastand then pick [monetary growth] numbers that we think are roughlyconsistent; and if they don't work out, fine. So, I don't think thatviolates anything in terms of what I perceive we're doing here andwhat I think the outside world thinks we're doing. So, that's where Icome out.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think all of us agree on what the basicpolicy challenge is and that is to balance the short-run risks ofweakness with the long-run risks of inflation and the need to keep theexternal adjustment process moving forward. Given the looseness inthe aggregates and the way we have treated those aggregates the lastseveral years, substantively, I don't think it makes a lot ofdifference whether we have alternative I, II, or III, as far as tryingto play this balancing game. It seems to me that which of these youchoose has to do more with the message that you want to send out thanthe economic or policy substance of what these alternatives mean. I-37-2/9-10/88think the message is important; and I would like to send out abalanced message. I would like for the country to know that we areconcerned about the current weakness but I also want to underscorethese longer-term concerns. And I think alternative II sends out thatbalanced message. If we tended to loosen a little, as we have done inthe short run the last couple of weeks, and then we send out a messagethat we are tightening as in alternative III, I think that's aconfusing message. I think that when you're sending out messages, youwant to keep the messages as simple as possible. At the same time, ifwe reverted to alternative I, I think that sends out the wrong messagetoo. So, I would think that in the testimony you want to strike thisbalance, and to me, alternative II sends out that message.Now the other issue, having to do with the width of therange, I think also is a substantive versus message kind of issue. Ifwe were to be totally intellectually honest, I think we'd have a verywide range, or we might not even have these [ranges for the]aggregates. But we have them, and we have generally stuck to a 3percentage point range. We have tried to widen them in the past andthat tends to send a message that we don't have any discipline up hereor that we are somehow losing that discipline. I don't think that'sthe kind of message we want to send, and so I would--again, not that 5to 8 percent is substantively better than 4 to 8 percent--just thinkin terms of a message and keep it at 3 points.As far as the issue of rebasing, I think we have to becareful that we don't rebase on an ad hoc basis. If you go back to1985 and 1986, we overshot the targets and we didn't rebase in thoseyears. Now if we rebase this time when we undershot, I think it sendsa message that we rebase when it suits us in terms of easing money andwe don't rebase when it means tighter money. Interestingly, if youtake a longer-term perspective on M2, if we had rebased for the lasttwo years, we would be just about where we are now. In other words,the undershoot of last year just about compensates for the overshootof the prior year. So, I would not rebase in 1988 for those reasons.MR. MELZER. I forgot to say that I wouldn't rebase either.Sorry to interrupt.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If we had rebased back to 1984 we'dstill be in the cone.SPEAKER(?). Right.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The Kohn cone too.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Kohn's cone. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I think the long-term targeting process isreally your chance, and our chance, to make a more clear statementabout what we think we can control over time. I think over time wecan control nominal variables and not real variables. And I thinkwhat we want to signal to the markets and the public is thiscommitment to bring on price stability. I think you do that bycontinuing to march the aggregate ranges down. In that context, Ithink we should have some fairly firm statements about our consensuson inflation, and I'd prefer to see some time horizon attached to thatprice stability goal.-38-2/9-10/88In terms of the specific targets this time, I would want tochoose alternative III, if not even slightly lower than that. Ithink, as the staff correctly points out, the forecast will fit any ofthese ranges. And I think, as Ed indicated, this will send the rightmessage to our public.In terms of the rebasing issue, it's an old one that has comeup many times before in terms of base drift. At least eight years agowe chose, at that time, not to adjust our misses. Ed was indicatingthat it seemed to be somewhat random; in those days, it seemed to bebiased in one direction. I think if we are going to want to adjustfor base drift, then we ought to do it in a consistent fashion. Thatwould mean something like picking the midpoint of the target rangeevery year and starting the base over again--starting the cone fromthat midpoint regardless of where we came out. I'm not recommendingthat. I guess I'd just as soon go with the randomness in our missesand start from scratch each time. But I would not move the basearound. My last point is that I would concur with Jerry that we oughtto put M1 into a monitoring range; but--and this may be premature toour later discussion--I'd also toss the monetary base in there as amonitoring range.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Without going back over yesterday's conversation,it does seem to me that it's important to remember that the economicrecord over the past few years, and that certainly includes the lastyear, has been pretty good. And I think the outlook for this year isalso positive. In terms of the risks, they're about equal on theupside and the downside. And I think we have a very good shot atcoming in about on the forecast. The risks, as I see them and as Isuggested yesterday, really are more on the inflationary front; I dosense some buildup of the inflationary pressure. In addressing theaggregates question, I think it's important to bear that in mind.Now, despite Don's very articulate and, I think, clearexplanation of the opportunities this year with regard to theaggregates, I think we are continuing in a period of reasonableuncertainty and it's terribly difficult to forecast just how this isgoing to come out. Therefore, I think we ought to try and establishranges that deal with those very tough uncertainties. If I were tochoose one of these specific alternatives, I would choose alternativeIII, largely for the reasons that have already been said. But I mustsay, given the uncertainty, I'd have a preference for the 4 to 8percent range that Bob Forrestal suggested. I think it does providefor the uncertainties and also deals with the consistency of ourmessage of trying to achieve price stability. So, I'd have apreference for 4 to 8 percent but certainly could be persuaded toaccept alternative III. I would not establish a monitoring range forMl; I think the uncertainty there is still too high to do that. And Iwould not be in favor of rebasing either. I think if we begin to movethe base around to suit our requirements, that's a rather awkwardmessage; I'd not be in favor of rebasing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess, like a coupleof others who have sat around this table too long, I'm maybe getting-39-2/9-10/88jaded. Let me first say that setting ranges is legally necessary tohave some constraining effect on the Committee and monetary policy.Therefore, I accept that as being something very good. But listeningto the discussion around the table brings to mind what I believe was astatement in the Bluebook: that the staff forecast falls in any one ofthese three [alternatives]. You're talking about a difference of 1/2of a percentage point in the midpoint from one to the other. And it'sminutia. The fact of the matter is that any one of them will fit.So, I think Ed Boehne is right. As the Bard said, "all theworld's a stage" and I think that's what we're doing here today. Thatis, [the issue] is what kind of message you give as you testifyregarding the intention of the Federal Reserve in the period aheadwith respect to economic growth and inflation. My own view is thatsince we already established alternative II in July, we probably don'tknow much more about what's ahead now than we did in July with respectto a decision on these aggregate ranges. Going on a holiday as Jerrysuggested, or at least the Federal Reserve doing nothing verydramatic, seems to me to be a very good thing to happen in the periodahead. I would reestablish the ranges of alternative II; I think youcan do anything you want to with them. I think they serve thepurpose; and the message that you give in testimony is the moreimportant one.I would not rebase; we've been through that many, many timesin the past with a great deal of consternation by Congress and othersabout what they thought we were rebasing. And I don't think we oughtto get into that kind of controversy. As a result, I could accept thewidening of the range to 4 to 8 percent; but to avoid any ripples I'ddo 5 to 8 percent--alternative II straight down the line.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman my speech was just madebasically by Roger and others. I would favor alternative II--not thesubstance but the appearance of it--and hope we make the besttranslation from the substance. It does reflect a march down--maybenot at the pace some would argue for--but it's a half a point lessthan what we had for 1987, and it's consistent with our direction inreducing the ranges, at least. If you go to alternative III, as TomMelzer said, I wonder if that's not a bit of a conflicting signalversus what we generally are perceived to be doing, which might leadto some confusion. Alternative II permits us, I think, to do whateverit is that we need to do. And it would reflect, to me at least, acontinuing commitment to guarding against inflation. So, I would stayjust where we put it tentatively. I would not rebase either.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was impressed withwhat Gary Stern said a while ago: that whatever tilt we may make inthe short run--and we'll discuss that a little later--it's importantto keep our eye on inflation in the longer run. And I think thatthat's the message we want to project. That being the case, I can bevery comfortable with alternative III. I would like to see usmaintain as much discipline as we can to hold our own feet to the fireand stay within whatever ranges we set. Of course, we have to havethe capability of going outside the ranges if that's appropriate.-40-2/9-10/88Part of my reasoning is that I would like to see us stay withinwhatever ranges we set and, if we're going to make a serious effort todo that, then I like the idea of being a little on the lower side witha 4-1/2 percent low instead of the 5 percent low.Apparently this argument about rebasing has been around for awhile--it's new to me being new to this sort of consideration--but Imust say that it makes a lot of sense to me. I don't know what formalwork has been done on that issue in years past, but I would urge thatat least we review it and seriously consider it. I'd be a littleleery of doing it ad hoc right here at the table without some furtherconsideration, but I am impressed with the force of that argument, andI'd like to see it pursued a little. I would agree that we havefought the battle of getting away from trying to be forced intoprojecting M1; we don't have to do it and I think there is still somuch variability there that we should not go back to doing it. So,the sum of this is that I would go with alternative number III.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I don't feel that strongly about any of theseparticular ranges. I feel a little like Roger Guffey and others whohave spoken on this issue. However, I think there are signal issues,credibility points, that have to be made. I do think, if we're goingto be credible on our view of the long-term inflation picture, thatthrough the midpoint of whatever range we establish forM2--I say M2 because I prefer not setting a monitoring range for M1,given my view that it has too many problems--we have to demonstratethat we are moving towards price stability, or a nominal GNP that'sconsistent with price stability. So I am in favor of continuallyratcheting down that midpoint. It seems to me that the fact that weeven establish a range means that we are trying to embody theuncertainties, in terms of all the things that can affect theaggregate; otherwise, we'd just have a line. And so the ranges haveto be somewhat credible to encompass what we think are theuncertainties. And if we fall outside those ranges, it means that weweren't even certain about the uncertainties. And that creates someproblems. My own personal view is that to encompass all theuncertainties we have to have a range that's wider than any that arehere. And I think that gives us a political credibility problem, tosome extent, in their presentation. I'm not really against the narrowrange, even though I don't think it embodies all the uncertaintiesthat we could face. We would look kind of silly announcing a rangethat admitted the uncertainty that I think we are really faced with.So I guess I don't really mind whether we have alternative II oralternative III; I'm sort of indifferent [between the two]. I guessif I were going to be honest with myself, alternative II would be alittle better; it allows a wider range and ratchets down the middlefrom last year. But I'm comfortable with alternative III; I wouldn'tresist that.On the basing issue, there are some implications from thebase. I think Governor Heller and Governor Angell made some importantpoints. But I think all of this can be handled in the language of thetestimony and how we present this. If we don't handle it carefully,we could give the message that the short-term implication of ourtarget range setting is a tightening of policy. That could conflictwith what we might be trying to do in the short run and create some-41-2/9-10/88confusion. So, it seems to me that if we're going to go withalternative III, we have to be very careful about how we explain itwhen the Chairman testifies on this, because there could be someconfusion about what we're actually doing in the short term and whatthis target might imply. So I think the basing issue is important. Ithink what Governors Heller and Angell pointed out is that we couldtake care of some of those concerns by rebasing. I think you couldalso take care of those concerns with the right kind of language inthe presentation. I don't really have any strong preference foreither, as long as we take care of it. I think probably it's betterto handle it in the language rather than to try and explain arebasing--although I have some sentiment for maybe trying to normalizethose last two months of the fourth quarter, November and December,which none of us can explain very well, and building the base off ofsome more normalized trend pattern in the fourth quarter rather thanletting those last two months so affect the average. But I don't feelthat strongly; we can easily explain that in the presentation. Ithink one way that you do that is by these tunnels that are builtaround the cone at the beginning of the year. You've got these dottedlines that look like parallel lines building off of the cone, so thatwe are even saying we are not taking the Kohn cone too seriously atthe beginning of the year--that's why we have these parallel linesbecause there can be some variation early. I guess that can all befit into the language. And as long as we do that, I'm comfortable.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Because of November to December?MR. JOHNSON. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Last July I dissented when a proposal was made tocut the ranges back by a half [percentage point], not because I didn'twant them cut, but because I thought we were firing our ammo too soon.I felt that if we kept them the same, 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent, thenwe'd get a crack at them now, when we could do what was appropriate inthe context of this period. I think that was the appropriate way togo and, consequently, I am willing to go with a cut now, down towhat's being called alternative II, I believe. But I would like to gowith a wider band, in keeping with what I said to Don Kohn about theuncertainties. I just think that we are misleading people when wesuggest that we can get it within a 3-point range. If I thought wecould, that's one thing; but at least many times we can't.So, I would go along with Messrs. Forrestal and Melzer:alternative II, with maybe a 4 to 8 percent range for M2 but stayingwith 5 to 8 percent for M3, so as to phase this in. I still believethat the risk is on the downside. Also, I think there are people outin the real world who think there are some downside risks and [thisCommittee] ought to be really, really concerned about doing anythingwith these ranges--even though, admittedly, they're longer-termranges. It would send a message to business people or money market orcapital market participants that suggests a tightening. Even thoughthey might be reading it wrong, I would hate to have that happen,because right now I think that the mood is that we are easing. I wasjust reading some money market commentary this morning and they thinkthe Fed eased yesterday when the fed funds rate went to 6-1/4 percent.If we send out a message when the Chairman testifies next week that we-42-2/9-10/88are tightening, I'd like to crawl into a fox hole, because I don'twant to be around when the flak flies. Anyway, that's sort of whereI'm coming from in general.On the rebasing, I've been in favor of rebasing all along.In keeping with Mr. Kelley's comments, I think we really ought to lookat this. And if we go to rebasing, we should do it come hell or highwater, good times and bad--stick with it and not send the message thatif it suits us we'll rebase, and if it doesn't we won't. I think thisis the time, though--and the chart here shows it--that it would make asignificant difference whether we go with an average of where wethought we were going to be in the fourth quarter or where we actuallywere. Also, if you don't rebase and then go to the lower rangesspecified in alternative III, I think that could really give usproblems. On the monitoring question, I don't have a strong view onthat; if you want to monitor M1 that's fine; if you don't that's okaywith me too.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One thing about this meeting which Ithink is pretty important is that we have to find the mechanism bywhich we are perceived to be in a general consensus. The reason I saythat is that it's fairly obvious that the Administration is beginningto wind down. There are elections coming up and we are turning out tobe the only people who are minding the store. The one thing I wouldparticularly like, if we could find a way to do it this time, is tofind a way in which we can accommodate each other in a manner in whichwe can speak with a single voice. I don't know whether or not that'sgoing to be feasible, listening to what I've been hearing. And it'scertainly a problem when one is dealing concurrently with the issuesof both short-term monetary policy and intermediate- or long-termbasing questions.In my mind, when I look at this particular outlook, as I sortof indicated in my views yesterday, it's very difficult to find theinventory weakness, or inventory recession, out there. The reason,essentially, is that if we actually had meaningful inventory overhang,we'd already see it in the order books. It just strikes me as not theway the system functions--to have order books under strain andconcurrently have a notion that there is an inventory overhang. Everyinventory recession that I've ever experienced--and I've seen an awfullot of them--was signaled first in the order books before anythingelse. This tells me, at least, that whatever the problems are outthere, that's not one of them. However, I must say that I pretty muchagree with what Jerry Corrigan has been saying--namely, that if thereis a problem out there, it's in the financial area. And I must say toyou that I'm bothered by this. We had a major shock in October and weseem to have temporarily come out of it. But the stock market, byanybody's measure, is not low; it's hanging up there. While a lot ofthe yield spread abnormalities have come down, it is still a veryunstable situation. What's concerning me is that there is avulnerability out there which is continuing to heal but is not healedyet. And I'm basically concerned, in a way which in fact GovernorSeger raised, that if we were to indicate that we were tightening, theshock to the markets I think would break the stock market and createsome real problems. Yet one can easily argue that we can break themarket by being too easy or too tight. I think it is a very narrowcone--spelled "c-o-n-e"--that we are going through at the moment. Andthe impression I get is that the markets, at this particular stage,-43-2/9-10/88are taking the little softness we have imparted with a good deal ofequanimity. Bond markets have been behaving well; the exchange rateshave been behaving surprisingly well; and there is a sense in whichthe markets are willing to accept somewhat lower real rates at thisstage; and I think they may for a while.The other side of the problem is that if we are not dealingwith any particular slowdown here, then the question largely is whatthen begins to emerge. And I suspect that what we have is a verytough policy problem, because I think there are short-term risks inthe sense that I think the markets need more time for healing--meaningthey need some general softness in the short end of the money market.But it's fairly apparent also, if the general views around this tableare correct about the longer term--and I must say, I subscribe prettymuch to what everyone has been saying about fears of inflation--thatwe have to make certain that, if we choose to be a littleaccommodative in the short run, we don't send the message that that'sour longer-term view.The message question is the real issue; because if anyone cantell me that the monetary aggregates are locked in a very sensible wayinto the economy--it requires a great deal of finesse and I will[unintelligible] it. There has been more data mining with themonetary aggregates in the last two years than I've seen with anyother set of data in my whole life. And whenever you get to that, youknow that there's nothing there. We can expand away or we cancontract, but I don't think it matters. As a number of you mentioned--I think Ed did--it doesn't really matter. I think the crucialquestion, during this particular period for the Federal ReserveSystem, is to communicate to the markets what our philosophy of theoutlook is and basically how we should function.So I must say, and we'll get to this I assume a little later,I would be more inclined to be somewhat more accommodative in theshort run--in a sense picking up what seems to be the desire, if notthe willingness, of the markets to perceive a somewhat lower ratestructure here, even if only at the margin. But we need to be verycareful that that is not extended in anybody's mind to a point wherethey will figure that we are not minding the store. As a consequenceof all of this, what I would like to do, and I'm not sure we caneffectively do it, is to hear everybody's short-term views before weactually vote on the target ranges, because I suspect we can't reallyseparate these two positions. They're part of a single monetaryphilosophy package and I'm not sure that independent votes on one andthen the other essentially capture the type of consensus which I hopewe may be able to marshal.So, having said that, I guess we could take a break now andthen get to the short-term discussion. And then what I'd like to dois see if we can find a way--if not by voting in a single package,then some way other way--that we could agree that none of us is[totally] comfortable with the end result but all of us, or most ofus, hopefully, can at least feel as though it's accommodatable.Having said that, I think the doughnuts are there. Are they there?The problem is they're not; we have to try to filibuster for 10 moreminutes.MR. KOHN. I could filibuster for you.-44-2/9-10/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You can filibuster.MR. KOHN. Or you can have the Managers' reports, as Peterand Sam just pointed out.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's not a filibuster, that'ssubstance.MR. KOHN. This is only substance--MR. BLACK. What's wrong with a longer-than-usual coffeebreak?MR. KELLEY. The major problem is that the coffee hasn'tarrived.MR. BLACK. Well, there are other things to do out there.MR. JOHNSON. You mean you've had a lot of coffee thismorning.MR. BLACK. The reason--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think you have, and as a result, Ithink we will adjourn on that note.[Coffee break]MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move theratification of the Manager's transactions?MS. SEGER. I'll move it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Approved without objection. Mr.Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. I'm sort of working this inreverse, but let me ask for a motion to ratify Peter Sternlight'stransactions and then I'll ask for questions of both.MS. SEGER. I will move that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I will second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Approved without objection.] Are thereany questions for either of our Managers?MR. HOSKINS. I'd like to know what the procedure is forformally changing the borrowings target.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, on this occasion, there werediscussions that I had with the Chairman and the Vice Chairman of the-45-2/9-10/88Board. And there's a kind of continuing dialogue I have with Mr. Kohnor whoever is sitting in his chair--he happened to be away during someof the time we were having these discussions. But it came out ofdiscussions and communications between our domestic Desk and theChairman, essentially.MR. MELZER. Peter, did I understand you correctly? In theearly part of your report I believe you said that the continuedsensitivity in approaching open market operations most recently waslargely due to the shift in policy and the uncertainties thatsurrounded that, not to any other factors.MR. STERNLIGHT. I said we were getting away from that greatsensitivity and moving toward the borrowing objective, as Januaryproceeded.MR. MELZER. Right.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that there had to be some movingback from that approach when we were putting in place this slightlyeasier stance, just to put across the fact that that modification ofthe stance was occurring.MR. MELZER. Yes.MR. FORRESTAL. Sam, what kind of trade number is the marketlooking for on Friday? Have you heard any possibility?MR. CROSS. Well, they're talking about $13-1/2 billion.They probably have very little basis for knowing, just like everybodyelse; but the fact remains that they tend to get these numbers intheir minds, and if it comes out better or worse than theirexpectations, it has an effect. That's the latest commentary,although it has varied from yesterday when we were hearing numbersanywhere from $11 billion to $14 billion or more. Then Mr. Yeuttermade some comments yesterday, which seemed to have taken a little ofthe bloom off the rose, that it's on the low side. And so, today,they seem to be talking about levels of around $13-1/2 billion.MR. PARRY. The Money Market Services range is $11 to $16billion in the survey they do.MR. FORRESTAL. I saw that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the higher the expectation, thebetter.MR. FORRESTAL. Yes.MR. CROSS. Yes. Accordingly, we haven't been hearing asmany high numbers as I would like to hear.MR. FORRESTAL. $13-1/2 billion seems to be low.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for either of theManagers? I'm sorry, Governor Angell.-46-2/9-10/88MR. ANGELL. Peter, I guess it seems to me that there's someappearance at the Desk that when we need to drain [reserves] and weare perceived to need to drain, we are still somewhat more interestrate sensitive about draining earlier in the period. It seems to methat's conveying to the market that we still continue to have a morenarrow interest rate tolerance. Would you comment on that?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, as I mentioned, in this period when weneeded to drain--which was also coming when we were putting in placethis slightly more accommodative stance--we proceeded in what I call agingerly manner, sometimes deferring for a day or so the actualdraining operations, waiting to see more evidence of the availabilityof the reserves that we thought were there before going in to mop themup.MR. ANGELL. I guess it would seem to me that when we hadthat change from $300 million to $250 million, that would have given alittle more opportunity for us to make another step towards moreemphasis upon the borrowing target and a little less concern aboutinterest rates. That didn't seem to show through to me; and I thinkit didn't show through to a lot of the marketplace.MR. JOHNSON. Part of that was because borrowing wasaveraging about $150 million, as Peter said. It was hard for it toshow through.MR. ANGELL. Well, I understand that. But we knew earlier inthe period that we needed to drain, and it seemed to me we didn'tdrain because of the fed funds rate. It seems to me that thatcontinues to have the market's attention and that doesn't seem quitein keeping with what I understood we were expecting to do on that aswe ended out this intermeeting period. I thought, as we got away fromthe first of the year, we had thought that adjustment process--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know, you're talking about a $50million difference. When you're draining a huge amount, withexpectations that the appropriate amount is in a range that is muchlarger than anything remotely near the total borrowing requirement,it's a very tough operational procedure to conduct.MR. ANGELL. I know, but I'm concerned that the markets mayexaggerate what it is that we have done--that there might appear to bea slight tightening. Interest rates may be running a little lowerthis week than we would expect, midpointwise, because of that surplus;and it seems to me that we now run the risk of having people think wehave snugged back up after this meeting, which I think is unfortunate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I would suspect that [such areaction] probably has become a likely prospect.MR. ANGELL. Well, I just want to indicate some slightdifference [of opinion] with regard to how that was done.MR. MORRIS. Well, you didn't get much of a bond marketresponse to the 6-1/4 percent fed funds rate yesterday.MR. JOHNSON. It was well acknowledged that there was a wireproblem, wasn't it? I saw a couple of reports about a wire problem.-47-2/9-10/88MR. STERNLIGHT. The procedures for the commentary on--MR. JOHNSON. Because the funds rate actually got down to 4percent.MR. STERNLIGHT. There was a big range of trading yesterday.And in the morning yesterday we did go in and drain a lot of reserves;we took out $5 billion.MR. ANGELL. I know. It's so late in the period.MR. STERNLIGHT. Right. It was late in the period.MR. ANGELL. What I'm saying is we waited so late in theperiod.MR. STERNLIGHT. Right. Funds softened afterwards and theygot as low as 1 percent late in the day yesterday. I don't yet havethe effective rate but I think it was around 6 percent. I didn't seeany reference to wire problems.MR. JOHNSON. You didn't? I thought there were referencesbut I'm--MR. STERNLIGHT. Maybe I just didn't see it. Today funds areagain around 6 percent or a shade under. We're going to be drainingsome additional reserves. For one thing, it has been very hard toevaluate the demand for excess reserves, which we think is high inthis period, although we're not sure from day-to-day just how high.Also, we are getting daily revisions in the amount of requiredreserves. It has just been a difficult period to operate in. But Ireadily acknowledge that we projected a draining job but were hesitantin meeting it because we wanted to let some of that softening showthrough. But, wanting something to show through, you always run therisk that more shows than you want to have show. I don't see any wayto avoid it; there are some risks on both sides of that coin.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But I think the key here is that themarkets did not react to that. I think that's the crucial question.If they had, then I think you would have had a problem. I watchedthat all day long; the exchange rate was absolutely solid and the bondmarket was hardly moving. It was as though they were off on vacation.So the markets didn't take any view of that, as far as I could see.Any further questions to the Managers?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I just want to pick up on what Ithought was a very important comment Peter made in the middle of hisremarks about the search for this elusive mechanism in relationshipthat's going to make everybody happy every day. That's just not goingto happen. Just to take a piece of it: On a slow day, the federalfunds market turns over $400 or $500 billion. The list of variousthings that could introduce slippage and errors into thoserelationships is vast.MR. JOHNSON. You hit on the key point, Jerry, which iserrors and slippage--and that's what causes the variations.-48-2/9-10/88VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But you can't have a monetary policythat is so fine-tuned that it attempts to overcome every one of thosedozens of things that can take place in the market.MR. JOHNSON. Well, you can overcome those things; it dependson what your objective is.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't think you can overcome themno matter what your objective is.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I think you could reduce the rangesubstantially.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The range of what?MR. JOHNSON. Well, it depends on what your objective is. Ifyour objective is a borrowing number--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't care what your objective is.MR. JOHNSON. Well,--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If your objective is the federalfunds rate--MR. JOHNSON. Oh, there's no doubt that that range could bereduced substantially.MR. ANGELL. Jerry, if your objective is the federal fundsrate--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mine isn't.MR. ANGELL. I know; mine isn't either. But if it is, Ithink you can pinpoint it, if that's your objective.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't.MR. ANGELL. My goodness! We sure did in the '70s.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Again, those were different days.Just take the computer problems and the frequency with which theyoccur. I guarantee you that that alone is an important source of day-to-day variability in the federal funds rate.MR. ANGELL. Well, Jerry, I just don't understand. If theDesk has the message that it's below, buy and sell fed funds.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It depends what time the computersgo down.MR. ANGELL. No, I'm saying if the Desk has the objective ofbuying and selling 1/8th of a point off of the fed funds target,that's going to be realized.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That means---49-2/9-10/88MR. ANGELL. Now, I don't agree with wanting to do that; I'mjust saying I agree with Manley that it can be done.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't think you can do it.MR. JOHNSON. It just depends on--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Heavens, I haven't heard thisconversation since Economics 101!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's about what it is, too.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Peter is very quiet.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let Jerry finish.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I really don't think it is desirableor possible to build that kind of precision into the day-to-dayconduct of monetary policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, with regard to Lee Hoskins'question about changing the borrowing target--I don't want to focus onwhether or not reducing the target $50 million was right or not rightfor the long-run best interests of the economy--but I am concernedthat it was done in such a way that it did not take into considerationthe decision made by this Committee and the directive that was issued[when the Committee consulted in early January]. There are four kindsof developments in that directive that permit you [as Chairman] tomove the borrowing target and I think that decision is leftprincipally in your hands. I think there was no evidence--at least itcertainly wasn't clear in Kansas City that there was incoming evidencefrom the fourth-quarter numbers, for example--for the borrowing targetto be adjusted down $50 million for the next two-week period. Itseems to me that decision was outside the confines of the directiveitself. I raise this without trying to make any other issue out ofit. But it seems to me it is an important issue that we have to keepin mind.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I'm responsible; and let me tellyou my reasons and why I thought it was within the scope of thedirective. First of all, there was increasing evidence from theinitial claims figures that the economy was slowing down verydramatically. And this was subsequently confirmed by the Januaryunemployment data. Secondly, and of considerable significance, wasincreasing evidence that the exchange rate was being stabilized.Thirdly, the markets were coming down on their own at that particulartime--clearly trying to seek a somewhat lower market rate level. Thecombination of those three factors, coupled with the nature of thedirective, made it important in my judgment that we move in a somewhatmarginal direction. The issue was discussed as to whether or not anFOMC telephone meeting should be called under those conditions. Thegeneral judgment was that it was not appropriate. The issue wasraised. If there is any sensitivity in this group that in the futurewe should--if that is communicated--I think it would be incumbent upon-50-2/9-10/88us to, in fact, go to a telephone conference. It was a close call.And if it's the consensus of this group that in the future we should,then I'd find it, as a result of your request, [appropriate] to do so.MR. GUFFEY. In my view, it's particularly important, giventhe background of the political pressure that had come from theTreasury people and so forth, that such a decisionbe a broader-based decision. I understand the flexibility that youmust have, Mr. Chairman, and that the Desk must have. This is astructural issue and I only want to raise it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I appreciate that. And I must tellyou that I resented those calls that were being made by the Treasuryand I told them. And I must tell you that the Secretary of theTreasury was very upset when he heard about them and did not likethem. I communicated in a manner which I hope will shut that nuisanceoff, because I thought it was most inappropriate. And I can't believethe insensitivity of the people involved in doing what they weredoing. That's the reason I asked you earlier on, by all means, to letme know if we failed to shut the valve down. I'll just have to use asledge hammer. Any other questions to the Managers? If not, then,Mr. Kohn.MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, Mr. Kohn. Questions for Mr.Kohn?MR. BLACK. Don, I didn't see any mention of your borrowingtargets under any of these alternatives [in the Bluebook].MR. KOHN. In the first paragraph on page 13, under theshort-run alternatives, we associated alternative B with $250 millionand with funds trading of 6-1/2 to 6-3/4 percent--around the range weexpected them to have been trading in the last week.MR. BLACK. I'm sorry, I remember having seen that. I wasjust looking for it in a different place and couldn't find it.MR. KOHN. We changed the place this time; maybe that will--MR. BLACK. That threw me off.MR. KOHN. Originality doesn't always pay off.MR. BLACK. And I've even got it underlined so I have noexcuse for not having remembered exactly what you had. I thoughtthat's probably what it was, but I just wanted to make sure.MS. SEGER. Should we be paying any attention to thestructure of rates? It seems to me that the long rates have droppeddramatically in the last couple of months, as have private short-termrates. The fed funds rate has dropped a bit, but it certainly hasn'tkept up with the others. And, of course, the discount rate hasremained stuck. Should we be looking at this as a factor orcondition?2/9-10/88MR. KOHN. I'd make a couple of points on that. One is thatthe drop in private short-term rates, particularly since the last FOMCmeeting, very importantly reflected the passing of the year-endpressures. We had a huge decline in those rates in the first week ofJanuary and I don't think that had anything to do with the economy ormonetary policy or expectations or anything like that.MS. SEGER. How about going back, though, to the October--MR. KOHN. I think that the decline in bond yields doesreflect a weaker outlook for the economy and expectations thatinterest rates will not be rising as much as people previously thoughtover the coming year. But, as I remarked in my briefing, the yieldcurve still is really pretty flat. I think there is an expectationthat we will be easing perhaps even further in the very near term, butthere is something of an upward slope beyond that. When you get out alittle, it does slope upward a bit; and I think that reflectsexpectations that there is enough strength in the economy that wewon't be seeing declining rates. We don't have a classic situation--asharp downward slope in the yield curve and tight monetary policy, oranything like that. It still has an upward sort of curve. I look atthose things as an indication, at least, of what the market isthinking and what they're expecting. Then you can measure thatagainst our expectations. President Keehn's Bank published an articleon indicators of monetary policy, which shows that spread, I think, asan important indicator--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible] spread has edged up inthis period. That's just suggestive of some expectation in the marketthat the economy will turn flat.MR. KOHN. I was really concentrating on the short-long kindof scenario.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. I mean they're, giving slightlydifferent signals. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. May I come back, Don, just one second to BobBlack's question about just what alternative B means? On page 13 itdoes indeed say it's associated with borrowing of $250 million. Onpage 14, in paragraph 16, it says that "Alternative B contemplates acontinuation of reserve conditions now expected to prevail after therecent slight easing." Now, when we get over to [the directive]language, which we're going to look at in just a minute, it says thatalternative B "would maintain the existing degree of pressure onreserve positions." And I guess I would like to know how that wouldbe defined. Would that be defined as the $250 million or would thatbe defined as what, in fact, has been happening here in recent days,more like $150 million to $200 million?MR. KOHN. Peter can give his views also, but I guess I wouldstill be tempted to think that $250 million was more a center ofgravity for this kind of funds rate range. But I would also be readyto adjust that informally, as Mr. Sternlight has done through theintermeeting period, if it looked like it was inconsistent with theCommittee's expectations. I think one week, or even two weeks, of lowborrowing is not necessarily indicative that the whole thing hasslipped; but it's something that would have to be watched very-52-2/9-10/88carefully. So, if you started by writing down $250 million, and itpersistently came in under that but was consistent with funds tradingin the range you expected, we could take it down as a technicaladjustment. But I'm not sure that we would have to do it right off.MR. KELLEY. Then, if we were to say that we were going tomaintain the existing degree of pressure, that wouldn't necessarilymean that we were going to, in fact, tighten from what we have beendoing?MR. KOHN. Well, I think it means tightening in terms of theborrowing objective you write in the reserve path [relative to recentactual borrowing]. But I think that other sentence in there gives Mr.Sternlight the flexibility to fall short of that if market conditionsdictate. Open market operations should not produce that effect.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I was surprised that the implication ofalternative A is that it could be implemented solely through openmarket operations. In other words, it has a borrowing assumption of$100 million--I guess I had in my mind that frictional borrowing wassomewhat higher than that.MR. KOHN. Well, so did I until recent weeks when it has beencoming in lower. I think it's a close call, President Melzer. Wehave seen, as people have pointed out, in the last few days someperiods in which the funds rate has been fairly close to the discountrate. Often that gives rise to an expectation that the discount rateis going to be reduced; and often those periods are periods in which adiscount rate reduction is a step away. But I guess the idea of the$100 million was to suggest that it probably is possible to get thefunds rate down to just a tick above the discount rate using openmarket operations. Whether that sets into motion expectations aboutthe discount rate I think is another question; and whether a $100million borrowing is what you would do it with or not, I don't know.But it does get tricky in this area. I agree that it's an importantquestion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Is it time for comments? I don't have anyquestions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, still questions. Questions?MR. BOYKIN. Don, as I read the write-up, alternative A wouldaccommodate a discount rate reduction. My question is, technically,would alternative B accommodate a discount rate reduction?MR. KOHN. Well, it would depend on a combination.Alternative B implies funds trading in a 6-1/2 to 6-3/4 percent area,in terms of the money forecast. If you were to reduce the discountrate, presumably that would take funds down with it, and that would bemore like alternative A.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.-53-2/9-10/88MR. BOEHNE. My question has been answered, or at least ananswer was attempted.MR. BLACK. You want to identify it? It wasn't on theagenda.MR. KOHN. I think it was the alternative A, $100million--MR. BOEHNE. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. Don, if I follow my earlier desire to somehow orother ignore the November and December artificially low figures--looking at the table on page 14 [of the Bluebook], there are growthrates from November to March and December to March. If I calculate agrowth rate from October to March--I've been doing it here on the backof the envelope--is 5.7 percent about right for alternative A and 5.4percent for alternative B?MR. KOHN. I don't know--you're talking about M2?MR. HELLER. M2.MR. KOHN. Yes; it's the right direction. It would besomething lower than the 6-1/2 percent and 7 percent for the [Novemberto March period], and it sounds approximately correct but--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any more questions? If not, let's go tocomments. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, our analysis and that in theGreenbook suggest to me that policy should not be eased beyond theactions taken two weeks ago. The sharp slowdown during this half ofthe year is related to the inventory buildup and should be correctedby midyear. A further rate decline wouldn't have much effect on thiscorrection, and it actually would primarily impact the second half ofthe year when the economy is really expected to bounce back.Moreover, if I accepted the much smaller inventory pattern of thestaff's forecast and the statement I guess that you made yesterdaythat the inventory correction could be even less than that expected bythe Board's staff, it would seem to me that any further easing at thispoint could be something of a mistake. Also--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unless you're using it for somethingelse.MR. PARRY. Excuse me?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unless you're using it for insurance.MR. PARRY. Perhaps. Also, a growth rate of 2 percent orslightly higher in 1988 as a whole is acceptable, in my view, giventhe rapid growth of the economy last year and also given that theeconomy has entered the range of full employment. Therefore, I'dfavor alternative B. Of course, if greater weakness did begin to show-54-2/9-10/88up in the statistics, we could always make a change toward an easierpolicy before the next regular meeting.SPEAKER(?). Maybe not.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you have a borrowing assumption?What number do you indicate?MR. PARRY. $250 million.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. $250 million. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Let me ask: Are we just concentrating on theshort-term issue or are we going to try to combine the whole thing atthis point in the comments?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know, that's a good question. Bob,would you reiterate in that context your longer-run targets as well?MR. PARRY. Right. I was in favor of alternative B in theshort term; and then for the long term, 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent, whichis, I think, alternative III.MR. JOHNSON. My view is that we have to be very careful interms of the short-term direction of policy. It's clear to me, havingjust come back from the BIS meeting, that the international situationwould be too sensitive to [want to] trigger a discount rate reduction.I think there's a much larger international implication from a movelike that--not to say that forces which might require such a movemight not develop over the next few weeks, if things looked moreserious than what we anticipate. I think under more serious economicconditions the international community could probably absorb somethinglike that. But right now we certainly don't have enough information,I think, to imply that. I think also that we have to be sensitive tothe international situation when we consider the short-term course ofpolicy.So, my views, in terms of open market operations in the shortrun, don't imply a move on the discount rate unless some futuredevelopments point towards more weakening. But when I say that, Istill think that some slight tone of easing is necessary. But I thinkthat can be done without creating the expectation of a discount ratereduction, mainly because I think that the markets perceive that weare sensitive to the international situation and that we have beensensitive to the dollar. And as a matter of fact, I've already seen anumber of reports indicating that the Fed would not be likely totrigger a discount rate reduction because of internationalconsiderations. And I think that's sort of the right tone in themarket. At the same time, it seems to me the market already hasabsorbed quite well--as the Chairman and others have pointed out--someexpectations of a modest easing. What they've actually absorbed isnot totally clear yet, because there's still a bit of uncertainty asto where we are.But I guess my preference is somewhere in between "B" and"A", although closer to "B". What I'm thinking is that I would prefersomething centered around a policy consistent with a 6-1/2 percentfunds rate, maybe even a hint lower than that. Alternative B is-55-2/9-10/88associated with $250 million of borrowing; I guess I could accept $200million of borrowing as something consistent with my view, althoughI'm not very confident in the borrowing number as projecting what Iwant. I could accept the $200 million number, given that Don hasdescribed open market operations in the Bluebook as somewhat sensitivebetween the borrowing number and money market conditions, and thatseems appropriate to me. So, I guess that's where I come out on theshort run--trying to avoid the implication of a discount ratereduction, although it may not be totally possible to do that. Givena move like I'm suggesting, which is only just a slight move away fromwhere we already are, I'm not even sure the markets would know thedifference from where we already are and what I'm suggesting, becausethings haven't totally settled. So I would go with something like a$200 million borrowing number, which is a tad below what is describedas "B", with the kind of language on operations that Don implied inthe Bluebook.In terms of the long run, as I said, I really don't have muchof a preference between alternative II and alternative III, mainlybecause they're both centered on about the same point. Butalternative II has a slightly wider range associated with it, which isa little more consistent with my view about the uncertainties in termsof an M2 target. I guess somebody else mentioned 4 to 8 percentinstead of 5 to 8 percent, which is in alternative II, and that getseven closer to what I think is the right answer. So I guess mypreference would be something like a 4 to 8 percent M2 target rangeand a $200 million borrowing number. And I think that somehowsatisfies my concerns about the short term and the long term.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I would prefer alternative B on the short run,with a $250 million borrowings target. Basically, my feeling is thatthere clearly has been a significant change in the thrust of policy,no matter how you want to look at it. Interest rates, in terms of fedfunds, are down 100 basis points from where they were in lateSeptember-early October. And a dramatic shift now shows through, fora month anyway, in the growth of reserves and the monetary base. So Iwould say, let's let that work. I don't think any more easing iscalled for at this stage. Secondly, and I guess perhaps moreimportantly, we already decided to make a move back to more normalapplications of the borrowings target and I think, as Governor Angellsuggested, we ought to take advantage of these stable conditions andcomplete that move now. I understand what Peter said about the needto be sensitive in the short run--letting the policy change showthrough--and I think that is appropriate. But I think now we can moveback and we ought to get that done. I really think that the marketshad become quite accustomed to dealing with that, and the fluctuationsyou got in the funds rate tended to be on the last day of a two-weekstatement period. I just don't think that's a problem in terms ofconditions. So I would move back to that now. I would indicate inthe directive that we were doing that--I wouldn't have language inthere in terms of continued flexibility. If there were agreementabout that, we might even have to deal with that lead-in phrase"taking account of conditions in financial markets" on line 108. Theother thing I would do in the directive is, in the lead-in I thinkwe'd have to say maintain--or whatever we're going to do--maintain/increase/decrease "the degree of pressure sought in recent-56-2/9-10/88days." I think it should be worded in that fashion probably; to methat usually conveys that there has been an intermeeting movement.Finally, I take heart in the stability in the foreign exchangemarkets, as you do Mr. Chairman, and I think there is somesignificance to it. I take heart in that, but I don't want to doanything to test it. I think we ought to take it and be happy we gotit, but not press our luck on testing it in any fashion.MR. JOHNSON. Can I ask a question about what you said intalking about going more strictly to the borrowing number? I justwant to ask Peter: My understanding is that for the last few weeksborrowing has been averaging about $150 million; and I think theimplication of what you're saying is that a continuation of that trenddefinitely implies a much higher funds rate, even in currentconditions. I don't know if you want to clarify that.MR. MELZER. Well, I'm not sure I necessarily agree withthat.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, the borrowing has been about $150million in the last two weeks and in the previous reserve period itwas $175 million, I guess. But with the $150 million some[unintelligible] were weak.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the facts of the case are that theborrowing/funds rate relationship is not back to normal.MR. MELZER. I guess I can believe that there never will besuch a thing as normal--where it's a totally stable, predictable,relationship. All I'm saying is that in some of these cases where wehave missed, one of the reasons it might have run low--and I thinkthis was said before--is that we have been unwilling to force ittoward the end of the [reserve maintenance] period. And I'm justsaying that a spike of a billion or two billion of borrowing on thelast day of the two-week statement period generally is not going to bedisruptive. My understanding is that $250 million is roughlyconsistent, even under present conditions, with a 6-1/2 to 6-3/4percent funds rate. And I would be quite comfortable with that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know, Tom, I'm only raising thepoint that it has not been kicking back and forth, but it has beenpersistently under--implying that there's still some disinclination tomove to the discount window--a certain historic relationship with thefunds rate/discount rate relationship. That's all I'm saying. I'mmaking a statistical point; you're raising an operational question.MR. JOHNSON. Well, you may be right. All it may mean is abig spike on the settlement date, Wednesday. But it still implies asignificant funds rate spike on or around the settlement day; and themaintenance period average would be considerably above what we areused to. Maybe that wouldn't disrupt the market, but it willcertainly change the tone of things.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. PARRY. What was his long-term?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Tom? Long-term?-57-2/9-10/88MR. MELZER. Oh! My long-term is alternative II, but I'd do4 to 8 percent for M2.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. For the short term, Mr. Chairman, I wouldprefer alternative B with a borrowing target of $250 million. Now Irealize on the basis of this recent discussion that we have someoperational problems; but we do have a target now of $250 million,associated with a funds rate of 6-1/2 percent, and that's where I'dleave that target. And I base that judgment on the forecast. I thinkwe are in an environment of a sluggish first half and the forecastindicates acceleration in the second half of the year. I think themistake we could make at the moment would be to overreact to thatsluggishness now. There's not anything we can do about it anyway; andI think it would be a procyclical kind of policy stance if we were tooverreact to the sluggishness now, which would show up in the secondhalf. So I don't think that easing is called for.However, there are risks, as we all have indicated, and a lotof uncertainties. So, I would be extra vigilant and extra sensitiveto changes in the economic situation. For that reason, I would preferan asymmetric directive which would be biased towards ease if we seesome continued weakening in the economy showing up in the secondquarter and into the second half. So, I'd favor alternative B withborrowing of $250 million. For the long term, I continue to favor the4 to 8 percent range for M2 that I indicated earlier, with a 5 to 8percent range for M3.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. As I said before, in contrast to many of themembers, I don't feel that the second-half strength is a foregoneconclusion. It's not in the bag and the risks are still there that itwill not come about. As far as the short-term monetary growth isconcerned, I see January mainly as a bounce-back after the very weakNovember and December numbers. If you take the number from October toMarch, as has been just supplied by Don Kohn, our current targets onlyimply 5-3/4 percent M2 growth under alternative A and only 5-1/2percent growth under alternative B. So there would be very slowgrowth, indeed, compared at least with the numbers that we see infront of us here--the 8 percent number that's the implied growth[under alternative B] from December to March. So I see both "A" and"B" as pretty restrictive policies. I certainly would favor somewherein between--I'd say right on the line between "A" and "B"--with aborrowing target just as it exists right now, maintain continuingpressure. And following Peter Sternlight, I'd say continuing pressureis $150 million and the trading range for federal funds probably wouldthen be 6-3/8 to 6-1/2 percent, broadly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So you're saying $150 million borrowingassumption?MR. HELLER. Existing borrowing, existing pressure--so itwould be $150 million.-58-2/9-10/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let's make sure we are all talkingabout the same thing. Don interprets existing pressure as $250million.MR. HELLER. Well, I interpret it--MR. KOHN. With room for downward adjustments.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What?MR. KOHN. With room for some downward adjustments if itlooks like this weakness is persisting. But I wouldn't take the first11 or 12 days of this maintenance period--MR. JOHNSON. Don's language sort of says $250 million butwith some room to adjust according to money market conditions. So--MR. HELLER. Well, I was going more with Peter Sternlight'snumber of $150 million. That's the actual number, and the actualpressure existing right now, and I want to maintain that actualpressure.MR. JOHNSON. Even if it means a lower funds rate, at somepoint, than what you're saying, 6-3/8 percent?MR. HELLER. Yes. If it goes down to 6-1/4 percent, that'sfine.MR. PARRY. What about long term?MR. HELLER. As I said earlier, I'm still in favor ofrebasing, with a 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent range; or 4 to 8 percent isalso fine with me. I really don't have a strong feeling on that asmuch as the rebasing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I share the questions that arearising as to just where we are, but for the short term I am in favorof maintaining the existing degree of pressure, and I think that'salternative B. I also would share Tom's view that we ought to bemoving back to a borrowings level, on a basis that's consistent withwhat Peter can produce; and, therefore, I'm leaning toward a borrowinglevel of $250 million. Of the three alternatives for the longer term,I'd be in favor of using the ranges stated in alternative III; but Iwould have a preference, as I said earlier, for a broader range of 4to 8 percent. And I think that that broader range would beappropriate both for M2 and M3.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I favor alternative B with a $250 millionborrowing, which I interpret as being essentially where we are now,after the recent easing. I would have a symmetrical directive. Ialso agree wholeheartedly with Manley on his views about the discountrate. It seems to me that whatever marginal adjustments we make inmonetary policy ought to be done through open market operations andthat we ought to avoid a change in the discount rate for the reasons-59-2/9-10/88that he stated rather well. However, my alternative B and $250million borrowing are predicated on the current discount rate. If thecircumstances should arise over the coming weeks that there might be achange in the discount rate, then I think one would have to revisitopen market operations. I don't think that we ought necessarily tolet a discount rate change automatically change open marketoperations. It seems to me that while they obviously work together,they are separate decisions; and a change in one shouldn'tautomatically lead to a change in the other.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I'm generally in favor of alternative B, with oneslight modification that I'll get to in a moment. But I think, asseveral people have mentioned, that we should work a little harderthan we have, at least, at achieving the borrowing objective--howeverwe specify it. In light of that, and in light of what I've seen goingon in the markets lately and the relationship between the fundsrate/discount rate spread and borrowings, I think I would favor aborrowing target probably in the neighborhood of $200 million ratherthan $250 million. If we worked to achieve that, I wouldn't besurprised if the funds rate might drop below 6-1/2 percent onoccasion; but on occasion, it might also rise to, or maybe even above,6-3/4 percent. I wouldn't try to prejudge or pinpoint that to a greatextent.As far as the long run is concerned, I am where I was before;that is, it seems to me that given all the circumstances, alternativeIII is the preferable one. I don't see a conflict between the short-run stance of policy and the long-run objective package. As I readDon's numbers, those things look like they fit perfectly. They don'tseem to be at all that much variance. We are not very good atforecasting monetary aggregate growth month-to-month or quarter-to-quarter anyway. So, I think you could convey a message about both theshort-run needs and concerns about the economy as well as the long-runobjective of policy with that combination.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're arguing for a wider potentialrange; would you be willing to accept 4 to 8 then?MR. STERN. I guess I'm not in favor of a wider potentialrange. I'm not sure I see particularly what it buys us. I'm notviolently opposed to it, but--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It does, I guess, send a message that wehaven't concluded that the money numbers have been locked back intothe economy in the way in which they were historically.MR. STERN. But that has been the case for some time, and forM2 and M3 we kept these 3-point ranges, regardless.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. With some cost.MR. STERN. Well, I don't see any problem with that. I thinkone of the values of the ranges is that when you hit the limits,you've got to stop and think and assess the situation: Do you want topermit the aggregates to go outside on the high side or the low side,or don't you? It seems to me that's one of the virtues of the ranges.-60-2/9-10/88And we may decide to let them go, but at least we will have given somehealthy analysis to the question.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I would favor "B", but I'd like tosee the average level of the federal funds rate near the lower end ofthis projected 6-1/2 to 6-3/4 percent range. I think there's a goodchance that the relationship between the level of borrowing and thefederal funds rate is going to continue to surprise us from time-to-time in the weeks ahead. So, I'd like to maintain this flexibility inthe operating procedures that we have, and retain the sentence that'son lines 103 to 107 of the directive in this form.As far as the long run is concerned, I would stick withalternative III. The statement that I'm really trying to make is thatI think there is uncertainty in the economy now. We have to beaccommodative and make sure that that doesn't become serious. But mysuspicion is that it's not going to be all that bad. So we want to becareful in the long run not to waken fears that we have thrown in thetowel on the inflation issue, yet at the same time show sensitivity tothe weakness that has been evident recently.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Having sat here for two days reminds me what adifficult job this is at the minimum wage. Even at $4 an hour, thehigher minimum wage, we'd still be--. But more seriously, I think oneof the most difficult jobs that economic forecasters have ispredicting turning points. I sort of remember that from school and Ialso remember it, having lived a long time and through a number ofbusiness cycle turns. I think policymakers also have a difficult timedoing that--even identifying that the turn has occurred after thefact. I just want to make sure that we are looking at every singlething here, and we have looked at a lot, certainly. And we're very,very sensitive to the notion that there might be a bomb placedsomewhere in this. It's just this feeling of unease I have, I guess,that I would like to concentrate on. I'll also repeat that I thinkthere are risks on the downside both in this half of the year and myfriend Governor Heller has convinced me that the bounce-back [in thesecond half] isn't assured either. So that makes me doubly concerned.I'd like to convey that feeling of risk and uncertainty and of havingto watch carefully how we proceed.If I had to choose among the alternatives as stated, it wouldprobably be alternative A. If we can come up with something that'ssort of a marriage between "A" and "B", then I could certainly votefor that. But I am not convinced that the bankers are back to normalif they ever were normal. I know a lot of them, and I had a feelingthat those scars were going to remain for a while and I think they areremaining. Therefore, I think it's more realistic to put a number inthe borrowing path that, in fact, reflects what's going on--which isBob Heller's $150 million. I think that's what their behavior isreally suggesting. I think if we force the $250 million, we would putquite a bit of upward pressure on fed funds rates. I'm willing to gowith maintaining the current degree of pressure, but I don't think the$250 million would produce that. Instead of putting all the latitude-61-2/9-10/88on the Desk, I would rather give us a little vote in the process andlet us suggest that maybe it go down to around $150 million.On the longer term, I would vote for alternative II with thebroader band for M2--4 to 8 percent rather than 5 to 8 percent, and 5to 8 percent for M3. A main concern I have is how these numbers willbe received by the financial markets when they are announced. Rightat this moment I would be very sensitive about sending any messagethat we are tightening or even considering a tightening. And I thinkone way to prevent that is to keep the upper end of this band where ithas been. So that's what I would vote for; I'm not sure that'sspecified exactly as an alternative.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I'm also in the camp that feelsthat the risks this year are more on the soft side. I agree withGovernor Heller in that I don't think this second half is in the bagand I would be fearful of anything that looked like a tightening. I'mreally quite comfortable with the slight easing that has occurred sofar. At this meeting I would like to come out with a configurationthat would essentially leave us there. I'm not exactly sure whatwould accomplish that. I think if we have $250 million as a borrowingtarget and take that seriously, it might result in what would appearto be a tightening, which I would not be comfortable with. So, Ithink I favor a $150 million to $200 million borrowing target andalternative B with some asymmetric language on the easing side. Andfor the longer term, I agree that we must maintain our posture againstinflation. For that reason, I would stay with alternative III inorder to maintain that message in the market.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Could you read that as 4 to 8 percent?MR. KELLEY. I could read that as 4 to 8 percent, yes sir.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, for the short term, I favoralternative B, and the $250 million borrowing assumption, with theunderstanding that it would be interpreted as Don explained. In thelonger term, my preference would be to remain with alternative II asspecified--that is, 5 to 8 percent on M2. I could accept 4 to 8percent if that's where the majority was. It does seem to me thatmaintaining the 8 percent on the top side still represents a downwardmove of a half a point [from the range for 1987], which indicates thatwe continue to be concerned about inflation. If you throw in anotherhalf a point on top--which, in effect, would knock a full point off--that might be, in my judgment, a little overkill in showing ourdetermination.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would opt in the short run foralternative B with the existing borrowing target of $250 million. I'mconcerned about trying to hit a target below that--and I'm talkingabout the $100, $150, or $200 million--simply because I think there isa frictional level of borrowing where we lose control, particularly ifyou get seasonal borrowing as $50, $70, or $100 million of that $100-62-2/9-10/88million borrowing target. I think you take a real risk: if things donot come in as you want in the first quarter and you choose to moveagainst a recession, then you have to do a discount rate decrease.And I think the implications of that for the dollar are very great, asGovernor Johnson has pointed out. As a result, I would stay rightwhere we are with the borrowing target of $250 million. On the longrun, I favor alternative II with a 5 to 8 percent range for M2; Icould accept the 4 to 8 percent range. I agree with the point made byBob Boykin that we have already gone down a half of a percentage pointfrom the targets set for 1987 and if you do another half point, yougive the view that you went on the low side. That's something I don'twant to do.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You spoke earlier, Mr. Chairman,about the need to try to come out of this with a point of view thatcould command some support. I'm tempted to say, looking at thislittle score card here, that you were clairvoyant in anticipating thatthat might not be the easiest thing to do. Let me first say what ismy preference and then what I guess I would regard as acceptable. Mypreference on the short run is a straight plain vanilla alternative B;and on the long run, a straight plain vanilla alternative III. In theshort run, I could associate myself with Gary Stern's approach, whichwould have "B" with a little tilt toward "A"--$200 million borrowingbut with the expectation that on the borrowing we'd work toward--I'llcome back to that in a minute.On the long term, again, I could accept 4 to 8 percent. Ihave three kinds of problems here. One is a little uneasiness aboutthe thrust of policy, let's say, that I can accept. Two is, that ifthe conduct of policy in the days and weeks ahead were strongly toprejudice the discount rate question--in a context in which theeconomic outlook, or the exchange market, or whatever, is notdifferent in a material way from what it is right now--I would havereal trouble at that point. Even so, we have to go carefully here, atleast until we get the trade number. If that trade number turns outto be a real bummer, even the kind of finessing we're trying to dohere is going to backfire.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, there is no finessing under thoseconditions.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think it is extremely important,at least for the foreseeable future and barring some material change,to try to conduct operations in a way that is not prejudicial to thediscount rate. My third point--calling a spade a spade--is that nowwe are running policy off the federal funds rate and I think that's amistake.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I share your view, Mr. Chairman, that thefinancial markets do have some fragility to them. Given thecircumstances we are in, I think it's rather dangerous to be in aposition of tightening credit at all. I'm not comfortable with even asmall step towards tightening. That's why I believe what we've donehas been not so well thought out, because I think we have set-63-2/9-10/88ourselves up in the circumstance in which we are apt to find itnecessary to tighten--and tighten after the fact--and that poses adangerous problem. I don't mean to be insensitive to the problemsthat we have had and I don't want to make too much over little, butwhen we have hardly any opportunity to go in the other direction,every step we lose on the downside gets to be, I think, rathersignificant.I think this talk about borrowing targets and then the fedfunds rate, frankly, has become a kind of zigzag step which neverends. I vote with the majority and I end up losing. And, GovernorJohnson, I just have to congratulate you--I mean you voted in theminority and you've won! And I just want to admit that to you; it wasreally very, very well done. I hope everyone understands thesensitivity that I have at this point. I would not make any movesother than what I thought was exactly right for the U.S. economy andthe world economy. I think we are running some severe risks of otherfactors blowing up and I don't understand why that is good from anyperspective. In the spirit of wanting to go along, I'll try to goalong. But I would like some assurance that we are not going to justkeep doing this, Mr. Chairman.On the long term, my first choice is alternative III, but Ican go with 4 to 8 percent. I can go with "B", if that's not easingfrom our present position. And I would like to have us mention theborrowing targets in the directive. I'd like the borrowing target togo in the directive. I would like either to lose with the fed fundstargeting issue and have it be fed funds, or I'd like to win, Mr.Chairman, and have borrowing be in the directive. And if we can workin that spirit of cooperation, I'll try to cooperate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What's your borrowing number?MR. ANGELL. My borrowing preference is $250 million; that'sthe deal we made. We talked about going from $300 million to $250million and we did it. And then I see the Desk operating in such away that it puts us in jeopardy--having to tighten to go to what Iagreed to do. I seem impatient and I'm sorry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sorry we didn't record that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We did!MR. ANGELL. But I want everyone to know I do understand theyare just differences in opinion and not--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Look, you're raising an issue which Ithink is right at the cutting edge of the policy operations. And thisissue has to be resolved at some point in a satisfactory mannerbecause, in a sense, it is a disruptive issue with respect to thisCommittee. And I--MR. JOHNSON. Yes--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Quiet. It may well be appropriate tofind another vehicle--maybe a luncheon discussion--in which we startfrom scratch, go through lists, and then at some point get a reallyformal decision, so we are not, in your judgment, unable to get firm-64-2/9-10/88positions on this. My own impression is that it's not a bad idea toput it on the luncheon agenda next time around. We can't have thiscontinuous discussion going on without having the Committee bringforth its judgment of precisely how this issue is going to beresolved--and not let it be at the discretion of either Mr.Sternlight, myself, or anyone else around here. Without objection, Ithink we'll put it on the luncheon agenda for next time.MR. JOHNSON. Mr. Chairman, may I say one little word onthis?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One.MR. JOHNSON. I sympathize completely with what GovernorAngell is saying, although somehow I don't feel I've won. But I doagree this has to get resolved. We can't go on arguing over whatoperational policy ought to be. It has to get clarified and then onceit's clarified, I'm totally satisfied joining whatever team that turnsout to be; I'll work within those rules. But right now we are in aconfusing period. It's one of those times when I'm not sure it'sclear. But it has to be clear at some point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Morris.MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I agree with Mr. Corrigan that wetackle our policy as if we are controlling the funds rate. I don'tfeel upset by this, however. I think there are only two things we cancontrol--the funds rate or the rate of growth in reserves. And whatwe have found in recent years is that there is no stable relationshipbetween the rate of growth in reserves and the objectives of thisCommittee. So let's face it: that leaves us only with makingjudgments with respect to interest rates. Even though we find it'sdifficult to follow, because of the experience of the 1970s, I thinkit's much better to face it than to build sand castles based somehowon relationships between borrowing levels and our objectives. Iserved on this Committee when Bill Martin was Chairman. For 19 yearshe controlled monetary policy through monitoring the federal fundsrate [or other money market rates]. And that 19 years was a period ofextremely successful monetary policy. I think the idea that we cannothave a successful policy controlling the funds rate is simply wrong.I think we have a lot of history to suggest that we can. So, I don'tshare Jerry's concern about calling a spade a spade.Therefore, my recommended policy would be alternative B, bywhich I mean that we keep the federal funds rate around 6-5/8percent--I think that's what Don described--until such time as wethink it ought to be moved lower or higher. As far as the long-termrange, Mr. Chairman, I would prefer alternative III; but as apractical matter I see absolutely no difference between alternative IIand alternative III and I'd follow your discretion as to which one youthink would be politically superior, because from my experience, ahalf of one percent over a year is nothing that we ought to quarrelabout.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I guess we could get to work toward ourluncheon discussion if we wanted to consider a penalty discount rate;-65-2/9-10/88that ought to reduce the concern over borrowings. I think FrankMorris raised a good point. We haven't been willing to address therate of growth in reserves, because while we may be able to controlthat, we haven't liked the outcomes. That may be because we have beenuncomfortable with the relationship between money and the economy.That's a longwinded way of saying that it's still a pretty confusingscenario in my own mind. I would tend to favor alternative B in theshort run, ensuring that the growth in the monetary aggregatescontinues; I would err on the side of making sure that growth iscontinued. In terms of the longer term, I would stick withalternative III.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that there seems to be a verygeneral consensus about willingness to accept 4 to 8 percent for M2 bya large majority, if not all, of the voting members. But it's notclear to me exactly how everyone comes out on M3. Don, do you haveany recommendation on that?MR. KOHN. Well, my thought on the matter was that you couldretain the 5 to 8 percent M3 range. We are projecting growth around6-1/2 percent, so--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're talking about M3?MR. KOHN. For M3, right. So, 5 to 8 percent would encompassthat, but 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent is also close. As I think PresidentParry and some others mentioned, we have on occasion in the past--though not for the last several years--had M3 ranges that wereslightly higher than M2 ranges. So, it's not without precedence.MR. PARRY. I have one question about that. If you had the 4to 8 percent range for M2 and 5 to 8 percent for M3--we really don'twant to make a distinction between the two in terms of uncertainties.The 4 to 8 percent is fine; I like it because the midpoint is 6percent. But in talking this out, given the uncertainties, I'm notthat confident about implying that you have greater certainty about M3than M2. That's the only problem I see having two different ranges.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would the rest of you like to speak tothat? Does anybody have any objection to keeping them the same?MR. HELLER. Deciding now, 4 to 8 percent for both?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. 4 to 8 percent for both.MR. BOEHNE. I think if we change one, we ought to changeboth.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, I sense you'd say 4 to 8 percent onboth?MR. BOEHNE. Yes.SPEAKER(?). That's fine.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If that is acceptable, why don't you[Mr. Bernard] read the paragraph for the long-term objectives as itwould read under those conditions.-66-2/9-10/88MR. BERNARD. "The Federal Open Market Committee seeksmonetary and financial conditions that will foster reasonable pricestability over time, promote growth in output on a sustainable basis,and contribute to an improved pattern of international transactions.In furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at this meetingestablished growth ranges of 4 to 8 percent for both M2 and M3,measured from the fourth quarter of 1987 to the fourth quarter of1988." Then we need something for debt. "The monitoring range forgrowth in total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at _ to _ percentfor the year."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What do you recommend, Don?MR. KOHN. We had 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent, but if you'rewidening the ranges for M2 and M3, I don't know--MR. HELLER. 7 to 11 percent then.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. 7 to 11 percent is fine.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. 7 to 11 percent?MR. BERNARD. So, nonfinancial debt is set at 7 to 11 percentfor the year. And then moving on to M1, for which I gather we have norange, the language there would be: "With respect to M1 the Committeeagain decided not to establish a specific target for 1988. Thebehavior of this aggregate in relation to economic activity and priceshas become very sensitive to changes in interest rates, among otherfactors, as evidenced by sharp swings in its velocity in recent years.Consequently, the appropriateness of changes in M1 this year willcontinue to be evaluated in the light of the behavior of its velocity,developments in the economy and financial markets, and the nature ofemerging price pressures."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody have any objection to the M1language that's here? If not, can we now go to a vote?MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesGovernor Heller YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor Seger YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. On the remainder of the directive, it'sa little more difficult to read, but let me tell you what I tabulate.Everyone is on "B" straight, or with a slight movement towards "A",with Governor Seger at "A" or somewhere between "A" and "B". Thedistribution of the borrowings objectives is: $250 million (4); $200million (4); $150 to $200 million (1); and $150 million (2). I wouldread the mode, at this point, as represented by $200. And thatimplies a funds rate of roughly 6-1/2 percent, as I understand it.-67-2/9-10/88Does anybody read the voting members of this Committee differentlyfrom that? That's the tabulation I got. I would interpret this to bemaintaining the pressure in recent days, with some slightlyasymmetrical language towards ease if one can find such language inhere. My impression, however, is that the instructions to the Deskare reasonably clear in the sense that everyone has indicated--thereare differences within a relatively narrow range, I think, but theyare not as great as they might be. Anybody have any comments orstatements on anything?MR. ANGELL. I think I could compromise at $200 million if wecan be symmetric. But to go to $200 million and then also beasymmetric--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, no, I didn't mean that. I'm sorry,you're quite right. The question is how we interpret "A" and "B".What we have to do is take $200 million symmetrically.SPEAKER(?). Symmetrically?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. Now if one can find the languagefor that--MR. BOEHNE. And this is on the assumption of a 6 percentdiscount rate?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. STERN. What about the language in here with regard toflexibility? Would we be likely to retain that or would we pull that?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What's the view of the Committee?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Could I just say a further word onthis, but hopefully without getting into a debate or a longdiscussion? I don't think the question of the operating tactics ofmonetary policy on a day-to-day basis comes down to what will work orwhat won't work. I think it's true you can make almost anything work.The question that I think is important is preserving for theCommittee, and for you as Chairman, an appropriate degree offlexibility. We are not clairvoyant; we cannot anticipate everysituation that arises. We have to have the kind of flexibility to dothings that need to be done. So, from my point of view, it's not somuch a technical question as to what produces the best statisticalresult and the highest R square. It's a question of what preservesthe maximum flexibility for the Committee as a whole, and for you asChairman, to be able to guide policy in a manner that's consistentwith the thrust of the Committee's wishes but incorporates the kindsof flexibility that are often needed. So, Mr. Chairman, that's how Isee the issue.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't think anyone disagrees withthat. I think the problem gets back to a language question.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If we assume the Bluebook's and DonKohn's estimates of "B" being $250 million, then if you use "B" with-68-2/9-10/88no [change in the] borrowing target, implicitly, it becomes "B" with aslight tilt towards ease. If we use $200 million as the borrowingtarget then it's symmetrical. The question is what is conveyed in thedirective when published. I don't think this is a problem for PeterSternlight; I think we have made it clear for him. The question iswhat is the appropriate language to communicate to the public, uponpublication, what our particular position is. I would entertain somediscussion from the Committee on what's the right way.MR. HELLER. May I ask a question? What are the numbersyou're penciling in for the M growths?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry, for the--MR. HELLER. Monetary Ms?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In the short term?MR. HELLER. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's the right question to ask since wehave changed the long term; and it's a most interesting issue.Alternative B is basically 6-1/2 percent [M2 growth], but I would readit as somewhat lower in view of what we did with the longer term. Iwould read it as 6-1/4 percent growth myself.MR. PARRY. No, I think you'd go the other way.MR. HELLER. No, not if you're lowering--the old borrowingtarget implicit in "B" was $250 million, right? So--MR. PARRY. But I think there's enough uncertainty--MR. HELLER. You shouldn't have a little--MR. PARRY. Bob, there's enough uncertainty associated withthe relationship that one can be comfortable with the 6-1/2 percent.MR. HELLER. 6-1/2 percent, yes.MR. ANGELL. Let's not argue about that.MR. BOEHNE. I would suggest, what about 6 to 7 percent?Okay?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Put it that way--yes, I feel comfortablewith that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, especially if Don thinks thatthe numbers are coming in a little higher anyway.MR. KOHN. They may be up there already.MR. JOHNSON. That's fine.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, 6 to 7 percent.MR. BOEHNE. 6 to 7 percent for both M2 and M3.-69-2/9-10/88SPEAKER(?). Okay.MR. MELZER. I think what ought to be conveyed to the marketis that one easing took place here. They're going to see that. Justtoday we had a period ending that way; they're going to see that lowborrowings number; there are already feelings around that some easinghas taken place. I think one thing that the directive ought to conveyis that there was one step; I don't think you want to somehow in thelanguage create the impression that a step was taken and then asubsequent step was taken today.MR. PARRY. I share that [view].MR. BOEHNE. I agree with that; it ought to be right up inthe front sentence.MR. PARRY. I think that's right; how do you do it then?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In fact, that would convey far more thanthis result.MR. ANGELL. Well, I thought we were taking a position thatwe are not easing today; we are maintaining existing conditions.MR. BOEHNE. No, you would say "to maintain the slightlyeasier"--MR. ANGELL. It's just that I think--apparently most think--that the $200 million borrowings is consistent with the existingconditions.MR. BOEHNE. But you would say that you would maintain theslightly easier degree of pressures sought in recent days.MS. SEGER. Would you say confirm the easing?MR. BOEHNE. That captures it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh no, that strikes me as--MR. JOHNSON. Maintain the slightly--MR. BOEHNE. Put "the slightly easier degree of pressure onreserve positions sought in recent days".MR. FORRESTAL. We have used that same language before.MR. BOEHNE. That says we are maintaining what we have donein the last couple of weeks, which I think would capture what we haveagreed to.MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. KOHN. It's a slightly reduced pressure.MR. BOEHNE. All right, slightly reduced pressure.MR. PARRY. Of recent days.-70-2/9-10/88MR. BOEHNE. Of recent days.MR. KOHN. Sought in recent days.MR. PARRY. Right.MR. ANGELL. I guess I want to second a little what PresidentCorrigan said in regard to the degree of flexibility. I'm perfectlyopen to having alterations in policy when the data show somethingdifferent. I'm very open to that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If you took Ed's language and put 6to 7 percent in for the aggregates that--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's why I like [it], if it's true.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's the right tone. Anybody have anyfurther comments on this?MS. SEGER. What we end up doing, though, is never voting fora policy change in this Committee. I was thinking of last April whena snugging was taking place that we never voted on; but at the end ofApril we sort of confirmed the tightening that had occurred. But wenever actually voted at the FOMC meeting on a policy to tighten. Iwas not opposed to doing it, but it just seems to me that there is adifference between our voting to ease, or whatever, and voting for nochange with a tilt one way or the other--in which case the Desk canchange the policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But remember that the Committee canalways reverse the Desk.MS. SEGER. Uh-huh.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In other words, this Committee has theability any time it meets to reverse whatever the Desk is doing. So,in a sense, the acquiescence to the Desk's change is effectively avote of this Committee to change policy.MR. BOEHNE. I think what we're seeing here is the calling ofa spade a spade. The more you conduct policy focusing on the federalfunds rate, the more frequent Committee meetings you need. And in thedays when we were literally focusing on the federal funds rate therewere Open Market Committee meetings every three weeks or so. The morewe moved away from the federal funds rate to reserves--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's--MR. BOEHNE. We've spread it [the intermeeting interval] out.MR. JOHNSON. I disagree with that. If you vote on the fundsrate why would you ever have to have another Committee meeting?MR. BOEHNE. I think the reason is that you don't have anyflexibility to take account of changes that could come in. You can'tjust absolutely fix interest rates for six weeks at a time.-71-2/9-10/88CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well I know--MR. JOHNSON. You could set a range.MR. BOEHNE. You could set a range, and then if you set arange, somebody has to have the authority to go back and forth. Ithink we generally have given the Chairman a great deal of flexibilitywithin the range that was set. One can quarrel with that procedure,but it seems to me that the Chairman acted completely within theframework of the directive that we passed last time--a directive thatgave him the flexibility to move up and down given certain sets ofconditions. You may or may not like his decision, or you may or maynot have done it the way he did it; you may want to rein him in, oryou may want to give him more flexibility. But I think that we haveto blame ourselves--not the Chairman for using the flexibility that wegave him.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I suggest that the issue of thefrequency of meetings of the FOMC also be on the agenda as part ofthis review. I think I'm hearing, as I've come into this place in thelast six months, that something is happening to the operationalprocedures in the System and that it would probably be useful to havea thoroughgoing review and decision on the part of the Committee as towhat form of surveillance the Committee chooses to adopt. And thefrequency of meetings is not an insignificant question. Do you haveenough to read something [Mr. Bernard]?MR. BERNARD. Yes, I think so. "In the implementation ofpolicy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain theslightly reduced degree of pressure on reserve positions sought inrecent days." And then I'm not sure about the next sentence--whetheror not that stays in.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Which one?MR. BERNARD. "The Committee agrees that the current morenormal approach to open market operations remains appropriate."MR. HELLER. How about "the current approach remainsappropriate."MR. BERNARD. Current--MR. HELLER. You mean before that you were less normal.MS. SEGER. But I thought we were hearing it isn't back tonormal.MR. HELLER. Well, it's a public statement.MR. JOHNSON. But if you read the rest of the sentence, themore normal implies more normal since right after the stock market[crash]. And I agree that it's probably a little more normal than itwas then--MR. HELLER. Yes, but that says the current approach remainsappropriate.-72-2/9-10/88MR. JOHNSON. You can do it either way.MS. SEGER. Or less normal.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the bracketed sentence captureswhat is going on in the markets.MR. BOEHNE. I think so too.MR. MELZER. If it doesn't, we have a problem with the lastpolicy record.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't you read--MR. BERNARD. "The Committee agrees that the current morenormal approach to open market operations remains appropriate; stillsensitive conditions in financial markets and uncertainties in theeconomic outlook may continue to call for some flexibility inoperations."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody object to that sentence then?SEVERAL(?). No.MR. BERNARD. "Taking account of conditions in financialmarkets, somewhat lesser reserve restraint or somewhat greater reserverestraint would be acceptable depending on the strength of thebusiness expansion, indications of inflationary pressures,developments in foreign exchange markets, as well as the behavior ofthe monetary aggregates. The contemplated reserve conditions areexpected to be consistent with growth in both M2 and M3 over theperiod from November through March at annual rates of 6 to 7 percent.Over the same period, growth in M1 is expected to remain relativelylimited. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if itappears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditionsduring the period before the next meeting are likely to be associatedwith a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of"--we had 4to 8 percent.MS. SEGER. 6-1/4 to 6-1/2 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You're calling a spade a spade.MR. BLACK. Consistent.MS. SEGER. That's trying to be on this side.MR. BOEHNE. You at least would pass a lie detector.MR. BERNARD. A range of 4 to 8 percent.MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me also state that implicit--MR. KOHN. I'm sorry--something jumped off the page at me asNorm was reading. "Growth in M1 is expected to remain relativelylimited"--we have 6 percent.-73-2/9-10/88MR. BLACK. Yes, I had the same problem.MR. KOHN. That may or may not be relatively limited, that's--MR. BOEHNE. Relatively moderate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do we want that sentence at all?MR. HELLER. Just scratch it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Also implicit, but not stated, is theunderstanding that should conditions arise in which the Board movesthe discount rate in either direction, I think an FOMC meeting at thatpoint is immediately appropriate--a discussion of policy isimmediately on the table. I think that's all I have to say on thatissue. Can we go to a vote?MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesGovernor Heller YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor Seger YesPresident Stern YesMR. BOEHNE. My congratulations to you, Mr. Chairman. Youhave performed a miracle.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't know where it came from.END OF MEETING-74-