Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 5-6, 1989A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Wednesday, July 5, 1989, at 3:00 p.m., and continuingon Thursday, July 6, 1989, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT:Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellGuffeyJohnsonKeehnKelleyLaWareMelzerSegerSyronMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Hoskins, and Stern, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta,and San Francisco, respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Kohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPatrikis, Deputy General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey,Promisel, Scheld, Siegman, and Simpson,Associate EconomistsMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1. Attended Thursday session only.-2-Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Stockton, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office ofBoard Members, Board of Governors2Mr. Wajid, Office of Board Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMs. Danker, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs,Board of GovernorsMr. Mahoney, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs,Board of GovernorsMr. Teplin, Economist, Division of Research and Statistics,Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, Lang, and Rosenblum,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of SanFrancisco, Richmond, Cleveland, Philadelphia, and Dallas,respectivelyMs. Lovett and Mr. McNees, Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of New York and Boston, respectivelyMr. Vangel, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof New YorkMr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bankof MinneapolisMs. Rosenbaum, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bankof Atlanta2. Attended Thursday session only.3. Attended portion of the meeting relating to the Committee'sdiscussion of the economic outlook and its longer-run objectivesfor monetary and debt aggregates.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofJuly 5-6, 1989July 5, 1989--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good afternoon, everyone. Ed Boehne isin transit. Apparently the train broke down or something unbelievablehappened; he's driving in and should be here in about one-half hour.But let's move forward. Would somebody like to move approval of theprevious meeting's minutes?MS. SEGER. I'll move it.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Cross, would youbring us up to date on your operations?MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any questions for Mr. Cross?Lee.MR. HOSKINS. Sam, on the warehousing agreement: When wasthat done and do we review it regularly at this Committee?MR. CROSS. We review it every year. It was reviewed inMarch of this year and reestablished without change, as has been donefor many years--ever since I've been here.MR. TRUMAN. There were similar arrangements that we used inthe early 1970s.MR. HOSKINS. Is that ever questioned by Congress as a way tocircumvent the limit that's placed on the [Exchange Stabilization]Fund?MR. TRUMAN. To my knowledge Congress has never raised anyquestions about it. It was established more or less permanently inthe late 1970s when the Treasury issued Carter bonds and they wantedto simply [make permanent] that limit and wanted to monetize theCarter bonds; so we held them from that point. It was carefullyexamined by the Committee at that time and [the decision] was madepublic; since then we've continued the arrangement. It is reviewed atthe March organizational meeting.MR. HOSKINS. It's reviewed and voted on?MR. CROSS. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do we have statutory limits?MR. TRUMAN. No, the $5 billion limit is a limit that theFOMC imposed.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But Lee is asking--MR. HOSKINS. I thought the limit was imposed by Congress.7/5-6/89MR. CROSS. No.MR. TRUMAN. No. I took your comment to mean that a limit isimposed by Congress in that the balance sheet of the ESF is in somesense controlled by Congress. It was last voted on by Congress Ithink in the 1930s but implicitly also, I guess, when they voted onthe SDR [amendment to the IMF Articles].MR. HOSKINS. Then why do we have to go through a warehousingarrangement? You could just allow them to increase the Fund.MR. TRUMAN. Because there is a practical limit on the[Fund], which is the size of their balance sheet. They have dollarsthat were originally acquired at the time gold was--MR. CROSS. The devaluation of gold in 1933.MR. TRUMAN. The dollar amount was set up in the ExchangeStabilization Fund then; it has been used periodically for a varietyof things and they also hold U.S. SDRs. Congress did review thisissue in the context of the approval of the SDRs. In the firstamendment to the [Articles of] Agreement in the late 1960s, theyauthorized the ESF to transfer to the Federal Reserve SDR certificateswhich, in effect, allows them to monetize those SDRs. In that sense,they again reviewed that source of the ESF funding itself. But that'sthe last time I know of that it was formally reviewed.MR. CROSS. The logic in a sense is not too different fromwhat the Treasury and the Central Bank have. Even when the goldflowed into the country then you were allowed to issue thosecertificates and receive dollars for them. We no longer have the goldflows; we have foreign exchange flows. And this, in a sense, is asimilar allowance for the Treasury to monetize these assets and gainthe dollars for them.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's also another implicit issuehere: namely, that there's a pro forma 50/50 split. If that splitwere not there we could do it all and they would not do anything. So,it's merely a question for them of being able to maintain their 50percent share of the intervention that's involved. So it's not acircumvention of any statute or convention; it's merely the result ofthe arithmetic of the limits of the ESF plus a desire on the part ofthe Treasury to maintain the 50/50 split. The only way it can be doneis through the warehousing operation. I should say it's one of theways; there are other ways.MR. HOSKINS. There are other ways they can get Congressionalapproval for more money for the Fund. I'm not asking anybody to dothat, but it seems to me that to some extent we've got something outof whack here. Either the Fund is too small relative to the size ofoperations we're currently conducting--MR. CROSS. It isn't the Fund. What this does is to shiftthe assets in the Fund; it doesn't change the size of the Fund. Itallows them to transfer one asset to another asset.MR. HOSKINS. I understand that. Well, let me ask youanother question, Sam.7/5-6/89MR. TRUMAN. It is true, as the Chairman commented, thatuntil the late 1970s, all the foreign exchange held by the UnitedStates--what little we had--was held by the Federal Reserve. So thisissue didn't come up in that context. The Treasury didn't get intothe holding of foreign exchange balances except with respect to theirown lending operations until the late 1970s.MR. HOSKINS. Are they accumulating [unintelligible] now?Sam, is that sufficient?MR. CROSS. Yes. The dollar has been declining now forseveral weeks and we're about 8 or 9 percent down from the highs. Westill have more than $2 billion availability under the open limit.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do we run into a headroom problem there?MR. CROSS. Pardon me?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do we run into a headroom problem there?In other words, has the dollar decline--MR. TRUMAN. No, it's at historical rates.MR. CROSS. We value it on the basis at which we haveactually made a transaction; so we don't change it when the exchangerates change. That is the only way we can do it because, if we didn'thandle it that way, we could inadvertently run out of leeway withnothing happening.MR. ANGELL. Sam, to what extent did you use banks to executethe orders in such a manner that the market would not have immediatelyrecognized it as a central bank order?MR. CROSS. Well, during this period we did most of it inwhat we call a discreet manner. That is to say, we operated through abank acting as an agent so that--although the word does get around insome way and people who are following these markets closely can oftentell a lot of what's going on--we did not go in openly buying foreigncurrencies. For the most part we had particular banks operating onour behalf in order not to show the extent to which the central bankswere in there. We had gotten to a point where operating visibly wasnot really working very effectively and we thought it would be betterto operate this way. Indeed, it has been much more successful.Remember, the other central banks have done the same thing, followingour doing it. The Germans most recently, and the Japanese too, havebeen operating in a discreet manner.MR. ANGELL. Do you think you were able to buy more cheaplyby buying discreetly than if you had bought openly? Did you buy theportfolio--MR. CROSS. I think it was a lot more effective because wehad reached a point where the market tended to feel that these rateswere out of control--well, not out of control but beyond the rangesthat the authorities wanted. And when they saw the central bankcoming in there they almost took that as a basis [for believing] thatthe dollar was by definition undervalued. And they tended to hit itquickly. Now, in operating more discreetly we have been able to kind7/5-6/89of encourage the dollar down without appearing to try to take on themarket in a direct way. Under certain conditions one technique ismore appropriate and under other circumstances another way is. Wehave felt during this period, given the market conditions that wefaced, that this was the better way to operate. And I think that hasproved to be the case.MR. ANGELL. Well, Mr. Chairman I would make a comment: Ijust do not agree that it's appropriate for us to act in ways that areintended to confuse the markets or mislead the markets. I believethat markets work best when all participants have information as towhat's going on. I am not a strong believer [in the view] that itmade the difference because you did it in a discreet fashion lately.My guess would be that if you had operated discreetly during theprevious period and you operated openly during this period you'd havefound out that an open way would have worked in a better fashion. Ijust don't hold that these kinds of moves make that much difference.But even if they did, I do not believe it's appropriate for agovernment agency in a market society to be acting in such a manner.It's not appropriate for us; I believe it opens up the possibility forthe charge of someone privately benefitting from what we do. So, Mr.Chairman, I would register not a dissent from the actions but anindication that if that were to continue I think I would have toobject.MR. TRUMAN. Governor Angell, Sam does make a regular reporton Desk operations [public] every three months. It's not as if theoperations are--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Give me a scenario in which privateparties--MR. ANGELL. Well, when we operate in securities transactionsat the foreign Desk in what I would call the normal manner that we useat the open market Desk we would be indicating to a group--to morethan one participant--what the Fed is doing. And they could all havea chance to participate. When you start choosing one bank to be youragent it seems to me it opens up possibilities.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're saying that that individual bankmay choose to--MR. ANGELL. Well, yes. And we have--MR. CROSS. Let me say a couple of things. First, even whenwe're operating openly we may go to, say, 5 banks out of 100--whateverthe number is. So it's not as though we operate in the way thedomestic Desk does and broadcast [our operations]; we never do that.We operate with a certain--we go out to do the transaction. Secondly,when we've operated discreetly we have done that with a bank on theunderstanding that they not reveal this information or talk to otherparts of their institution and so forth. Now, obviously the word--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I believe Governor Angell was raisingthe question as to whether the individual bank trades on thatinformation, which is not available to other participants in themarket.7/5-6/89MR. CROSS. Well, in a sense, a bank can do that any time weare in the market and are trading with a bank. As I say, if we areoperating quite openly we might go out and talk to 5 banks or 10banks. They might choose to join us, and this helps move the marketin the direction [we want] if they're convinced that it's going thatway. We do move around from one institution to another; we don't usethe same one, obviously. Sometimes we might use several at once, butwe do it in a way that they are not supposed to go tell all theircustomers and others that they are operating on behalf of the Fed.MR. ANGELL. I prefer to be operating in markets in whichself interest is assumed to be the motivating factor for the partieswe're dealing with rather than to be operating under the assumptionthat someone is going to be behaving in the manner that suits ourinterests and that might be against their own self interest.MR. CROSS. Anybody who is operating to suit our interestagainst their own interest is going to end up in the hardware businessor something pretty soon. I don't think any of them do that.MR. ANGELL. Well, in addition to the possibility ofsomething occurring that would give an impression of beinginappropriate--in regard to a favorable opportunity for one bank orone trader--I still would hold that it's always best to let marketsknow what it is we're doing and to try to buy at the best price. Andit seems to me that buying at the best price--MR. CROSS. We do buy at the best price.MR. TRUMAN. Governor Angell, we're doing it at the bestprice but within the limit. If you want to take your rule to thelimit--if [buying at the best price] was the objective--then we shouldhave been talking up the dollar for weeks and then Sam could have gonein and bought the foreign exchange cheap. The objective was not tominimize the price at which we picked up yen and DM balances; forbetter or for worse, it was to limit the rise of the dollar. Thatdoesn't necessarily always mean picking up the [best price]; you can'thave it both ways.MR. CROSS. We were trying to influence the market; thatdoesn't mean we were trying to fool the market. But I don't know thatit would follow that we always have to tell everybody in the marketevery time we operate. That seems to me to be a different matter.MR. ANGELL. Well, I realize that a bully has more clout attimes than does someone who plays according to the rules. But centralbanks have considerable power. And it seems to me they should operatein an open and clear fashion that gives participants access toinformation in a timely manner and does not seek to confuse. My view,Mr. Chairman, is that operating as we did tended to disrupt the normalmarket processes, including the price of gold. And I think it wasunnecessary and undesirable. That's all I have to say.MR. HOSKINS. Just a question. It may be more appropriatefor you, [Mr. Chairman]. It seems to me, if I've done my numbersright, that we have increased our net exposure some 50 percent in thelast couple of months.7/5-6/89MR. CROSS. Well, we increased it by $10 billion; we had $20billion and we now have $30 billion.MR. HOSKINS. That's about 50 percent. So the question is:Do we have any practical limits to the exposure that we want to takeon in terms of U.S. economic policy? Since the warehousingarrangement can be expanded indefinitely--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Implicitly, there are two questionsinvolved in this. They are basically separate ones. One is: Do wehave any limits on the amount of those transactions and eventually thenet positions we take strictly for the purpose of influencing themarket? And two is: Are we aware or do we care about the capitalgains and losses that are implicit in that particular action? Todate, the amounts of monies involved have been rather modest. One ofthe problems that you have, no matter what level you're dealing with,is that it's not always the case that maximizing one's capital gain inintervention would involve the same set of tactics that one wouldemploy to influence the market in a certain way. So, those can be twoseparate basic issues. I don't remember those issues ever coming upor [our positions] ever being of the size where those issues arose.But I would be more inclined to ask Sam whether he knows of any caseback in history when there was a concern about the size of ourpositions.MR. CROSS. Well, no. I certainly don't recall any suchtime. We have always had [some] and, indeed, even though $30 billionis higher than what we've had in the past I suspect the time may comewhen we will be pleased to have some currencies. But--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sam, what's the market value of our goldstock?MR. CROSS. Let's see.MR. TRUMAN. It's about 9 times the $11 billion; so, about$90 billion.MR. CROSS. It's $90 billion if you use market price.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In that sense the same issue as on theforeign currencies is involved--MR. ANGELL. Very similar.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One should consider them the same if weraise the issue about an absolute level of foreign currencies. Thesame logic requires that we question the size of [both].MR. TRUMAN. Oh, but that--MR. HOSKINS. I see that differently. I see we are notintervening in gold and in my view muddying up the water; we areintervening in currencies. I'm just wondering: How much would we do?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What I'm trying to get at is--you're notraising the question on capital gains?7/5-6/89MR. HOSKINS. No, I'm not.MR. JOHNSON. So, you're talking about whether there is alimit as to how much sterilized intervention we would do as a matterof policy.MR. HOSKINS. How much are we willing to do?MR. JOHNSON. But that question, it seems to me, involves ourrelationship with the Treasury as agent and whether we could doanything we wanted to. That's a big legal question and it gets intoall kinds of issues; I've asked those questions before too. It's notvery clear.MR. CROSS. It's not clear.MR. HOSKINS. But is there some limit where we will beconcerned about it? If we doubled [our exposure] to $60 billion,would that call for being semi-concerned?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If we get up to $60 billion thediscussion will last twice as long here!MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, it is fair to say--and maybe thisis a flimsy excuse, President Hoskins--that the reason there is alimit in the Authorization is precisely for the concerns that you areraising. I think you realize you're asking for a systematic ratherthan a routine basis. Historically, the limit was in there because wewere concerned about the other side; we were building up exposureshistorically because we were drawing down--MR. CROSS. Right.MR. TRUMAN. We were running into debt in periods when itwasn't clear how we were going to bail ourselves out of this process.But it was put into the Authorization--and that was a conscious moveon the part of the FOMC at the time--asymmetrically because theexposure was to find out whether we were net long or net short. Andit was intended so that the Committee could be concerned about thesethings. Now, on the Chairman's second question, we have done a staffanalysis in a research paper here that was issued recently which doessuggest that, at least on the financial risk side of things, ourintervention has been profitable. I agree with the Chairman; I don'tthink that's the major issue here. But that is one of the concerns.MR. JOHNSON. I don't think that was what Lee was saying.He's saying, as a matter of policy, is sterilized interventionsomething that you want to do and are there limits to that? I don'tthink he's talking about capital gains.MR. HOSKINS. No, I'm not talking about capital gains.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that Lee went into this [issueof] volume. I've never really focused on what the limits are but Ithink it has been the consensus that we're looking at a dollar bubblethat is going to turn down and make the issue moot at some point. Ifthat turns out to be false, I think we had better get involved in agood deal more strategic [discussion] of this with respect to the7/5-6/89Treasury, because I think we all feel uncomfortable about this. Butat the moment I would say that the issue is probably unnecessary andwill eventually disappear from [unintelligible] forecast on whatexchange rates are materializing in this group.MR. JOHNSON. Still, the interesting question would be, justhypothetically, if we stated that the Federal Reserve would no longerdo any intervention for [unintelligible] what would that mean? I'mnot sure it would make any difference.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It would make no difference.MR. JOHNSON. That's the problem.MR. CROSS. It might not make any difference; it would dependon what the Treasury's attitude was and what they were able to doabout it in part. And that creates all kinds of--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it will be for their own accountpresumably to get authorization to hold unlimited amounts of foreigncurrencies.MR. CROSS. Well, or to make some other changes.MR. TRUMAN. The worst of all possible worlds would be togive the Treasury the authority to dictate to the Federal Reserve todo it for its own account. Then the Federal Reserve would have noinfluence over the amount of sterilized intervention that took place.Only the monetary policy operations will offset it.MR. ANGELL. And certainly we don't want to do that.MR. TRUMAN. And the next step would be not to use monetarypolicy operations to offset it.MR. ANGELL. Of course, Mr. Chairman, my comments had nothingto do with any displeasure whatsoever in regard to the size of theintervention. Even though I'm willing to talk about Mr. Hoskins'point, I fully support our objectives in the sense that I support themas a part of the market stabilization effort as distinguished from amarket disruptive effort.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any further questions for Mr.Cross? We need a motion to ratify the transactions since the Maymeeting.MR. KELLEY. Moved.MR. JOHNSON. Seconded.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any objections? If not, themotion is passed. Joan Lovett could you bring us up to date on theactions of the Desk?MS. LOVETT. Thank you. [Statement--see Appendix.]7/5-6/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Joan Lovett? If there areno questions, do I have a motion first to ratify her request for atemporary increase from $6 to $8 billion in the intermeeting leeway?SPEAKER(?). So moved.MS. SEGER. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any objections? If not, we also need amotion to ratify the actions of the Desk since the May meeting.MR. MELZER. So move.MS. SEGER. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. The next item on theagenda is our usual chart show. Messrs. Prell and Truman.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Everyone should havefound by his seat a copy of this package of charts entitled "Materialfor Staff Presentation." [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for our colleagues? Manley.MR. JOHNSON. I'd like to follow up with a question I keepasking every time. The interest rate assumptions behind this forecastare generally for higher interest rates into 1990--both short and longrates, but more on the short than the long. Still, if you go back tothe February FOMC meeting, I think there was an assumption of a pickupin long rates of up to 1 percentage point from about the 9 percentlevel then prevailing and of about 1-1/2 percentage points on thefunds rate. Since that time interest rates appear to have peaked;long rates are down about 75 basis points from where they were then,instead of up. Short rates appear to be peaking out well short ofthat range. If the economy has slowed more than anticipated--althoughI'd have to go back and check that--and if the inflation forecast ismaybe even a little lower than anticipated back at that point, whathas changed? How do you explain that?MR. PRELL. In terms of precisely what we were projectingback in February, we did indeed have a rise in short-term rates. Wehad the federal funds rate moving up to 10-1/2 percent or so. I mustsay, actually, that the federal funds rate rose more in the first halfof the year than we anticipated. At the same time, we had bond yieldsmoving up and approaching 10 percent and on long Treasuries we hadsome slight movement upward to around 9-1/4 percent in the secondquarter of the year. We flirted with that [level]. Clearly, with therecent drop, they dropped below the trajectory we had at that time.We also were not anticipating a dollar on the path that we have seen.My suspicion is that that's an important element in this whole story.Now, we could probably go on for hours trying to dissect what hashappened and determine which way causation ran. I personally findappealing the notion that we may have had an autonomous increase indemand for dollars which expressed itself to some degree in depressingbond yields. Be that as it may, the dollar has been on a differentpath. And as I suggested, we think that has been a significant7/5-6/89element in damping inflationary pressures even though there are somelags in the process, looking at the composition of price movements andso on. We think there is something to be said for the argument wepresented in the Greenbook dissecting the price measures. On thedemand side, I think we have had a surprise on consumer spending. Toan extent we were looking earlier at that pattern of household networth and discounting it a bit. We could see that there was anargument for a higher saving rate. Maybe that indeed is what hashappened. We wouldn't have anticipated the stock market being asstrong as it is now but the level, as was already suggested, may bedriving [unintelligible] and be a drag on consumption. Where we comeout now is that we are looking at short-term rates and long-term ratesthat will be below our expectations. And we think the dollar's higherlevel will be something of a drag on domestic production growth overthe next few quarters and, therefore, something of a depressant onprice inflation. We are interpreting this recent decline as having asignificant real element, which will help to boost the interest-sensitive sectors of the economy in the months ahead, particularlyhousing.MR. JOHNSON. On that point: interest rates on the long-endhave been trending down for a while, yet the economy hasn't shown anysigns of being stimulated by that.MR. PRELL. I don't see a declining trend in long-term rates,really. I think they fluctuated in the 9 to 9-1/4 percent range forquite a while and then we had a very sharp drop. I don't think we'vehad enough time to see the response [to that].MR. JOHNSON. Well, I think there's--MR. PRELL. I will admit that the anecdotal evidence does notsuggest a tremendous change in the mortgage market and housing demandat this point--or I should say on the home building side. Clearly,there is evidence of a flurry of refinancing activity. And maybe ifpeople are rushing out to refinance they also perceive rates to bemore attractive for buying homes. There is naturally a lag in thisprocess and sometimes a tendency to hold back until one thinks rateshave gotten as low as they are going to go. So, we would expect tosee homebuilding improving in the next couple of months.MR. JOHNSON. Okay. But I think there is some modestdownward trend in long rates; if you draw a line through thefluctuations, I think you can see that. The other point, though, isthat rates are considerably lower relative to where you wereforecasting them and yet you have weaker GNP.MR. PRELL. I think it's partly because we have had theweaker GNP. I think the markets were surprised, in part, by howquickly the deceleration in the economy occurred. They became lessconcerned about an inflationary overshoot and I think that has been afactor; that probably has contributed to some diminution in theinflation premium. At the same time, we think that the real rateswill come down.MR. JOHNSON. That's fine. But why haven't those relativelylow interest rates had some stimulative effect, with a lag? They have-10-7/5-6/89been lower than you forecast for a considerable period of time. Iassume what you're saying is that the dollar has offset that.MR. TRUMAN. One way to think about it, Governor Johnson, isthat the change of the dollar's forecast--at least over the fourquarters of 1989 as now projected--is 12 percent. If you think thatsomehow the market has changed its assumption by that much, that'sconsiderable; they don't have to even see that. They can see futureimplications, for both inflation directly and for aggregate demand,that are going to come from a stronger dollar over that period--especially if you go back near the turn of the year, or November-December, when we were still dealing with a situation in which thedollar was quite soggy. And to the extent that the market at thattime was projecting, as we were, a continued decline in the dollar--which under the conditions of relatively full employment we were goingto have to accommodate, if you want to put it that way, by restrainingother elements of demand--that was the strength that was then in thesystem. The dollar turned around and added to that whole processrestraint that wasn't in our forecast; but in some sense, it certainlywasn't in the markets' forecast either. So, you have this key changein expectations, which had [effects on the] performance of the economyand on the outlook.MR. JOHNSON. So going forward, assuming the dollar is notgoing to appreciate--you even have some depreciation--are you saying,then, that that represents a decline in real interest rates and somestimulus to the economy?MR. PRELL. If you look at our housing forecast, particularlythis time versus last time, you see a different tilt. To that extentthere is some stimulus coming to domestic demand. Since our lastforecast, the major change, in a sense, has been that we now have thedollar doing some of the work we formerly thought that interest rateswere going to have to do. We've had a shift toward a lower net exportcontribution to GNP growth than we had previously, which is offset bysome contribution from interest-sensitive domestic demand sectors.MR. JOHNSON. Okay, I'm having a little trouble assuming--MR. PRELL. This may be evaporating by the minute.Logically, if we're going to go incrementally from forecast toforecast that pushes one back in the other direction. But I don'twant to make that much of a small movement. The level adjustment hasbeen considerable in the picture--MR. JOHNSON. I think I understand your logic.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. My question has to do with interest rates aswell. The financial projections indicate that interest rates willhave changed little through 1990. Then in the Bluebook, there'sreference to what the impact might be on other short-term and long-term rates. I assume the projection is with regard to the funds rate.If you had the funds rate in particular remaining at its current levelfor a couple of quarters, it seems to me that the impact on othershort-term interest rates would be quite marked as opposed to the 1/4point change referred to in the Bluebook--which is over a shorter-11-7/5-6/89period I'm sure--and that there could conceivably even be somesignificant change in long-term rates as well. Is that in the modelor in your forecast? I really can't tell.MR. PRELL. In our forecast there is some backup, forexample, in 3-month bill rates and Treasury bond rates but--MR. PARRY. Could you tell me how much?MR. PRELL. Well, I've written down about 1/4 of a point thisquarter. It's not as large as I think you're alluding to.MR. PARRY. But if you just let the model run for threequarters how much backup do you think you'd get?MR. PRELL. Well, I'm not sure I want to let models run onthis because, basically, what really has happened, according to ourmodels, is that long-term rates are now where they should be relativeto short-term rates given a term structure equation that has its long-term rates determined with a lag by short-term rates. The mysteryearlier had been why long-term rates were so high given that we hadhad the sharp descent of short-term rates. That should have fedthrough. I don't know that the models capture the forward lookingexpectations formation that seems to characterize financial marketbehavior today. I do concede the point that there would be a risk ofa bigger backup on this. I was disinclined to be any fancier aboutthis, having made the mistakes in the past that Governor Johnson wasso kind to point out again.MR. JOHNSON. I just had to, Mike!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If I had asked about this I would havesaid: Explain to me why your models worked so well so consistentlyprior to this. This is more like the average [experience].MR. PRELL. The term structure equation has worked remarkablywell over--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is a sense in which the problem isthat we were getting [inured] to the outcome replicating the models ina way which we cannot expect them to continue to do. What we'relooking at to be explained now is a more average experience than whatwas to be explained six months ago.MR. PARRY. Well, that's just with short-term rates. Therelationship between short-term [and long-term] rates is not moretraditional.MR. PRELL. Well, I think the market is expecting furthereasing in the funds rate; there's no doubt about it.MR. PARRY. Okay. All I'm trying to do is figure out theconsequences--MR. PRELL. Indeed.-12-7/5-6/89MR. PARRY. --if you get this level. It seems to me that inthe short-term end of the market you'd have a backup of substantialproportions.MR. KOHN. I think the market probably has about a 50 basispoint decline, and maybe more after today--MR. JOHNSON. I'd say much more after today.MR. KOHN. --built into the funds rate over the next 3 monthsor so. So the question is what their expectations would be if wedidn't ease. Would they continue to expect that ease down the pike?And that's not--MR. PRELL. That's what Don has argued in the Bluebook: thatbecause that movement in interest rates isn't going to affect the pathof economic activity in the next couple of months that path ofeconomic activity is likely to look soft enough that people willprobably still be expecting some further ease--unless they take theview that the Fed is really bent on fighting inflation and takingsizable risks on a soft economy, in which case the bond rate rise, ifany, might be negligible. So, I think you get into a very complicatedkind of guesswork about expectations against various events in theeconomic news.MR. PARRY. But you were saying that the funds rateassumption is what?MR. KOHN. I think the market has built in about a half point[decline] over the next 3 months or so. Joan [Lovett] has a differentview. The bill rates are way down today; they may be a little moreafter today. But as of, say, Friday or Monday I think that was a fairstatement.MR. JOHNSON. But all that's within a month.MR. KOHN. No, no. The way I look at it there's [a declineof] about 25 basis points within a month and the other 25 basis pointsin another month or so.MR. JOHNSON. The one-month forward funds rate is closing inon what?MR. KOHN. I don't have the most recent table with me but afew days ago it was about 9-1/4 percent.MR. JOHNSON. Okay.MR. KEEHN. For those of us who were on planes today, hassomething been going on in the market today that is significant?MR. KOHN. Well, bill rates are down about 15 or 20 basispoints--or the 3-month bill rate is, anyhow.MR. PARRY. And the dollar?MR. TRUMAN. The dollar has dropped by 2 percent or so sinceyesterday.-13-7/5-6/89MR. CROSS. It's 1.8815 in marks and 138.30 in yen.MR. BLACK. Are they attributing that to what they thinkwe're about to do? What is the explanation?MR. JOHNSON. If you look at the bill market they are.MR. CROSS. That's certainly part of the explanation.MR. TRUMAN. That, interacting with the economy and Friday'sreports, right?MR. CROSS. They've been looking at purchasing managers'[reports]. I think there has been a cessation of the things that weredriving the dollar up--all these political factors, these portfoliothings, that have happened. They have tended to focus on othersubjects. They have seen some evidence that the economy appears to beeasing, or is at least slowing down a little; and building on theseexpectations about what's happening to interest rates is certainlypart of it, I think.MR. PRELL. At the risk of beating this too far into theground I would just say, given our uncertainties, that if the 3-monthbill rate were to go up to 8-1/2 percent or a shade higher versus whatwe have here we wouldn't regard that difference as all that materialfor the economic outlook. I don't want to hinge everything on aquarter point or so on the 3-month bill rate.SPEAKER(?). Makes sense.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for our colleagues?MR. SYRON. Mike, do you have any inkling as to what's goingto happen with the GNP revisions?MR. PRELL. We really don't have much to go on. Perhaps Dave[Stockton could address that].MR. STOCKTON. The data that we've seen to date--the retailsales and inventory data--are not suggesting a large revision in GNP.But what we haven't seen is so much larger than what we have that itprobably would be dangerous to make any firm statement at this time.MR. BLACK. Any guess on the unemployment rate and thefigures this Friday?MR. PRELL. Our guess at this point is that the unemploymentrate will edge up and that we'll have an employment increase of lessthan 200,000.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Yes, I want to express appreciation to both Mikeand Ted for the chart show. Whether anyone agrees or not, I thoughtit showed very well the total package of what you're expecting. Itwas particularly helpful to me to have those alternatives that both ofyou presented. I found it very helpful.-14-7/5-6/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions?MR. GUFFEY. This question may already have been answered,Mr. Chairman, but regarding the notation in the Bluebook that, giventhe baseline forecast, you might expect short-term interest rates totick back up because of overplay by the markets: Is the baselineforecast still consistent with, say, Bluebook alternative B?SPEAKER(?). [Yes.]MR. GUFFEY. It is. And that contemplates an uptick sometime in the future, and probably the near-term future, of short-terminterest rates?MR. KOHN. Well, as we were saying to President Parry, asmall uptick.MR. GUFFEY. A quarter or two up?MR. KOHN. Yes, a quarter.MR. PRELL. This is a quarterly-average number that we havein our forecast. One could even reconcile a bigger movement in thenear term of some easing.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you very much.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions? If not, wouldsomebody like to start the Committee's discussion? President Parry?MR. PARRY. All right, fine. Mr. Chairman, the economy inthe West currently is rather surprisingly robust. Although recentmonthly employment data for California suggest that the rate of growthis slowing, the California economy will remain at a strong level.Employment growth in Nevada, Washington, and Oregon ranks them amongthe six fastest growing states in the nation. Outside of Alaska andArizona real estate markets continue strong. In April, the statewidemedian home price in California rose above $200,000 for the firsttime. Home prices also are rising rapidly in Washington and Oregon,but from far lower levels. One curious development comes out of ourregular survey of District business leaders. Almost all of thosesurveyed indicated that they believe that the economy, in general, isslowing and will continue to slow. But when we ask them about theirown businesses virtually no one sees any significant slowing in theirown businesses, outside the lumber industry.Despite the high level of activity on the West Coast ouroutlook for the national economy is really quite similar to that ofthe Greenbook. We believe the economy appears headed for sluggisheconomic growth but no recession. In fact, we see the possibility ofsome downside risks for the economy in terms of economic growth.According to our analysis consumption and business-fixed investmenthave been growing unusually rapidly in the past two years. A reversalof this pattern could mean a weaker economy than now seems likely.Despite slower economic growth the economy remains above its fullemployment level. Thus, I would agree with the Greenbook's inflationoutlook, which shows relatively constant rates of inflation for 1990.Thank you, Mr. Chairman.-15-7/5-6/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I'd say that in the Mid-Atlantic part of theThird District there's a clear change in the tone of the economy.Almost all sectors are flat to down: residential and nonresidentialconstruction are off significantly; manufacturing is flat; retailsales, while up a touch in dollar terms, are clearly down in volumeterms; and for the first time since the expansion began employment, asmeasured by payrolls, is down a little. Having said that, labormarkets still remain tight and the unemployment rate is still belowthat of the nation. Nonetheless, this is the first time we've seenpayrolls down. I would say that attitudes in the business communitycan be characterized as cautiously optimistic, but I do sense afragility there. I think that the expansion has gone on for so longthat people have gotten in the habit of thinking it will continue.Maybe they believe that that is the most likely outcome. But I thinkwe could see a fairly prompt deterioration in those sentiments, atleast as expressed by business people in my District.Looking at the national economy we can't help but beinfluenced by the people who surround us, and I think the outlooknationally is still most likely to be a soft landing. But the chancesof a bumpier landing have increased. As far as the Greenbook forecastgoes, I think that the downside risk is greater than the upside risk.There is just very widespread softness in the economic indicators.While there is no evidence of a cumulative downturn, when you seewidespread softness you begin to ask questions about whether it mightbe self reinforcing. So, I would say that, yes, the Greenbook outlookis a reasonable one; but my own sense is that the risks on the downside have increased noticeably over the last six weeks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I ask both you and President Parrywhether you sense or know of any marginal inventory backup?MR. BOEHNE. No, I have not sensed that.MR. PARRY. No.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The reason I raise the issue is--MR. BOEHNE. Maybe a little in retailing outside autos, butnot much.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In the autos you can see it. Butthere's just the earliest margin that one senses and I'm curious toknow whether or not we pick it up from the data ever so slightly in acouple of other places. I want to know whether or not one senses thatas being real, cumulative, or an illusion.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I sense the beginnings of a littlehesitation in some planned expansions or equipment purchases. Plansare still going forward but you get just a bit of a feeling thatpeople are beginning to wonder for the first time in a long timewhether it is the right decision.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.-16-7/5-6/89MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, like much of the rest of thenation, economic activity in the Sixth District has continued to slowsomewhat--although I'm getting the sense from people that they don'tfeel that this slowing is going to continue or, to put it another way,that the deceleration is worsening. The slowing in overall activitybasically reflects the balance of very weak construction activity andrather strong growth in international trade. We've seen thistranslated into rather robust port activity, for example, in theDistrict. As I mentioned last time, it's interesting to note that alot of this increase in exports and the resultant port activityincreases are due to some increase in exports to Latin America. Wesee the usual continuing sluggishness in housing and auto sales. Butthis time we took an extra special look at wages and the availabilityof labor and we still see very little wage pressure, even though insome areas and in some selected industries there is a tight labormarket. But wage increases have been remarkably slight. On theinventory question that you raised we don't see much evidence ofinventory accumulation in the District--outside of autos, of course.The general tone perhaps coincides with what others have said in thatthere now seems to be a shift toward some concern about too rapid adeceleration, whereas before in the District people were saying thatinflation was a concern. Although I don't think it ever was an acuteconcern there was more concern about that than about a decline in theeconomy. I think that has very definitely shifted. And while peoplewill tell you that their own businesses are doing fairly well, thereis a cautionary element now that is going to be reflected in businessplans in our District at least.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, our projections are very close tothose in the Greenbook. We have slightly higher growth in real GNPand a slightly higher inflation rate but the differences here arereally minor and not worth mentioning. The overall profile of theforecast is just about the same. More interesting than theprojections themselves is the question as to where the risk of errorprobably lies. If one looks at domestic final demand only, one mightconclude that the risk in the case of GNP is definitely on the downside. But, as we all know, the behavior of net exports of goods andservices has had a very large impact on our total GNP over the lastsix years. And the prospects for net exports are something of a wildcard in the outlook currently. I think the staff's projected sharpdrop in the growth of exports is certainly reasonable, given thestrength of the dollar. But the underlying demand abroad is prettystrong in a number of countries and this could buttress our exportsfor a while, I think, even if the dollar remains relatively strong.On balance, I would say that the risk of error in our forecast andthat of the staff's is probably on the down side; but I wouldn't ruleout the possibility that the economy could be a little stronger, giventhis wild card on the export side.When we get to the price issue, I think the risk is aboutevenly distributed. The staff is expecting that the underlying rateof inflation as measured by the CPI less energy and food will be about5 percent over the next several quarters. I think a lot of that isgoing to depend on how strongly these aggregates come back and whetherthe projection of growth in the aggregates is really going tomaterialize. On an anecdotal level, at a recent meeting of our board-17-7/5-6/89of directors to which we invited our alumni there were more mentionson the part of both groups about how tight labor really is and thevirtual impossibility of attracting labor. Now, we have a prettyprosperous District by and large with the exception of a few parts ofWest Virginia. But still, it was striking that so many were reportingsuch difficulty in attracting labor. This leads me to think that wemay have more wage/price pressures than some people assume or thatthese pressures may be around a little longer than some are assuming.MR. FORRESTAL. Excuse me, Mr. Chairman, could I back up? Ineglected to mention our forecast and outlook for the nationaleconomy. Our forecast for real GNP is somewhat stronger than theGreenbook's and our forecast for inflation is higher as well. Thedifference in GNP is almost entirely due to our view of consumerspending; and I gather from what the staff said that perhaps they area little uneasy about that forecast. We think consumer spending isgoing to be somewhat higher. If the Greenbook is correct aboutconsumer spending I suspect our forecast would be about the same astheirs.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, with regard to the currentsituation, at least in a national context, I do think there is abuildup of indicators that suggest fairly specifically that the growthrate is moderating. That's particularly true in the interest-sensitive parts of the economy, notably cars and residentialconstruction. But across a broader spectrum of the current leadingindicators I think we do see some tendency for moderation and atrending downward. With regard to the forecast, ours is really verysimilar to the Board staff's. We have somewhat stronger growth in1989 and more so in 1990. I doubt it's worth going down sector-by-sector because I think in the main it's a difference in the policyassumption that we use in putting our forecast together. We wouldexpect a more rapid decline in interest rates, particularly short-termrates, than is true of the staff forecast, which accounts for ourhigher outlook on GNP growth.With regard to the District, what seems to be true in thenational level is certainly less true within the District. There area couple of parts of the District that certainly have peaked and areheading down. Automotive is clearly a part of that, and merchandisesales have been trending down for the last couple of months. Butother parts of the District continue to show strength. For example,through May commercial construction contracts were up 1 percent versusa decline for the United States as a whole. That same kind ofdichotomy is true for residential construction. We've had a bit of anincrease whereas other parts of the country have been down. As aresult of that, within the District the demand for building products,specifically gypsum and cement, has been pretty strong. And thedemand for business equipment and other categories of industrialequipment continues to be surprisingly vigorous. The steel businesshas been good though they expect something of a decline in the secondhalf. Nonetheless, the first half has been good enough that for theyear as a whole steel in the District will come in pretty well.Employment in the District has shown good gains. We are equal withthe national numbers and at this point our unemployment rate for the-18-7/5-6/89District as a whole is under the national average; that's the firsttime that has happened in a while.On the price and inflation side the situation is a bit moremixed but I think, on balance, it's positive. The reports we'regetting from our directors as well as other market contacts wouldsuggest some stabilization in raw material prices. Indeed, a coupleare coming down; aluminum and copper have been mentioned as pricesthat are coming down. And with some minor exceptions there are nostand-outs in the raw material category that are showing great bigincreases. For finished product prices I understand that marketpressures continue very intense. For example, in the paper industrythey're operating at higher rates. who runs acompany in one part of that industry says they are operating at 93percent. And though they have had price increases over the last 12months, looking ahead they think they are not going to get anyincreases at all. And that's quite unusual to be operating at thosehigher rates and not getting price increases. On the labor side,despite very tight conditions I'm surprised and impressed by how goodat least the organized contracts are coming in. People are stillgetting 3-year contracts and some are quite low. I heard one commentof an increase in costs of 1-1/2 percent per year but that's unusual.The 3 percent continues to be quite common. On the agricultural side,and here I think the situation is very uncertain, the eastern part ofthe dDstrict has had far too much rain and the western part has nothad enough; unfortunately, you can't average that out. We're simplygoing to have to wait and see how the growing season takes place todetermine whether or not we're going to have good yields. But despitethat, the demand for agricultural equipment continues to besurprisingly strong. Both tractors and combines are being sold at ahigher rate this year than last year. One of the major manufacturersin our District has cancelled a two-week summer shutdown so they cankeep up with demand. I think the District doesn't quite reflect thetrends we're seeing in terms of the national numbers. But having saidthat, we lagged the recovery on the way up; and I think it's probablytrue that we're going to lag this turn on the way down. Prettyshortly some of the moderation trends that we're seeing nationallywill show up in the District as well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I'm getting a little more concerned about theeconomic situation since we met last time. Starting on the same daythat we made our modest change in borrowing, June 5th, we got a wholeseries of data that I think have become a little more troubling. OnJune 5th auto sales came out and were marked down from May over theprevious April by about 2/10ths of a million units. Today when we getthe report for June I think the numbers will be down again. And autoproduction schedules have been cut back some since that time. On June13th we got reports on real retail sales, which were down 7/10ths of apercent; and that was the fourth month in a row of negative realsales. On June 15th industrial production came out and had increased0 percent. Capacity utilization was marked down. On June 16th we gothousing starts, which were down for May by about 2.1 percent. Andpermits stayed unchanged at a fairly low level. On the 23rd of Junewe got new orders for durable goods, which were down 4-1/2 percent forMay; nondefense capital goods orders were down 8.6 percent for May,and excluding aircraft they were down about 3.2 percent. Real-19-7/5-6/89personal consumption, which came out the same day, was down 0.3percent, and real personal income was down 0.2 percent. On June 28thwe got leading indicators, which were down 1.2 percent; they were downin three out of the last four months. Then, most recently, we got thepurchasing managers' survey, which showed new orders for June actuallynegative for the first time in a long time. Vendor performance forJune for the first time in a long, long time showed actual fasterdeliveries, not just a slowing in the rate of increase [of backlogs].Prices paid were also down below the 0 line, showing an actual declinefor the first time. That's a whole string of data. And that'sstarting to look like a deterioration.These data are all just series of information that areincorporated in the financial markets even more. We have seen itbuild up over the last several weeks. The yield curve has gotten morenegative. Bond rates now are down quite sharply; they closed in onthe 8 percent rate for a while and for the 30-year bond they're stillaround 8.12 percent, or something like that. If you put the fed fundsrate on a coupon basis, the yield curve is inverted by almost 2 fullpercentage points. The markets are clearly expecting lower futurerates by a considerable amount. The bill market has even started todiscount more sizable moves than I would imagine. Now, maybe it'sjust a lot of noise lately, but the bill market is down 20 basispoints today. Looking at the traditional relationship between rateson bills and fed funds, which builds in a spread of about 3/4 of apoint, if you take into account where bills are today the market isdiscounting almost a full percentage point decline in the funds rate.There may be some noise in there, for sure. But the fact is there's afairly sizable discounting going on in the markets, based on a stringof data like this and a lot of information that's coming through.What worries me about it is that once that psychology startsdeveloping--and the longer the short end of the market is held up--themore future interest rate declines are anticipated. Once you get thatpsychology in the market investors start postponing investmentprojects expecting rates to go even lower. Consumers quit financingconsumption because they expect to finance consumption at an evenlower rate in the future. And this situation starts feeding on itself.The postponement of activity due to expected future declines in rateswill continue as long as the short end of the market is being shoredup so high above the long end. I think that's one of the risks. Now,if nothing happens what worries me is that markets could becomedisorderly at some point. A string of data like this and a feelingthat the market is not realigning itself on the short end withexpectations on the long end at some point could make the stock marketvulnerable to flight. That's what I worry about. Whether this willcontinue is not clear. But I see a very troubling series of trendsgoing on.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, the New England District that hasled the upturn to some extent is certainly way out front in thedownturn. In talking to our directors and other people around theDistrict, I'd say in terms of making their own investment decisionsand going forward there is some cautious pessimism on their part.Things seem to be fairly soft over a pretty widespread area. Specificindustries such as the high-tech and computer industries are quitesoft. Some of that may be related to particular mix factors in that-20-7/5-6/89part of the industry. In the defense sector, which is very important,current work in process is starting to be reduced and they are reallyconcerned going out. Employment has been growing somewhat more slowlythan nationally for a while now. Superimposed on all of this, we dohave an overhang in the construction industry and in the housingindustry; the result of this is that loan demand has softened a bitand we're starting to get a backlog of property on the market and anexpansion of auctions. This combines with the fact that we have inMassachusetts, the largest state in the District, very serious fiscalproblems--both state and local. People reading about the fiscalproblems continuously has led to a broader pessimism, which has beenreflected in retail sales. So, inventories are not a problem at thispoint in time but people are being really quite cautious. Wages havebeen well behaved, as you might expect in this environment, though thelabor market in the services area--particularly the lower-end servicessector--is still quite tight. But it's loosening up a fair bit inproduction levels.As far as the national economy goes, we would generally agreewith the Greenbook as it was presented with a couple of caveats. Wehave somewhat stronger growth in GNP as a result of somewhat strongerconsumption growth--obviously in other parts of the country--with thesaving rate not holding up as high as the Greenbook has it. We havesome concern about higher inflation because of the uncertainty on ourpart that wages nationally will remain as well behaved as they have inthe past, particularly looking at the tightness in labor markets andwhat has happened to prices in an overall sense--not just excludingfood and energy, but all prices. So, I think it's pretty clear thatwe're in a very difficult period. We don't see a cumulating downturnin the economy. But I think the risks are at least balanced, withprobably some more margin on the softer side of the economy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On the regional side,the Tenth District is continuing to improve. To be sure, it's stilllagging the national scene; but given where we started a couple ofyears ago we're still improving. On the food and agricultural sidethe outlook is good, notwithstanding all the talk of what has happenedin the drought areas. For example, drought has [hit] in Kansas andthe northern sector of Missouri and it extends up pretty much acrossIowa. But given the additional acreage that has been planted, theoutlook for production of agricultural products is really very good inlight of the rain that has fallen in a good part of the United Statesoutside of the Tenth District. In wheat specifically, the hard redwinter wheat that is principally grown in the Tenth District--inKansas particularly and in Oklahoma and Texas--that crop to be sure isgoing to be down considerably because of the drought situation. Butoverall, it's important to note that the production of wheat on thenational level is going to be up about 15 percent above what it waslast year. And that's notwithstanding the fact that Kansas, which isone of the biggest producers of the hard red winter wheat, is going toharvest something less than half of the crop harvested just a yearago. Given that kind of an outlook, we would agree with the commentsthat were made by Mike and others with respect to food prices in theperiod ahead: that they will be moderate, with about a 4 percentincrease over the next year. The energy industry in the TenthDistrict has not fully participated in the nationwide improvement in-21-7/5-6/89exploration and development. Indeed, in Oklahoma the number of rigsfell substantially over June, for example, whereas nationally thatcount was up. Manufacturing continues to improve, largely in theexport-sensitive aircraft and high-tech areas. And constructioncontinues to improve very modestly in the District. It is above theyear-ago level; although commercial construction is down somewhat,overall construction is up.On the national level, I recognize that in all of the numbersthat have come in, and that have just been recited for our review,there is a softness that appears to be showing through. I would seethat as coming close to achieving the objective that we've beenstriving for, and that is, to bring the overall growth down. However,we would see growth in 1989 and into 1990 somewhat greater than theGreenbook forecast, largely reflecting a bit stronger consumption thanthe Greenbook forecast incorporates. Overall, the only real evidenceof wage [pressures] and concerns that we have been able to uncover inthe Tenth District is in the steel settlement that was announcedearlier. There's a real concern that a steel producer in the TenthDistrict who is in the midst of negotiations now will be badly hurt ifthat type of settlement is imposed upon them. That's all I have, Mr.Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. In terms of the outlook, our money-driven modelends up with a pattern very similar to the Board staff's forecast--inother words, slowing real growth and inflation leveling off over thisyear-and-a-half period. The main difference is on the real side wherewe have considerably weaker real growth--roughly 1-1/2 percent forthis year as a whole and 1 percent for next year. But in terms of thedeflator our numbers are within a tenth or two of what the Board staffhas. The only other thing to mention is that our forecast assumes, asdoes the Board staff forecast, a reacceleration in money growth in thesecond half of this year and continuing on in the next year.As far as the District is concerned, our numbers show thiscontinuing pattern of slowing that has been mentioned. Non-agricultural employment growth is slower than the national average.It's interesting that even though the unemployment rate is coming downthe District rate is still somewhat higher, at around 6.2 percent.But the labor force obviously is growing very slowly. Manufacturingemployment, in contrast to the national picture, has really held upwith other employment growth. We're not seeing the relative weaknessthat shows up nationally there. However, there are some industrieswhere there is a slowing or, in fact, declines in employment: in theauto industry employment growth is slow; and there have actually beendeclines in food processing, electrical machinery, and printing andpublishing. The one area of notable weakness is nonresidentialconstruction where in the most recent period for which we have data,the 3-month period ending in May, we have a decline of about 20percent compared to the prior period. Again, I think we have justgone through this cycle quite a bit later than some other parts of thecountry in terms of the nonresidential construction. As far as[unintelligible], I don't really detect the same shift in tone as someothers have mentioned. Certainly, people will acknowledge that therehas been a slowing, but in the contacts I've had I have not picked upthis concern about possible cumulative weakness.-22-7/5-6/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. As best I can judge, the District economy is nowperforming very similarly to the national economy. That is, the paceof the expansion in general has slowed--allowing, of course, for theusual diversity between economic sectors and particular regions withinthe District. As this has happened it seems that earlier concerns andreports about inflationary pressures have ebbed at the same time; andthis has gone on even though for the most part labor markets remainquite tight and we continue to hear reports of labor shortages.With regard to the national economic outlook, our modelgenerates an interest-rate pattern similar to the Greenbook--that is,essentially flat interest rates from here on out--and somewhat morerapid real growth, especially for 1990. I personally am a little morecautious than that, in part from reading and reviewing many of thesame statistics we've all looked at and Governor Johnson summarized.But having said that, I would also add that in many respects it seemsto me that things have worked out largely as we might have hoped a fewmonths ago, in the sense that I think it was recognized that we neededa slowing in consumer spending and a slowing in the pace of employmentgains if we were to arrest what appeared to be building inflationarypressures and some deterioration in the psychology about the priceoutlook. So, I think in many ways things have evolved about as wellas we might have hoped.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, the Eleventh District economycontinues to show modest improvement overall. Much as Roger indicatedfor the Tenth District, we do have to keep in mind that we were comingoff a very low growth base of economic activity. Even though we aregetting modest improvement we continue to show weakness inconstruction activity, and I guess that would be expected for us.Single-family housing is the only area of construction that does showsome improvement. While the energy sector has shown a little growthin the last few months in response to the higher oil prices, the gainsare very small. Drilling and related activity are still below thedepressed levels of a year ago. Recent rains have improved theagricultural outlook for this year in some parts of our District. Butnonetheless, we still expect farm income to be a little below lastyear's. We are seeing continuing gains in the manufacturing sector,with nondurable goods showing the greatest strength. The outlook inour area is at best guardedly optimistic as cuts in defense spending,slowing in overall demand nationally, and an inability to expandoutput in chemicals, petro-chemicals and paper all combine to restrain[the prospects for] growth in coming months. Orders growth has beenslowing in several industries. Retail sales, including autos,continue to show year-over-year gains down our way. And Houstoncontinues to be kind of the shining example for us, which is aconsiderable change over a couple of years ago. Price and wagepressures remain well below the national average in that regard. I amglad to report on the financial side that in the first quarter ourDistrict banks just about broke even for the first time in over twoyears. Nonperforming [loans] and charge-offs continue to move in theright direction; but part of this is a statistical illusion as many ofthe loans in recapitalized banks are put back to the FDIC. All inall, we think the banking sector is still several quarters away from-23-7/5-6/89supporting business expansion. We haven't noticed or detected anyreal inventory problems in the District. With respect to the nationaloutlook, the Greenbook [forecast presents a reasonable picture of]what we're going to be facing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I'm delighted to see theseindicators showing a significant slowdown in the rate of growth. Atthe same time, I'm skeptical about whether we have seen the fulleffect of the inflationary pressures that were there in the past. Ibelieve that we are more likely to see at least a quarter more of someupward pressure on prices as the [past pressures] are reflected. Butwhat concerns me most are the consequences of a more severe slowdownthat could be triggered by a failure of the expectations that GovernorJohnson was touching on a few minutes ago. I think the markets areextremely skittish. The way the stock market, the foreign exchangemarket, the bond market, and the money markets have been bouncingaround makes me nervous because I think that reflects the nervousnessof the markets trying to read things into every bit of informationthat is published and reacting--or overreacting, in my opinion--tothings that are not necessarily indicative of what's going on in thebig picture.At the same time, as a backdrop to all of that, I think thefinancial system is rather narrowly balanced. We have these hugeamounts of corporate debt, some of which is based on a very skinnycoverage of debt service. We have junk bonds being a significantinvestment in a number of pension funds. A number of banks aresupporting the short-term credits involved here. And we have a lot ofS&Ls with a lot of that junk paper as well. So a significant turndownin the economy could cause all that to get out of whack and have aripple effect throughout the whole financial system that I think couldbe very severe. A lot of that debt is really based on continuedgrowth at current or immediately past levels rather than on the kindof growth that we're talking about, which I suspect may be adisappointment. We also have an LDC debt situation that is more andmore unsettled because of political influences. And the banks, ifthey are encountering very severe profitability problems in otherdirections, are going to be in a far less competent position to handlethe kinds of pressures that may be imposed either because of theadoption of debt reduction plans or because of simple default. Wehave a real estate market that is increasingly soft in many parts ofthe country where it was previously very strong. And that is going tobe compounded by the overhang of the RTC disposal situation which is Xhundreds of billions of dollars. Whichever strategy the RTC adopts--whether it is a quick disposal and [a decision to] dump the overhangon the market temporarily and hope the market will come back, orwhether it's hold onto it--the overhang is going to tend to depressthose prices. It seems to me that anything that could restore someconfidence in the markets might have a desirable effect there, becausethe banks and the S&Ls are the principal ones who are going to gethurt by that kind of a situation.So, I think that in spite of the risk of not achievingfurther progress on inflation immediately, the effects of asignificant recession--if that's what we've tipped into--could be evengreater. I'm not at all satisfied that we even have to be in what is-24-7/5-6/89technically a recession in order to have significant changes inbusiness plans and significant consequences in the areas that I'mtalking about. I think there are great expectations out there forlower rates, and the disappointment of those expectations could resultin an acceleration of the slowdown that could take it out of ourhands. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Well, for the second month in a row, I canreport that [businesses in] the Fourth District are less optimisticthan they have been for the last 18 months. Having said that, overallthey are still operating at pretty high levels of utilization ofresources. Nevertheless, there has been a slowing in the pace ofsales, new orders, and even production. We have things that were onallocation that are not on allocation now. We have some, at least,not accelerating factors. Overall, people in the District that we'vetalked to still expect the inflation rate to stay between 4 and 5percent and to be relatively stable in that range. Among those whoare less optimistic, it will be no surprise to you to discover steel.Their concerns may have evaporated in the last two days because theywere primarily based on the idea that the dollar staying where it waswould impact them--being a commodity-oriented business more than someof the others; they had concerns that the second half would beimpacted by that level of the dollar. Capital goods also aresoftening, but for different reasons. There are cutbacks in autodemand and cutbacks in defense spending and those are cutting intomachinery fairly significantly. But the backlogs that are in placewill carry people in terms of production and shipments pretty muchthrough the remainder of the year. There is one other point in thecapital goods area: [Unintelligible] continues to say that the exportside has been very good, that the foreign investment boom is going tocontinue. So they are looking for continued strength through the yearin terms of capital goods. Inventories overall are not a problem, butpeople are saying that apparel is starting to back up as are homebuilding and materials a little. But it is nothing that they areoverly concerned about at this point in time. They think there willbe very quick adjustments before the situation could get out of hand.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. When does the steel contract run out?SPEAKER(?). August 31st.MR. HOSKINS. The price?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, the contract.MR. HOSKINS. Wage contract?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. HOSKINS. That doesn't occur for USX until 1990, I think.Everybody else is late this year, if I'm not mistaken.MS. SEGER. National is--MR. HOSKINS. National has already done theirs.-25-7/5-6/89 -26-MR. BOEHNE. Bethlehem is--MR. HOSKINS. Everybody has started but USX doesn't have toface it, I think, until 1990 or 1991.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What's the strike-hedge buying that thepurchasing managers were talking about this year?MR. HOSKINS. The strike buying?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I recall, the purchasing managerswere commenting about strike-hedge buying in steel.MR. HOSKINS. I'm not sure which--MR. PRELL. There have been a couple of negotiations andthere is one ongoing, which was referred to earlier. Those may havebeen what they were looking at--Bethlehem and some others.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh no, they weren't referring toBethlehem or National--well, it may have been National.MR. STERN. But I thought National rejected the contract.MR. KEEHN. Inland has been in negotiations but I don't[think] they are a major supplier of the auto companies.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, it could have been National orInland that they were commenting on.MR. PRELL. Actually, I heard those stories some months backas explaining the strength in steel production, even in the latterpart of last year. It has been a pretty murky matter as to what wasgoing on and the timing.MR. HOSKINS. In terms of the national outlook, we don't havea quibble, really, with the Board staff's projection. I'm happy tosee that we don't have accelerating inflation and I'm not very happyto see that we don't have decelerating inflation. I am concerned thatwe think we can do more with demand management than we've proven to beable to do in the past through monetary policy. And I continue tothink that our long-term objective ought to be to get some moreprogress on the inflation rate than we're showing in any of thealternative scenarios.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I view the staffforecast as basically a reasonable one. My own forecast is probably abit stronger in real GNP growth terms, as has been the case for along, long time. We have an inflation rate both this year and nextthat is still running 1/2 percentage point or more above what is inthe staff forecast. I look at the forecast today versus, say, 12 or 6months ago, and I think there is an important difference in that 12 or6 months ago I, at least, viewed the situation as being distinctlyasymmetric on the side of too much growth and too much acceleratinginflation. I would view the staff forecast now as reasonably wellbalanced. But by definition the forecast that in those circumstances7/5-6/89is reasonably well balanced today is one that does have somewhatgreater downside risks than it did before. But that's in the natureof things. That to me says that we've either been lucky or good.Now, on the question of lucky or good--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Or both.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I was about to say I think where Icome out is both. I say that because I am hard pressed to convincemyself that the rise in interest rates over the past year or so, goingback to March last year, has been decisive in causing the slowdown inspending we have seen, except in housing. In other areas in which wehave seen a slowdown I think I can convince myself that the slowdownmay have as much, if not more, to do with other things than it doeswith interest rates. Certainly, I think that's true in autos wheresaturation alone, coupled with the bunching up of purchases of fleetsof automobiles by auto rental agencies and others, is producing someanomalies--as reflected in the widening spread between used car pricesand new car prices. In the area of nonresidential construction, Ithink the slowdown is at least as much, if not more, the result of theexcesses that took place earlier, in terms of commercial real estatedevelopment and shopping centers and other things. Energy I don'tthink is interest-rate driven. And the slowdowns that we're seeing inboth state and local and in Federal government purchases of goods andservices clearly are not interest-rate driven. So, I think there hasbeen a combination of some fortuitous developments, rather than luck,and some good policy that has produced the kind of result that I thinkmany of us wanted to see.Although I agree with much of what John LaWare said about allthese financial problems, the only problem is that I could make a casethat they are an argument for tighter monetary policy rather thaneasier policy. Be that as it may, on the anecdotal side there isclearly a sense that one picks up, as several others have talkedabout, of things having slowed down further--especially in May andJune. As I mentioned to you earlier today, Mr. Chairman, periodicallywe have been talking to a group of firms--we can't call it a surveybecause OMB would get mad at us, but it has certain characteristics inthat direction--and I'd like to share with the Committee severalfeatures that came out of our talks with these firms in the period ofJune 19th to June 23rd. We have done this enough so that it has itsown little history to it and we can get a sense of what the dynamicsare. First of all, in terms of export orders and export growth the[unintelligible] pattern now is that most of them are still seeingexport orders running in a range of 10 to 15 percent increases, whichis down from 20 to 25 percent last year. But that seems to be largelya kind of a saturation thing. None of the firms, with the exceptionof one small manufacturer, said that the exchange rate appreciationthat we've had in recent months has yet had any impact on their exportorders, although several did say that if the exchange rate stayedabove 2 marks or 140 yen that they would expect that to begin to show.But it has not shown to date. They also are suggesting that theirbacklogs of export orders are still high and rising. I'm not going togo through all of this but just on the question that you specificallyraised, Mr. Chairman, the second interesting part is on the inventoryside. What we see is that the clear majority of firms, especially thebig firms, are reporting inventories as quite normal. But again, insharp contrast with earlier discussions with these people, we now have-27-7/5-6/89something like a third of them expressing a little uneasiness aboutinventory developments and a couple saying that inventory developmentsmay well prove to require some production slowdowns. Again, it's notprecisely [the information] in and of itself; it is that there is achange in the kinds of things that these same firms had been saying tous in the past. The price forecasts are basically, except for certainsensitive commodity price tables of intermediate materials, in the 5percent range. Capacity investment plans are holding up; there are nomajor changes. And in some cases these companies are talking aboutvery major investments. The paper company is talking about two newplants coming on stream in the early '90s, and this is big stuff.There is no sign of any retrenchment at all. There is one interestingdevelopment. A large chemical company tells us that they are gettingready to build a new plant that won't come on stream until 1991--Mr.Truman, you'll be interested in this--and they went out and hiredto assure them that the dollar would come down before theymade their decision.MR. TRUMAN. Did they get their money back?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. They volunteered that. The lastthing that I think is very telling is in their anticipated wage billincreases for 1989. And here, there is an unmistakable virtuallyacross-the-board acceleration. About a third of the firms are nowtalking 3 to 4 percent; they were talking 2 to 3 percent. Anotherthird are at 5 percent; they were talking more 3 to 4 percent. Andanother third had increases ranging as high as 10 percent, but most ofthem were within the 5 or 6 or 7 percent range. What should one makeof this? I'm not sure. But clearly, there are three or four areas--export orders, inventories, investment, and wages--where [discussionswith] this handful of very representative firms do suggest someimportant changes from what they were telling us a year or two ago.There is one last point I would make at this juncture. Iwant to say a little more on the inflation issue in the context of thepolicy discussion tomorrow. If I go to Mr. Truman's chart 17, theexternal side of our economy still stinks; there's no other way to putit. Nobody else seems to worry about it too much, but I sure do. Idon't know what the right exchange rate assumption is, heaven knows.But if you take our forecast--this is a minor thing at the margin--weget back in 1990 to a situation in the United States where domesticdemand is growing faster than GNP again. It's not by a lot but that'swhere we end up. That's not a forecast as much as it is anobservation. But if you look at those numbers, you can put whatevermargin of error you want around them and they are lousy. That netinvestment position in 1990 ends up at minus 14 percent of GNP. Thatis trouble looking for a place to happen; and it's going to come hometo roost on us sooner or later. And partly for that reason, thatreinforces my own view that I'm quite prepared to accept running somerisk of the kind of slow growth that is built into the staff forecastand maybe even growth that is a little slower than that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. In looking at the current situation, it doesseem clear that there has been some change of patterns. Of course, alot of this is very, very good. Those of us who would like to see thetrade balance corrected without a depreciating technique would believe-28-7/5-6/89that that's the only way that we're going to get to our primary[objective] of stable prices. We're going to have to have a stabledollar to do that. And certainly the slowdown in consumer spending isan integral part of that success. The only problem is whether anyonebelieves that you can take consumer spending from a 3 or 3-1/2 percentrange and cut it in half and somehow or other just automatically stopthere; I think there's some uncertainty about that. I don't knowwhether Mike will be pleased to note that there is at least oneindividual on the Committee who is on the other side in regard to theconsumer spending issue. Mike, I'm looking for decidedly slower realconsumer spending than the Greenbook. And I note that I'm the onlyone, I guess, who is on that side. You've heard a lot of others onthe other side. So, it helps to get you closer to the middle, Mike,for me to take that position. The reason that I believe consumerspending was slow in the second quarter and had slowed below what wehad in the first quarter and below what I think the Greenbook says forthe second quarter relates to a very logical follow-up of a set ofdevelopments. One is that we have had extremely slow money growthover such a long period of time that there is not the kind ofliquidity out there to support what has turned out to be inflation inthe discretionary consumer spending area. If you only have 10 to 15percent of consumer income that is discretionary spending, you don'thave to [unintelligible] to begin to make a decided difference. Whenwe have reports that we not only have the unexpected estimated incometaxes in April but we also seem to think the money stock was showingthat, then that seems to go along also with some adjustments in termsof consumer behavior. It wasn't so long ago that during April taxpaying times it was somewhat more noted as to how much borrowing mightbe utilized to facilitate the income tax effect rather than some senseof drawing down money balances. Stop and think about marginal taxrate changes and the lack of deductibility of some interest rates,including the lack of deductibility of borrowing money to pay yourincome taxes; that causes the after tax interest rate to be decidedlyhigher than it had been before. It seems to me quite logical, then,that you'd get some differences in this kind of environment inpersonal household saving rates. And that, together with certainmaybe overpublicized demographic factors, it seems to me leads us to adifferent kind of behavior--which of course is exactly what we've beenwanting.So, I don't think we need to grieve too much about gettingthe exact same results that we were after. We wanted to slow moneygrowth down because we didn't want to revive the liquidity that wouldbe necessary in a sense to accommodate these inflation pressures thatI think all of us knew would be forthcoming--given the import priceside and the energy price and the other commodity price effects, someof which stemmed from last year's drought. So all in all, it seems tome it's very logical for consumer spending to be low and for it tostay low. Now, when you add to that what's happening to housing,there are enough communities in the United States where the housingmarket has changed so that the wealth effect of this change in housingmust necessarily, it seems to me, show through in regard to spendingpatterns for consumers. So, I'm bold enough to have consumer spendinggrowth rates only about half of those the staff is projecting. Andyet I end up getting, I think to Mike's embarrassment, almost exactlythe same real GNP numbers that Mike had.MR. PRELL. We welcome you.7/5-6/89MR. ANGELL. Oh, you welcome me! Well, [unintelligible]we're both probably wrong, but for different reasons. Nominal GNP, itseems to me, is not going to be able to be as expansionary as has beenpredicted. I just so believe that the monetary slowdown will show[unintelligible] on nominal GNP. So I tend to be optimistic in thatregard; that's why I have [forecast] what I would call a rather niceexpansion. But if I'm wrong on that and inflation runs about asGovernor LaWare thinks it will, then I don't think there's any room,and I think there are considerably more downside risks. But I'm goingto remain somewhat optimistic.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, we continually and, of course,properly discuss the risks and how they vary--from inflation kickingup as a result of too strong an economy versus making progress oninflation as a result of the slowdown. I find myself very much withGovernor LaWare; he really made my speech and I certainly won't repeatit. But one word that I think was in his remarks bears some emphasis,and that's the fragility of this situation. However you assess therisks, it seems to me that the fragility on the down side is quitesubstantial and should be recognized as an element therein. Anotherthing that I think was in his remarks that I'd like to emphasize isthe consequences of which way these risks fall. If we wind up with asomewhat stronger economy than we think, then inflation will probablycarry along for a while and it's hard to say exactly how it willbehave. But I don't hear anyone saying that there is any risk ofinflation running away from us on the up side. On the other hand, Ithink the consequences of seeing a downside result could be verysevere indeed, in terms of the larger social picture of the countryand where we are and what we're trying to do in this country. And Ithink as we assess the risks, however you come out on where the risksare, it's useful to think in terms of the composition of those risksand the consequences of having the risks fall out in either of the twodirections that they could go. So I think it's worthwhile to considerthose two aspects: fragility, which seems to me to be wholly on thedown side; and the consequences of the result that we might realize ineither direction, which also seems to me to be far more severe on thedown side, should it work out that way.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I've been sitting here thinking that I need a newhearing aid because I can't believe the change in the comments todayversus the FOMC meeting in May or, for sure, the one in March. EitherI needed the new one then and not now, or vice versa. Anyway, as youknow, I've been somewhat concerned about the slowing economy for afair while. So, it is nice to have some other people who are on boardwith the same concerns. Where I depart from the staff forecast isover the next six months or so, for a couple of reasons. One is thatin the auto industry, I think for the first time in three or fourmonths, we're going to find that the auto manufacturers actually havesome latitude to adjust production. As they got into the late stagesof this model year they were locked in because they had madecommitments to suppliers to take X amount of materials and, therefore,they carried through with their production plans; but now they arereaching the end of that run and we're seeing announcements already ofextended shutdowns from model changeovers. And this is sort of the-30-7/5-6/89first round. Then Chrysler, for example, when it starts up the newmodels at one of its plants, instead of putting two shifts on is goingto put one shift on. I think we're going to see a number of thesethings. Instead of just holding production constant and trying to ramthe sales through the system through the use of these variousincentives--which made the dealers very, very unhappy--I think we'regoing to see more and more production cuts. I realize that the autoindustry is no longer as important a share of the U.S. economy as itused to be, but in terms of explaining cyclical wiggles I think it'sstill rather significant. Therefore, I think over the next twoquarters what's going on there may be really rather significant.I got some numbers this morning that I'll just share with youbecause, on the one hand, they were interesting; on the other hand,they were rather scary to me. Chrysler sent some surveys to theirdealerships and what they have discovered is that 60 percent of thepeople coming into their dealerships were not able to come up witheven the downpayment to buy a car. That's sort of scraping the bottomof the barrel, as I see it. One reason, of course, is that used carprices have weakened; and [that hurts] those who, when they had trade-ins, could forget the downpayment. I find the [unintelligible] systemworking; the others don't necessarily have trade-in difficulty butthey just don't have the cash on the barrel head. And this includes,by the way, the opportunities to use cash rebates for downpayments;even with that availability, 60 percent weren't able to get adownpayment together. Also, the number of people actually coming intotheir showrooms is down about 10 percent from a year ago. And whatthey call the closure rate is down. So, of the people coming in, thenumber who actually go through and make a purchase is way down--Idon't know by what percentage. Also, 31 percent of their dealers arenow losing money versus under 20 percent last year. Those that arestill profitable, though, have seen their profits drop to less thanhalf of what they were a year ago. Jerry, you mentioned that tightmoney hasn't had the impact you might expect; I think you can see itin autos. And it works through the dealers, as the dealers have hadto pay 3, 3-1/4, or 3-1/2 percentage points more to inventory thistremendous pile of cars; that's real money to them because they arethe ones, as John LaWare knows, who have to pay these financing costs.General Motors doesn't, or Ford doesn't. The dealers have seen thesefinancing costs soar and that has increased their unhappiness with thesituation; it has also increased the flow of gripes back to the automanufacturers. By the way, auto sales picked up in April when theseincentives went in but since then, even with the most generousincentives in place--to me these are the most generous incentivessince they launched incentives back in '86--sales are viewed by peoplein the industry as disappointing in both May and in the sneak previewof the figures for June that they had received just before I talked tothem. That's one thing that concerns me.The other sector where I'm a little more negative than thestaff forecast is in housing; I believe the staff has housing startshitting bottom this quarter and then starting to percolate up. Iwould like to think they would turn around that quickly but I'm notreally that convinced that they will. Therefore, as I said, myconcern is how we are going to make it through the next couple ofquarters before we see some of the monetary changes work through,because I think the very slow monetary aggregate growth that we havehad is having an impact and, unfortunately, that it is going to-31-7/5-6/89 -32-continue to have an impact for a while. Thank you very much; I hopewe're lucky.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no further items on thisgeneral tour de table, why don't we adjourn until 9:00 a.m. tomorrowmorning?[Meeting recessed]7/5-6/89July 6, 1989--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We are now up to Mr. Kohn's presentationon the long-term ranges.MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Quick question, Don: Of the 8 to 10revisions, is there any systematic directional change in those?MR. KOHN. I don't think so. Remember one year we loweredthe bottom end of the M2 range; that was in 1988. Other years we havewidened the range. I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman, I'm looking for--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Actually, Norm has given me a table.MR. KOHN. It's the table I'm looking for but am havingtrouble finding. It's about half and half.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's what I think.MR. KOHN. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, there are no systematic indications.Other questions for Mr. Kohn?MR. JOHNSON. Don, I need a review; you may have mentioned itbut go over it one more time. One of my concerns is that if we arebeginning a period of declining interest rates, clearly, we're goingto see behavior in velocity symmetric to the increase we've had overthe period of rising interest rates; we're going to see a decliningvelocity growth. Would you review again, just as a rule of thumb,what the lags are on, say, a 100 basis point decline in interestrates? What would that do to M2 growth or to the M2 money demand Iguess is the way to put it? What kind of lags are there before theycatch up?MR. KOHN. Well, the lags can last four or five quartersbefore the full effect is felt if you just have a one-time decrease.I'd say about 100 basis points at the current level of rates probablywould give you, say, about 1 percentage point or something like thatover four quarters. Dave? I'm sorry, it would be more like 2percentage points in the growth rate over a couple of quarters.MR. JOHNSON. So 100 basis points would yield 2 percentagepoints in growth over a couple of quarters?MR. KOHN. Yes. In other words, if you did it this quarter,in two quarters you'd have a maximum of about 2 percentage points moregrowth; and then it tapers off after that. The whole effect--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What we really want to know is thechange in the level at the end of the cone.MR. KOHN. Right. I would say that's probably about 1-3/4percentage points in four quarters, judging from this table.-33-7/5-6/89MR. JOHNSON. One of my concerns is that, given the lags, ifwe started a sustained period of declines in interest rates--even ifwe were shooting for 5-1/2 percent or so nominal growth next year--wemight end up having to absorb 2 full percentage points or more ofextra M2 growth because of the effects on velocity just to hit thatnominal target. If that's what you think--MR. KOHN. If you think the economy is going to be weaker--that its underlying demands are weaker or that inflation will becoming down faster and therefore interest rates will be lower--then Ido think that. We have a 6-1/2 percent growth projected forrelatively flat interest rates. There's no question in my mind thatif you thought rates would be declining significantly and you wantedto get approximately the same nominal income growth, for the samerates then you'd be threatening the upper end of the 3 to 7 percentrange.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Which suggests that we may be 9 out of11 [next February].MR. JOHNSON. That's what I was saying.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Mr. Kohn? If not,I'd like first to discuss whether this Committee desires merely toreaffirm the 1989 ranges and then go on to discuss the 1990 ranges. Iwould appreciate it if someone would like to initiate a point of viewon the 1989 ranges.MR. JOHNSON. I'm in favor of extending the existing ranges.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it to you--MR. ANGELL. Yes, I would not want to change the '89 ranges.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me reverse the question. Is thereanyone on the Committee who feels it might be desirable to change the'89 cone? If not, I would entertain a motion to reaffirm it. Do wehave one?MR. JOHNSON. So move.MR. ANGELL. Second.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Let's now move tothe more important issue of views on the tentative ranges for 1990,emphasizing the tentative aspects of this and recognizing that ourhistory is not one in which we have been committed irrevocably towhatever it is that we choose at this meeting. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think you have taken away theeasy part of the problem. The 1990 ranges are really where I suspectwe will have most of our differences here. And I think that's themore important part of [our decision]. A lot of this depends on howone views the ranges; there are different ways that one can look atthis. To me, the most important thing is that the ranges are oursignal to the public, and I hope a reasonable signal, of what we plan-34-7/5-6/89to do over the next four to six quarters to achieve the long-runobjectives of monetary policy. Accordingly, I think it's veryimportant that the ranges we select for 1990 make it crystal clear tothe public that this current apparent softening in final demand is notgoing to divert us from our objective of trying to restore pricestability over the long run. We have made a lot of progress on thisand I think we've had excellent monetary policy for a long time now.But we still have the underlying inflation rate at around 5 percent,so we still have some distance to go on that. All of us, obviously,would like to achieve price stability with a minimum of disruption inthe economy. But I think price stability really has to be ourprimary--and I would say our single overriding--long-term goal. Ithink the greater the public's confidence in our commitment to thatend, the less the short-term disruptions are going to be.So, in my mind, it's highly desirable that we reduce therange for M2 further in 1990 to maintain the credibility that we'vewon over such a long period of time. So, I strongly preferalternative III. What that means to me, really, is that we want theunderlying rate of growth of M2 to come in somewhere around the 4-1/2percent midpoint of the 2-1/2 percent to 6-1/2 percent range, whichwould be consistent with what I think we've been trying to do for along time. Now, I recognize that the staff's baseline forecast for M2for 1990 is 6-1/2 percent. That means, of course, that a 2-1/2 to6-1/2 percent range doesn't give us a lot of leeway for error on theup side. But frankly, I wouldn't be unduly concerned if interest ratemovements or some other temporary factor did cause us to come in abovethat, as long as we were reasonably confident that that was temporaryand it was something that we could explain to the public.If you'd permit me to add one final point, Mr. Chairman:Every time we go through this exercise, I become more and moreconvinced that we really need to change our targeting procedures tolook at this on a multi-year basis. Several of us have made thispoint in the past; and I'd like to suggest again that we take a lookat that because, given base drift, this seems to me a prettyinefficient way to target on the long-run objectives on which I thinkwe all agree. I would like to see us, if we can agree on that, makesome kind of move in that general direction.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I'm very sympathetic to Bob Black's perspectivefor the long run. It seems to me that we do want to get those rangesfor M2 down to 1 to 5 percent. A 1 to 5 percent range is where wehave to be in order to be even close to credibility in regard to pricelevel stability. If we mean that, it just seems to me that's where ithas to be. I do believe, however, that we ought not to back up. Thatis, I want to see us only lower ranges and never raise them. And,with Don's report, I believe that it would be prudent for us for 1990to keep the 3 to 7 percent range. It seems to me that we will onceagain have a period in which the expectation will be for risinginterest rates, and that's when we ought to go down another leg to 2to 6 percent. So, Mr. Chairman, I prefer the long-run strategy II,which is very conservative. But I prefer alternative II for 1990,because I'm not willing to go down and then exceed it on the top side.If there's one thing that I feel very strongly about after 3-1/2 yearshere, it is that whenever we have erred on the extremes on M2 growth,-35-7/5-6/89with 9 percent M2 growth and 2 percent M2 growth--even though we maysay M2 growth, V2 doesn't give us precision--we have been buying alittle lack of stability. So, my preference is alternative II with acommitment to getting to 1 to 5 percent before my term is over.MR. BLACK. I can't really quarrel with that. I was justhoping, as I was telling Don before the meeting, that he could come upwith as good reasons why we ran over the target as he did in hisrecent memorandum--which I thought was excellent work--explaining whywe ran so low. If he could, then I could be pretty well satisfiedwith that. He certainly eliminated some of my worries about thisunduly slow rate of growth we've had in M2 recently. It has beenabout 3 percent adjusted.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, our analysis suggests that M2 andM3 are likely to grow in 1990 at a slightly less rapid rate--5-1/2 to6 percent--than the Bluebook [forecast]. But even that slower growthwould be consistent with not changing the ranges, at least ontechnical grounds. I do think, though, that it is important that wereduce the ranges because I think it does send a message to the publicregarding our resolve gradually to lower the rate of inflation overtime. I think the strategy II that was outlined is the one that weought to be pursuing over the longer term. Therefore, I would supportthe suggestion of President Black to pursue Bluebook alternative III,which I think would still be at least within the range of what I wouldexpect the growth of the two aggregates to be next year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, given our experience with theaggregates this year, I think it's very difficult to forecast theoutcome for the balance of the year, much less for 1990. I think thememo that Don sent out analyzing what has happened so far really wasan excellent way of looking at what has happened. But that certainlyis after the fact, and it doesn't give me, at least, any realassurance as to how these aggregates are going to perform in thefuture. But in the interim, it does seem to me that the signal effectof the ranges that we select really is very, very significant. Thereis an interesting quote in the Bluebook on page 17 which says "Butonly alternative III involves a further reduction in all the currentmoney ranges and might seem most in accord with reinforcing theCommittee's longer-term commitment to price stability." I think thatis a very significant statement. To say anything else, really, interms of the choice of the range would be a mistake. Therefore, Iwould be very strongly in favor of alternative III for 1990. If infact things work out this year along the lines that Don is suggesting,we do have--as apparently has been the case in the past--theopportunity to change the ranges in February. Clearly, if a changewere appropriate at that time, then we would do it. But I think inthe interim it would be important to signal our continual commitmentto price stability. And I think alternative III accomplishes that.MR. GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I think that policy has been amixture of luck and skill and has been remarkably effective. And I-36-7/5-6/89think the challenge before us is to continue that process. Thecomments that have been made on signals are highly appropriate interms of the point that it's certainly necessary that we lower some ofthe ranges. But I find that I'm somewhat sympathetic to what GovernorAngell said, particularly given that we think it is likely, were we toadopt alternative III, that we subsequently would have to raise therange for M2. With that [being] our suspicion--and it is mine--Iwould prefer alternative II.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I would identify myself withthose who think that the announcement effects of these ranges arehighly important. At the same time, as a technical matter, I think weneed to make these ranges as realistic as possible; and given thestaff forecast for growth of M2 and M3, I would favor alternative II.I think there are two signal effects that we need to give out nowbecause of the uncertainty of the economic climate. Clearly, we needto send a signal that we are not letting up on our fight for pricestability. But on the other hand, given what not only the staffforecast but other forecasts are showing for the economy, I think wealso need to send the signal that we are not altogether tolerant ofrecession. And I think alternative II gives you the best of bothpossible worlds in that regard. So, I think we'd be better off atthis time tentatively adopting alternative II. Then, if the economyturns out to be stronger, we can move to alternative III for M2 inFebruary.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. [Since the Chairman is out of theroom], you're about to witness the first official act of the ViceChairman of the FOMC in 25 years. [Secretary's note: ChairmanGreenspan returned]. Mr. Chairman, I just told the Committee theywere about to observe the first official act of the Vice Chairman ofthe FOMC in 25 years. I was about to call on Mr. Stern.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't you do so?MR. BLACK. He did it and he did it very well!MR. BOEHNE. But Jerry, that brought the Chairman back veryquickly!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You say he didn't fumble?MR. BLACK. You'll have to speak more quietly next time,Jerry, if you want a longer reign!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Stern.MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman. I'm sensitive, asI think everyone is, to the emphasis on the long-run objective ofprice stability. But from my perspective, I think this is the time toacknowledge our uncertainty about 1990. I think it's possible tooversell this signal effect with regard to the ranges. It's moreimportant, in my mind anyway, where we actually come out rather thanwhat our announcement is as to the particular ranges at this point intime. Where my uncertainty about the outlook and the associatedgrowth in the aggregates for 1990 lead me would be simply to adopt the7/5-6/891989 ranges for 1990. I find it a little awkward to lower, say, theM3 and debt ranges and maintain M2, as under alternative II, forexample. It seems to me that that suggests we know more than we do--that we're in a position where we can lower some ranges and notothers. And I find it difficult to go down that path. It just seemsto me that at this point in time we don't lose much by simplyreestablishing the 1989 ranges for 1990 recognizing, as already hasbeen pointed out, that we're going to get another look, or two looks,at that later this year and in February. I happen to believe thatwe're certainly going to learn a lot over the next six months aboutprospects for 1990, and I'd want to use that information.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I don't think this is the time for a realextended philosophical discussion. But simply to say that ourobjective is price stability greatly oversimplifies what a centralbank is all about. It seems to me that what the central bank is allabout is sustainable prosperity. Over the longer pull, probably themost important contribution that we can make to that is pricestability. But that to me is a means to an end, not an end in itself.So, in terms of sending out signals, I think that our signal ought tobe one that says we are trying to have a sustainable prosperity. Togo down willy-nilly in a mechanical way just for the sake of sendingout a signal that we're committed to long-run price stability coversover a lot of the uncertainty that we see. If I were in yourposition, Mr. Chairman, in trying to sell some aggregate measurementsI think I would want to stress the uncertainty--that we are committedto bringing inflation down but we also don't want to have a recession;we're committed to a soft landing. And in that kind of environment,it seems to me that tentatively adopting the 1989 ranges for 1990would make sense. From a technical point of view, I would think thatas we go through 1990 we're going to be in the alternative I toalternative II range. I don't see that alternative III is terriblyrealistic. By simply adopting the 1989 ranges at this point we tendto straddle alternative I and alternative II; and we can then makewhat modifications we want in February to make them more realistic tothe economy at that point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would join those whoagree that the announcement effect is important. But because of theuncertainty about where we're going to end up in 1989, adopting the1989 ranges for 1990 with the opportunity to look at them again inFebruary makes sense to me. That is not exactly alternative II in thesense that alternative II does drop the ranges of both M2 and debt.That doesn't make much sense to me. I would just adopt the currentranges. I do have some sympathy, however, with the proposal of BobBlack that we move to a multi-year targeting procedure to avoid thisbase-drift problem that likely will occur at the end of this year andinto next year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I think Gary and I were reading off the samesheet of notes. In a long-term sense, I'm in sympathy withalternative III. Eventually, we've got to get those ranges down. But-38-7/5-6/89I don't think this is a time right now when we need that announcementeffect. In other words, I don't think our credibility in terms ofcommitment to price stability is in question now. And, as some peoplehave pointed out, there's a risk: If we take [the ranges] down now andgo back up we have actually adversely affected our credibility.Secondly, we have some evidence to indicate that it would be hard tohit them; we may be right at the upper end. And I agree with whatGary said: that's where we really hurt ourselves. If we set the rangeand then don't meet it, I think that could have an adverse effect. Inany case, I come out waffling between alternatives II and III,basically. And I think probably the best answer is to acknowledgethat uncertainty just by adopting the '89 ranges and refining them inFebruary.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I find myself very much down thesame track as the last several speakers. There is a high degree ofuncertainty here that I think we need to recognize. I certainlyappreciate Ed Boehne's point that long-run price stability is a meanstoward the larger end of sustainable prosperity. In terms of signaleffect, I think there are other signals that are important to send tothe market and to the economy and the most important may be stabilityof performance on the part of the Fed. Moderation and balance wouldbe some of the hallmarks of achieving that stability signal. As aconsequence of all of those things, I would urge that we maintain thecurrent ranges.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I would support sticking with the current rangesand carrying them over into next year. I would use the arguments Iused last year at this time: that there are uncertainties and thatthere is no great [harm] in carrying these over because we do haveanother crack at them. As I think Mike Kelley said, it's better topresent the appearance of stability rather than zigging and zagging.However, if we are going to change them, the direction I would go in,frankly, is toward alternative I--for a couple of reasons. One isthat I hope we do get some additional M2 growth as interest rates comedown. Secondly, talking about base-drift, I went back and looked atthis table: in 1987 M2's actual growth was 4.1 percent, which wasoutside the low end of the range; that was followed by growth lastyear of 5.2 percent, which was within the range but below themidpoint; and so far this year M2 is growing below a 2 percent annualrate. So, if we look at this over a longer period, it seems to methat there is some point at which maybe we ought to say we should bemaking up a little of this growth that we haven't achieved in the pastand that we did think at the time was a reasonable objective. So, Icould go with either carrying the existing ranges forward oralternative I. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I favor carrying over the 1989 ranges because Ithink we'll need the room.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.-39-7/5-6/89MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I would go with alternative IIIbecause if we don't do that I think there could almost be an impliedreading that we're willing to accept inflation in the 4 to 5 percentrange. And I'm not sure that we want to leave that implication. Ithink we all are having a bit of a sense of foreboding regarding whatthe economy is actually going to do. But it's still a littleanticipatory. I think to reverse what we have set in place over timeis probably going to be read as a little more significant than some ofthe others think. If it becomes necessary early next year to make anadjustment and to move the ranges up, it seems to me that that wouldbe done on the basis of knowledge in fact existing at that time, asopposed to tone and feel and a suspicion at this point. And I couldjustify an upward move if circumstances, in fact, were there todictate that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I agree with a lot of the other comments. Ifavor extending the current [M2] range of 3 to 7 percent for 1990. Ifind that acceptable, although I do think there is some risk that wemay test the upper end of that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is extending the '89 ranges for allthree?MR. JOHNSON. Yes. I'm just saying alternative II; I can'tremember now what the other two were.MR. ANGELL. Alternative II lowers M3 and debt.MR. JOHNSON. Alternative II is what I favor; I can live withthat. I agree with Gary that I don't see exactly how we make thistwist on M3 and debt but I've never paid any attention to thoseanyway. I can accept alternative II.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But you would take unchanged because youdon't care. Is that correct?MR. JOHNSON. That's right; I would take that too. I doagree that in the long run the ranges should come down. I thinkGovernor Angell is right that 1 to 5 percent probably makes sense inthe longer run. If you're going to have nominal GNP that's consistentwith something like price stability, and if the long-run trend on M2velocity is around 0, then you want an M2 range that has a nominal GNPassociated with price stability and you've got to be in that areasomewhere. But I think we're a ways from that. And I think, as EdBoehne said, one of our major functions is to avoid destabilizing theeconomy in the process of seeking this goal of price stability. So,for those reasons, the 3 to 7 percent range for '90 makes some sense,even though I think we could find ourselves well above that target ifwe go through a sustained period of declining interest rates. But Ithink it's a reasonable target and worth trying to hit.I can't help making one last comment, though, on this wholeexercise about monetary aggregates. The way in which we conductmonetary policy, these monetary aggregates are simply passive proxiesfor what the economy generates through money demand. This is not amoney supply process. We are setting interest rates and the economy-40-7/5-6/89is reacting to those interest rates and it's demanding money; andthat's the way it works. We are not setting any money supply goal andsupplying that amount of reserves to make sure [we achieve it]. I'mnot saying I disagree with that; I'm simply saying that that's the wayit works. And we shouldn't kid ourselves and think that we'resupplying levels that are being generated through our policy. Icouldn't help that last comment.MR. BLACK. It is a modern-day version of the real billsdoctrine.MR. JOHNSON. I'd have to think about that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Listening to the discussion, I hear a lot ofwords about long-term price stability objectives. I could have heardthe same thing last year when I sat here. The inflation rate is stillup there; it's probably higher than it was last year at this time. Ifyou look at the Board staff's strategies for 1988 through 1991 there'svery little difference in the inflation rate. The average is a rangeof 4.1 to 4.6 percent whether we are tight, easy, or stay the same interms of the baseline. If you take the Board staff's baselineforecast and try to run it forward to see when we get to pricestability, it takes at least a decade to do that under their baselineforecast. Now, if that's the case and that's really what we'relooking at, then I think we shouldn't kid ourselves that we're afterprice stability because we're not. If we follow that path we're aftercontrolling inflation at the current rate. If we're comfortable withthat then I think we ought to say that. If we're not then I think weought to do something more aggressive in terms of moving toward pricestability, and that includes [going to] multi-year targeting so thatwe don't have base drift problems. Otherwise, next year we will be atthe same point with a different set of concerns about the short termand pushing off the long term. So, unless we tie our hands somewhat--like a portfolio manager at a bank might by requiring insuranceagainst stock losses to be put in place--we're going to continue todrift with the economy and with the vagaries of internationaldevelopments.So it seems to me that, at the minimum, we ought to go toalternative III, 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent, if the signal is important.The idea that we might have to raise it--really, when you take a lookat the half point differential, it's relatively small. It's notlikely that the difference between 3 to 7 percent or 2-1/2 to 6-1/2percent is really going to cause much trouble. But if we put anyvalue on signaling, then we ought to go for 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent,because we're likely to miss that 1/2 point mark anyway and it's not abig problem for us. I think this is a very important session for usevery year because it's our only chance to look ahead 18 months. Andthat's what it's all about. That's the range in which policy is goingto impact the inflation rate and the economy. If we've been too tightin the past and we've made a mistake and the economy is alreadyheading down--well, that's history. Rushing into the breach now withlower interest rates is only going to produce more inflation down theroad for us. So, I think we ought to tie our hands a little withrespect to long-term targets and we ought to have tighter targeting.I'm in favor of alternative III.-41-7/5-6/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Where I come out is very close towhere Gary Stern was--and for the reasons he gave, which are as goodas any. That would be the '89 ranges for '90.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. For all three?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes. Having said that, let me justadd a comment or two. I have to say that I have become increasinglyskeptical, bordering on cynical, about the usefulness or reliabilityof these money supply measures as targets or indicators of monetarypolicy, notwithstanding the wonders of P*. In this specific andimmediate context I'm not nearly as concerned as I think some areabout the slow growth of M whatever over the recent past or, indeed,over several years. I don't want to get into a big discussion of thatbut I would simply say that one of the reasons I'm not as concerned isthat when I look at the very broad measures of credit availability--credit growth, debt growth, and L growth--all of those things arebehaving in quite a satisfactory way. In my mind, at least, all thisfinancial innovation does play a significant role in accounting forthe abnormal gap between M growth, however measured, and these broadermeasures of debt or credit or overall liquid assets, including nonbankliquid assets. So I'm just not quite as concerned.Also, let me make a brief point in the context of Mr.Boehne's comment about a means to an end. I ask myself the questionin the context of current policy: Is it possible, first, that the risein the inflation rate has stabilized--that it's not going up anymore?There's a reasonable chance that that's true, but I don't think it'sbaked in the cake. But even if you assume it is baked in the cake,then the next question I have to ask myself, which is very relevant tothis 18-month period, is: What would it take to buy back theacceleration in the inflation rate that we have had over the past 18months? Forget about long-term price stability for the moment; justask yourself what it would take to get back to where we were. Isthere any plausible set of reasons to believe that we could recapturewhat we've lost without a fair amount of slack having to develop inthe economy?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're saying excluding the oil priceeffect?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's right. Maybe there are somethings working in that direction; certainly, international competitionis one. But history seems fairly compelling on this point: it'sawfully hard to see how you can get a deceleration of the inflationrate, even by a percentage point or so, without some slack in theeconomy. And I think that is another aspect of this goal of pricestability. It's nice to talk about it, but I am very skeptical thatwe can even achieve that intermediate goal of buying back what we'vealready lost without having to incur some real costs, much less getback to genuine price stability of 1950's vintage or something likethat. So, I think Mr. Boehne's point is right on the mark, and wehave to be realistic about what is feasible and what is not. Anyway,I can certainly live with the '89 [ranges] for '90.-42-7/5-6/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. A lot of issues have been raised here,and I think it's very clear that without exception they are allfocusing on some way to eventually bring the inflation rate downsignificantly below where it is. I think the differences within theCommittee are basically tactical rather than strategic. I must admitthat I come out in an area which is either alternative II or '89repeated, largely because--leaving aside the inflationary questions--the credibility on money supply growth is something I don't think wehave a problem with. I think President Melzer [stated] it quitecorrectly; the ability of this institution to hold money supply at thevery nominal growth rates of the last two years I think has put us ina position different from the Bundesbank, for example, which has beenhaving a terrible problem of going off the other end. But however onelooks at this, at some point we're going to have to confront the issueof inflation stability or price stability; either the markets aregoing to do it to us or we're going to have to come to grips withthat. I don't think we have to in the immediate period; but we mayfind, when we're reviewing the '90 targets again in February, thatthat issue is going to be right in front of us and we're not going tobe able to duck it terribly much.Well, as I count up the various views, the critical mass isbasically to stay with the '89 ranges temporarily as tentativenumbers. I don't know whether or not those who are in favor ofalternative II feel comfortable with that or not, but it's sort ofhalf-way there. Because of the comments that I heard, I think itwould be [appropriate] for somebody to move the continuation of the1989 ranges for all three variables--the two Ms and debt--for 1990.MR. JOHNSON. So move.MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let's take a formal vote.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Guffey YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn NoGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesPresident Melzer YesGovernor Seger YesPresident Syron YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. That brings us to the next orderof business, which is our standard short-run discussion. Mr. Kohn.MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Kohn?MR. BOEHNE. You made the point that the markets have builtinto current rates a quarter point drop in the funds rate ratherpromptly. A quarter point from what base? Where do you---43-7/5-6/89MR. KOHN. I think about 9-1/2 percent. We've said 9-1/2 to9-5/8 percent, but it's averaged closer to 9-1/2 percent and I thinkthat's about where the markets think it is.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions?MR. HOSKINS. Let me just follow up on the one Manley askedearlier. If you were to lower rates 50 basis points, you would expectM2 by the fourth quarter, or by December, to be growing at 8 percent?MR. KOHN. That's correct. You can see that in alternative Ain the Bluebook. We have 8 percent, actually, from June to September.MR. PARRY. June to September?MR. KOHN. June to September. And that would encompass astrengthening pattern of M2 growth over that period. Consequently, bythe time we got to the fourth quarter I think it would be in the 8percent range or [even] higher.MR. ANGELL. The fourth quarter to December would be what?MR. KOHN. Quarter IV to December under alternative A? Idon't know. Quarter IV to September is 3.7 percent, so my guess--MR. ANGELL. Well, it'd probably be about 4-1/2 percent onalternative A to December. Is that about right?MR. KOHN. Right, something like that.MR. PARRY. No, it's 3-3/4.MR. KOHN. That's to September; but then to December--MR. ANGELL. If you maintain that you're going to get morekick.MR. KOHN. Yes. My guess is that it may be closer to 5percent--closer to the midpoint of the range.MR. MELZER. Don, in the Bluebook and in some commentsyesterday and today there has been a fair amount of discussion aboutwhat the market has built in, in terms of expectations. I don't viewthis as particularly unusual--that at the time policy is perceived tobe on the move for the market to get ahead of itself--or particularlydamaging if the expectations are not ratified. Would that beconsistent with your view of the past? This isn't particularlyunusual is it?MR. KOHN. Well, it certainly is not unusual for them to bespeculating about a change in monetary policy about the time you folksare sitting in this room meeting. My sense is that the intensity ofthe speculation and the immediacy and size of the expected ratemovement is a little larger than normal. We have had some prettystrong upward sloping yield curves and expectations; one can thinkback only six months or less about some pretty immediate movements onthe other side. I don't have a measure of how intense this is but I-44-7/5-6/89have the sense that the expectations are quite firmly held. It's nottotally unusual. And they can go both ways with this.MR. MELZER. Well, I'd be cautious about the extent to whichwe let that influence what we do; that's mainly what I'm saying.MR. KOHN. I think that's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other?MR. JOHNSON. I'll just follow up on that. I agree--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, these are questions, not--MR. JOHNSON. Well, this is a reaction to that. I think it'strue that the market is discounting a fairly immediate 25 basis pointmove. But if you go a little further out--and I agree with whatyou're saying, Tom--the market is discounting more than a point in thebill market. And I don't--MR. KOHN. Well, it's 3/4 of a point, I think.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's not more; probably a mechanicalestimate of what the bill rate today is implying is 8.8 percent on thefunds rate.MR. JOHNSON. There is normally about a 3/4 point spread, ifyou just take the average between the Treasury bill rate and the fedfunds rate; and the Treasury bill rate now is about 7.75 percent.MR. KOHN. And I think that [translates to] about 8-3/4percent; the mechanical translation varies with the level of rates.MR. JOHNSON. What is the rate?SPEAKER(?). 8.8 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. 8.8 percent.MR. JOHNSON. Okay, I'm sorry.MR. KOHN. It varies with the level of rates, GovernorJohnson, because you have to make some estimate for a marginal statetax rate--since bills are exempt from state taxes--as well as thecoupon equivalent kind of [adjustment].MR. JOHNSON. Sure. What I'm saying--MR. KOHN. And the mechanical translation of 7-3/4 percent[on the bill rate] is about 8-3/4 percent [on the funds rate].MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I think that's about right. I'm sayingthat's what the bill market has built in. Now, it clearly looks likean overshoot to me of where we want to be; but I'm simply sayingthat's where the market is.MR. KOHN. One sense of where this yield curve is you can seeon Chart I of the financial indicators that I have; it's really a-45-7/5-6/89minus, as of Friday of last week. But you can see that we have hadsome upward slopes in yield curves, at least measured this way, thatare larger than the downward--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mr. Kohn?MR. STERN. Don, are there any reasons why you may be more orless confident about the path of M2 over the next 6 months than usual?MR. KOHN. Well, I'm never very confident; but I must saythat the response of M2 in June and over the last couple months wasroughly about what we expected. Particularly if I take out the demanddeposit component, which has had its own special influences with thecompensating balances and whatnot, M2 is running stronger than weprojected at the last meeting, and that's consistent with a slightlylower interest rate and a bounceback. The June performance reassuresme somewhat that we are on an upward trajectory here and are morelikely to come back within that range.MR. ANGELL. But, Don, there is a possibility that thesucking down of those balances was abnormal in April and May and thatthere was some bounceback effect. So, it seems to me that there'ssome uncertainty as to whether or not that 6-1/2 percent [growth] willbe maintained.MR. KOHN. I agree, certainly. And we have built in a verymodest [response]--I think about 1/2 percentage point--justarbitrarily assuming that it would get back in over 6 months into ourforecast. On the other hand, as we go forward, even if rates were tostay at this level or something like it, we do have a little more ofthe influence of the recent decline in market rates coming in. So,we'd expect those two factors together to have a slight downwardimpact on velocity.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions? Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Since some people outside follow the reserveaggregates--I realize we don't target them but they have [dropped]more than we expected, I believe, since last summer--how would youexpect them to perform over the rest of this year?MR. KOHN. We have the monetary base growing at about 3percent this year, so we have it bouncing back. Because we have M1essentially unchanged over the last half of the year, that dominatesthe reserve aggregates; we have them growing from June to December.But on a Q3 to Q4 basis they are essentially unchanged. And we havecurrency growing at about a 5 or 6 percent pace. So I think thereserve aggregates would tend to flatten out and the base would tendto grow a little faster, the base being 2/3 or 3/4 currency.MS. SEGER. But you do think the decline in the reserveaggregates would cease under alternative B?MR. KOHN. That would be our expectation on the basis thatthe decline in Ml would cease.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions? President Keehn.-46-7/5-6/89MR. KEEHN. Questions or--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We're still on questions. PresidentBlack.MR. BLACK. Don, in your chart 9 where you have P above P*,is that a significant difference that would [lead] you to think thatthat's some indication for us that it might not [unintelligible]?MR. KOHN. Well, as noted in the Bluebook long-run strategysection, we have P very slightly above P* here. We would expect thisto be roughly consistent with Mike's Greenbook forecast stretching outto 1991, which was a very, very small deceleration of inflation. Itwas eerily similar to the staff baseline forecast.MR. BLACK. I like that adverb.MR. KOHN. I think in the Bluebook we said "interestingly;" Iwanted to say "eerily."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anyone else? Don, am I correct insensing that this particular period seems to have far moreanticipation in it than anything in the recent past? It's not onlyfederal funds expectations but the size of the changes in the long endof the bond market. Are we looking at something which is the result,in part at least, of the increasing size of the financial servicesindustry and the extent to which there is a great deal more activityand anticipation and players in the game?MR. KOHN. I think there's a trend over time. One of thequestions raised was: Does that trend in the activities of, say,pension funds in the stock market--and I assume in the bond markettoo--add to volatility? Do people tend to move from one side of theship to the other--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The derivative instruments are alsocrucial to this whole game.MR. KOHN. I think that the academic findings are, as weheard at President Guffey's conference last summer, that volatility isgreater than can seem to be explained by fundamental factors in themarket. Whether this has gotten worse over time, with the pensionfunds and financial services--that's the question. I think it's moreof an open question. We have had other periods--one can think back toa year ago when we were starting to tighten--in which expectationswere very strong and the market bond yields moved up from, say,February through March; we were in this 7-1/2 or 7-3/4 percent area inFebruary of 1988 and we were at 9 percent within a couple of months.So I'm not sure that--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, at least I remember the bill raterising really sharply against the funds rate in that period.MR. JOHNSON. It did. You've got--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not as much as this.-47-7/5-6/89 -48-MR. JOHNSON. Well, it closed the spread quite narrowly acouple of times.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Which in a sense was implying another100 basis points.MR. JOHNSON. No, not quite that much; but when we wereperceived [as] behind by the market in catching up to inflationaryexpectations we did get a fairly significant closing of the spread.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm not opposing it, I'm--MR. JOHNSON. I don't think it ever has been discounted apoint over the funds rate.MR. KOHN. I do think this movement, say, since late '88 hasbeen unusual. I'm looking at a chart of the bill rate and the fundsrate now. We had similar kinds of movements in early '85--this sharpup and down. There are some [periods] like that, but in the last twoyears, say, the size of the movement is fairly unusual.MR. JOHNSON. You could argue that that's related to thespeed with which the Fed moves with the market.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. True enough. Unless there are otherquestions, I think we can get to the substantive issue. But it doesstrike me that what is happening here is that the markets essentiallyhave responded very dramatically to the expectation that the economyis turning and that we will respond, with necessity coming in behind.And in an odd way it has made the urgency of our response somewhatmuted because the economy doesn't run off the funds rate; it runs offthe long-term bond rate and the bill rate and all of the other relatedinstruments. However, the question that I think confronts us is: Howdo we respond to what the evidence out there shows? I personally am alittle concerned, as I indicated yesterday, about whether [unplanned]inventory accumulation will show up. There's no question that thedata per se do not show any inventory backing up. But I've beenthrough too many business cycles in my business career to haveremembered making exactly that statement just prior to a slip in finaldemand which all of a sudden is unearthed and backs up a good deal ofinventory. And all of a sudden we find ourselves with some generalweakness. I wouldn't be particularly concerned were it not for thefact that, at this stage, I do think the money supply data--eventhough projected with some optimism to strengthen--are really quiterestrained. And if there is one thing the central bank has to takedue notice of, it is the Vice Chairman's concerns, which I generallyshare, that it is required of us to maintain financial aggregates insome acceptable pattern. That's really the reason why we have thecones.The question that confronts us is the issue of how we shouldmove. Frankly, I would be inclined at this stage, with the newmarginal calculation made by Don Kohn, to move the borrowing; I guessseasonal borrowing requirements are down by $50 million, which wouldbe the equivalent of 25 basis points on the funds rate. I ask myself:Why not more? And I think more [of a move] is potentially risking thetype of problem that Governors LaWare and Johnson raised yesterday.I'm concerned that the worst thing that can happen to us, as far as7/5-6/89policy is concerned, is that we are perceived to be easing too fastand in a manner which would open up the possibilities of inflationaryexpectations. It's hard for me to imagine how we are going to get thelong-term bond rate down significantly from here unless the economyeases up quite significantly. But if we are dealing with a situationin which there is a belief that the Fed is opening up the money supplyvalve and that we're on our way down, I think we are risking the typeof instability [we want to avoid]. That really would be quitecounterproductive to an endeavor to just come off the pressure we'vebeen imposing because, if we get a major response in inflationexpectations, which would drive long-term interest rates higher,rather than soften the weakness in the economy and try to createsupport, we could inadvertently do precisely the opposite. I can'tsay to you that I know that, in fact, it would occur that way. But,looking at the way the markets have behaved just in recent days, thereis a fragility and an instability out there. And I think the argumentthat Governor LaWare raised yesterday is one that we should be focusedon. I'm not sure I come out exactly where he comes out on policy as aresponse to that. But the question of not creating instability, Ithink, is crucial for us. So, I would be reluctant at this stage totry to move all the way to "A," which would be a full $100 milliondecline in the borrowing requirement, for fear that we might end updoing precisely the reverse of what we would be endeavoring to do--ifthe Committee decided that it wanted to move somewhat in the directionof ease.MR. JOHNSON. How would you feel if we moved 25 basis pointsand bond rates fell further?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You mean the interest rates?MR. JOHNSON. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would feel quite comfortable. Thatwould suggest to me that the markets' view of the Fed's anti-inflationcredibility remained in place.MR. JOHNSON. I think that's right. Maybe it would stiffenit; I think that would be the impression.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me put it to you this way.Were it not the case, and the economy continued to be soft, I think wecould probably safely move another notch.MR. JOHNSON. Okay. That's what I'm saying.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But I wouldn't want to prejudge that.MR. JOHNSON. No, I think that's--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it would be dangerous to do so.So, I would like to recommend [borrowing] sort of half-way toward "A"with symmetric language, if for no other reason than I can't think ofany purpose for using other than symmetrical language.MR. FORRESTAL. Sorry. Did you say symmetric or--?-49-7/5-6/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Symmetric. In other words, I wouldinitiate at this meeting moving half-way toward "A," meaning a declineof $50 million in the borrowing requirement, which in our newcalibration is the equivalent of 25 basis points [on the funds rate],and staying with symmetric language. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I can support the formulation thatyou put on the table, Mr. Chairman. But I do think that the bodyEnglish on it is important. I completely support your suggestion thatwe've got to be careful here. Therefore, I think the symmetriclanguage is also important for the reasons that you've stated. Interms of the more cautious approach I would simply add: (1) that itstill, as I said earlier, is not clear to me that the inflation ratenecessarily has stopped rising--and even if it has, I think we stillcould get a couple of months of lousy numbers; and (2) as an extensionof that, and for external reasons as well, I at least am prepared torun some risk of an economy that is on the slow side for some period.But I think the thrust of your prescription is precisely right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, to my mind we're in a very,very difficult period at the moment and I think the formulation ofpolicy is more difficult than usual. If you step back a bit and lookat our strategy, the strategy that we formulated a year ago was wellconceived and I think it has been well executed. I think we havepretty well gotten the results we wanted--that is, in the sense thatwe have brought the economy down to a more sustainable level ofperformance. Unfortunately, inflation is still at too high a level.If I believed my own forecast I would be more apt to stay where weare. But I recognize that my forecast for GNP next year is anoutlier; and given that outlier position, I have much less confidencein that forecast than I ordinarily would. So, I think yourprescription is the right one. I think we have to be careful not tomove too quickly and undo inadvertently what we have achieved throughthe strategy that we developed last year. I would certainly supportyour formulation, including the symmetric language. But your pointabout the comments that were made yesterday concerning fragility andthe consequences of policy is very, very important, because I thinkthe consequences of moving too quickly and letting inflation move upwould be perverse and would achieve exactly the kind of things that wecertainly want to avoid. So, I think going slowly the way yousuggested is the proper stance for policy at the moment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry,MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I think it's appropriate for us tomove very cautiously at this point. It's clear that the current ratesof inflation are a problem; and even more of a concern is the factthat underlying inflationary pressures are likely to remain a problemfor quite a while, whether you [accept] the forecast of the Greenbookor some of the others that have been talked about around the table.So, it seems to me the biggest mistake would be to move tooaggressively and, therefore, I could support the proposition that youput on the table.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.-50-7/5-6/89MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I have a great deal of sympathy forthe policy prescription that you advocated for the following reasons:first, given that our long-term goal is price stability, I'm not allthat unhappy about where we are right now; and at least for the nextcouple of quarters I'm not that unhappy with what the Greenbookforecast has embedded in it in terms of the behavior of rates.Knowing the uncertainties that exist in this world, I think it is veryimportant to move gradually, for the reasons that other people havementioned, and to adopt an approach or continue an approach in whichthe Chairman has a fair amount of flexibility. There are things thatcould happen in the intermeeting period that would substantiallychange how one would read the economy. So, I very strongly supportthat.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree, essentially,with those who have already spoken with respect to your proposal. IfI were to believe our own forecast for the quarter immediately ahead,quite likely I would opt for alternative B with symmetric language.Essentially, the question in my mind is whether or not we really havethe slowing that was detailed yesterday in the numbers that GovernorJohnson cited--whether or not that is going to continue throughoutthis quarter or whether we will pause and get a reacceleration andtherefore an inappropriate further dropping of short-term rates atthis point. Then we'd have to turn it back around. But given thatuncertainty, your proposal to move cautiously seems to me to beappropriate--symmetric language of the directive and betweenalternatives A and B. One thing that isn't clear to me, however, ishow the borrowing level would be treated. I know there has been anexplanation; I guess I just didn't understand. It is dropped by $50million under your proposal, Mr. Chairman. Given that the seasonalborrowing is roughly $500 million or a bit above and we have been at$600 million as a borrowing level, are we talking about $550 millionor are we talking about staying at $600 million?SPEAKER(?). 600.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What I'm doing is calibrating off whatDon Kohn has indicated.MR. KOHN. It'd be roughly $600 million.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think they recalibrated the [currentlevel] to $650, so technically, I guess it comes down to $600 million.MR. GUFFEY. 600?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. You recalibrated the $650 million for whatalternative?MR. KOHN. For alternative B.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. For "B."-51-7/5-6/89MR. PARRY. And $550 million for "A."MR. JOHNSON. Okay, right.MR. ANGELL. But you expect that to be consistent with [afunds rate of] 9-1/4 to 9-3/8 percent?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's correct.MR. JOHNSON. It doesn't sound like the old formula, butthat's okay.MR. KOHN. No, Governor Johnson, it isn't because of the--MR. JOHNSON. That's all right.MR. KOHN. It [includes] seasonal and adjustment borrowing--MR. JOHNSON. Yes, okay.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to add one othercaveat. We do have a fairly important number coming out on Friday--that is, the employment number. Rather than moving to the lower levelthat you are suggesting before that number comes out, I think I'd waitand take another look before the--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me suggest this: If the number turnsout to be a major surprise, on the up side perhaps, we would be welladvised to have a telephone conference on the basis of that.MR. GUFFEY. I would agree; that's very satisfactory.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, given the current situation and theaccumulation of evidence in the economy, along with the currentconditions in the markets, I think the policy prescription that wasoutlined is just right and I concur with it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Yes, I concur with that policy; I believe that aborrowing range associated with a 25 basis point move at this point intime is the most prudent. We really have been very fortunate, itseems to me, that the market has given us so much credibility thatlong-run rates have moved to where they have moved. And it seems tome that we should have the objective of somehow or other getting atleast the soft landing in the housing industry and that's most clearlydone with long rates, not with short rates. It just seems to me thatfixed mortgage rates need to be in the single-digit area in order forus to have the soft landing. Now, for those who may wonder how thisfits with price level stability, I will share with you the commodityprice annual rates of change charts that I've been following very,very carefully. As you can see, those smooth rates of change have hada very flat top on them; so I've been hesitant to call what I wouldsay is a forecast of a downturn in the CPI year-over-year rate ofchange. But unless I'm totally wrong, the CPI year-over-year rates of-52-7/5-6/89change between now and October are going to be declining. And it'sencompassing that that would permit me to want to--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's a technical reason for that; thegasoline price we know is coming down and we have that refineryadjustment problem, which the seasonal does not pick up. Mike, whatis that worth in the PPI? As I recall, it was not small.MR. STOCKTON. No. We're expecting that to take about 4cents a gallon off gasoline prices by the September-October period.So there's about a 4 percent decline just from that as well as someweakening in gasoline margins over and above that. Once that's inplace, we're expecting CPI prices to be [rising] 0.2 to 0.3 percentfor the summer months of July, August, and September. And for the PPI[we expect a] zero to 0.1 percent rise for a few months in latesummer, early fall.MR. ANGELL. I'm aware of those technical changes and that'swhy I have such a low forecast for the CPI in the second half. But Idid want [others] to be aware of the fact that some of that is a one-time deal and will not necessarily follow through. But the work thatPeter Von zur Muehlen has been doing--and he will have a working paperfor the American Ag-Econ Association and the U.S. Department ofAgriculture meeting in Baton Rouge, Florida later this month--hasshown that these smooth commodity prices have been very significant inregard to forecasting changes or peaks in the CPI. And that's what Iguess I'm staking my reputation on that the CPI will respond.MR. BOEHNE. Be careful, Wayne.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The technical data are supporting that.MR. ANGELL. I never stake my reputation without some otherhelp like that!MR. JOHNSON. But, Wayne, this is ex-oil. Would you beforecasting an ex-oil CPI turning point?MR. ANGELL. No, I don't think--MR. JOHNSON. Well, I think it's reasonable.MR. ANGELL. Yes, I feel confident that that will take place.But we have to understand that changing the growth of the money stockdoes show up in these commodity prices. It took a while for thoseslow money growth rates to show up but now they are showing up. And Ithink that's encouraging. What we want to avoid, it seems to me, isthe risk of too severe a slowdown, which would then be followed byoverdoing it in regard to money growth rates on the up side. So, Ithink caution is the right word. And I expect the markets to bestabilized somewhat by less than maybe the markets expect. And then Ithink we need to take another look. Now, I would prefer asymmetriclanguage just because--as you know, in March I thought we should havebeen symmetric and in May I thought we should have been asymmetric--remember, these minutes are released 6 weeks from now. So, I thinkit's better to have the 6-week release make us sound a little smarterthan it does when we're so reluctant to move in a direction on thesymmetry that I think is needed. It's not going to show up now,-53-7/5-6/89anyway; and if it turns out that we are wrong we will havedemonstrated that we didn't make any moves. But I favor yourproposal.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I know your preference is to go between "A" and"B" but I think I would go all the way to "A." First of all, I don'tthink that a 50 basis point change in the fed funds rate is all thatstartling. Going upward we went 50 and 75 basis points without evenwinking or blinking at all. Also, I'm not so sure that all themarkets have incorporated only a 25 basis point easing by us. Thismorning I heard the early financial news on TV and some of the stockmarket commentators were talking about the impact of expectations oflower interest rates on the stock market. Again, I don't know ifthese folks are right, but they were building the stock market storyon substantial declines in interest rates. Secondly, we heard allthese pieces of evidence presented yesterday about the slowing in theeconomy, and I certainly agree with all those. Frankly, I think thatthere's going to be much more slowing going forward, regardless ofwhat we do today, because I don't think the actions today are going toimpact the economy one way or the other for probably the rest of thisyear.Earlier we were talking about the importance of announcementeffects; probably there are a thousand people in the country who knowwhat we do at the FOMC, and maybe 500 of them know what the ranges arefor monetary growth. But there are 500 and some people down at theother end of Constitution Avenue who are going to be following whatgoes on in the real economy. If the economy weakens even further andthey start hearing from the folks at home about rising unemploymentrates and so forth, then I'm sure our Chairman here is not going to bethe man of the hour when he has to go down there and meet with them--because I think they will wonder why we didn't see what was going on,or if we saw it, why we ignored it and didn't react. So, as I said, Iwould prefer alternative A.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I support your policy recommendation, Mr.Chairman. I don't think we came out too far apart in our conclusion,because I think destabilization in either direction is bad.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I said that because you had notcommented; it was more omission rather--MR. LAWARE. So, I certainly support the 25 basis pointchange in rate and the symmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, you made my talk for me except thatyou made it much better than I would have. But, I would like tosuggest one thing. It probably won't meet with a lot of acceptancebut I'd like to see the monetary aggregates moved up in that list ofthings that might temper what we're doing in the intermeeting period.Rather than the unemployment and employment figures [to be released]this Friday or inflation figures coming later on, I think this is-54-7/5-6/89really the crucial thing. And I think it's important that we do keep[money growth] moving up; it has been very weak for a long time andunless we get to change that, frankly, I think we're going to run intotrouble before very long. So I'd like to see that moved up to thefirst place. But otherwise, I'm right with you on this.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I'd be very close to Bob Black's position. AsI listen to the comments around the table, it seems that there is aview that the economy is softening. Certainly some indicators have[shown] that and some people are arguing that we ought to ease policyon that basis. A one-quarter-ahead forecast for real GNP has an errorof plus or minus 2 percentage points around it. If you go out 18months on inflation you find roughly the same error. The only pointI'm trying to make is that we seem to be in the business of fine-tuning; that, I think, has led us into some problems in the past. Ifone is to support your proposition, I think the reason ought to be toensure that we get Don Kohn's projected money growth for the secondhalf. While I prefer to stay where we are on the hope and prayer thatDon's forecast is accurate, I certainly would be ready to bias[policy] toward alternative A if the aggregates didn't come through.And I'd probably be more aggressive--along the lines of Martha'sposition.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I agree with what you suggested. I thinkcaution is appropriate for the reasons that Lee expressed before. Ifwe fall into the trap of short-term fine-tuning it could be verydisruptive in the long run. So, I think the caution is appropriateand I think the symmetrical language conveys that as best we can.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I support your prescription.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I certainly support yourprescription. I would like to suggest when it's in order--now orlater--a reordering of the presentation of our list of concerns in thepolicy directive. Would that be in order now? Or would you prefer todo that later?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Since the issue has been raised late inthis go-around, perhaps we ought to complete this and then go back tothe question of ordering--unless somebody's vote or view would dependon that [unintelligible]. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I agree with the Chairman on his proposal,although my preference probably would have been 50 basis points on thefunds rate phased in over two periods, because I do think caution iscertainly needed in the immediate period. I think we ought to testhow the market absorbs 25 basis points before we consider any furthermoves. As Don Kohn pointed out, if you go further out, the marketclearly has discounted well over 50 basis points in terms of what theyexpect us to do over a period of time, which is certainly within the-55-7/5-6/89period between meetings. So, my preference would have been to plan totake another step based on how the markets developed between here andthere. I generally think asymmetric language would be preferable, butI can go with the symmetry. I still want to express a concern,though. I think we always became quite concerned with where we wererelative to the markets when we were tightening--when the marketsperceived us to be behind on the inflation fight--and we moved fairlyaggressively to catch up and even tried to stay ahead at times, whichI think was critical to our gaining credibility. I think that problemworks in reverse. If we lose the confidence of the markets that weare going to pursue a stable policy and keep up with changes andevents, we're going to run the risk on the down side that we wereworried about on the up side. I don't think we're there; but I thinkthat problem is simmering out there for us. I don't think we'reanywhere near finding ourselves in a situation like this, but theproblem I worry about in the back of my head is that the Fed droveinterest rates gradually down to 0 in the 1930s and it didn't do ablessed thing to stop the economy's decline. Getting into that kindof a mentality is a risky situation, so I think we need some[asymmetry] both on the down side and the up side. But I can go alongwith your funds rate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I would concur.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think your suggestion for a 25 basis pointdrop in the funds rate is exactly what ought to happen. I would,however, take some issue with the [proposed] symmetry. I would preferan asymmetrical directive for two reasons: first, I think the risk hasshifted and there is more downside risk than there is upside risk inthe economy and an asymmetrical directive would underscore that; andsecondly, given the string of data that we have had in recent weeksthat have been on the bearish side, it's difficult for me to imaginethat we would tighten in the next six weeks. It would have to be avery dramatic turnaround in the data, and I think the probabilities ofthat happening are very, very small. On the other hand, what is mostlikely is that we will see a continuation of the bearish data and itwouldn't take nearly as convincing a string of information in thatdirection to warrant a further decline in rates. And when I considerthe reasons why we usually have had asymmetrical directives, it seemsto me that those two reasons have been high on the list.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can we now get views on the issue of theposition of the various elements which affect our directive? At themoment it reads: number (1) inflationary pressures; (2) the strengthof the business expansion; (3) the behavior of the monetaryaggregates; and (4) developments in foreign exchange and domesticfinancial markets.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, before you go to the go-around I'dlike to have reactions to another suggestion, and that is: It seems tome that "indications of inflationary pressures" is a defensive posturethat was appropriate during the period that we knew we were going tobe giving ground on inflation. I would rather have a more positive-56-7/5-6/89statement in the wording such as "progress toward price stability"rather than "indications of inflationary pressures."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sounds like a reasonable suggestion.Does anybody object to that?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I have trouble with it because Ireally have been concerned that we may be projecting this notion tothe public and to the Congress--and I hope you're right with yourcommodity prices, Wayne--that there's a free lunch, or that we can getfrom here to there without having to incur some real difficulty in theeconomy. And I think that's very dangerous.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me suggest, then, that we withholdthat until perhaps the next meeting when it would be on the tableagain--unless there's an objection to that--because that's the type ofchange which I think is an important change and should largely reflectthe views in the Committee generally.MR. ANGELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, the reason I raise it now isbecause you're about to prepare your Humphrey-Hawkins testimony. AndI was thinking in terms of that testimony as well as this directive,which is going to be published six weeks from now. At this point intime the chances of our avoiding too significant a turndown, I think,depend upon our credibility; and I think that stronger language to aprice level commitment will help the long-bond market more. That'sthe reason I raise it now.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't have any trouble puttingsome words like that in the Chairman's testimony or even in the bodyof the directive itself. I don't know; maybe I misunderstood.MR. ANGELL. Well, I guess I don't understand what you objectto in terms of progress toward price stability.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What I object to is that I think weare running a risk of creating an impression in the Congress andelsewhere that we are going to get to price stability in some easy,painless way. I just am very, very skeptical that that is possible.I'm skeptical that we can even get the inflation rate back down to 4percent without having to incur some hardship.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's why we do say in the directive,as Norm points out to me, that "the FOMC seeks monetary and financialconditions that will foster price stability, promote growth," etc.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We probably should look at these--MR. ANGELL. Well, can someone think of some other languagethat somebody doesn't object to?MR. PARRY. What's your concern?MR. ANGELL. "Indications of inflationary pressures" seemslike a resistance approach. In other words, if inflation pressuresdon't get any worse it seems like maybe that's what we're after.MR. HOSKINS. Isn't that what we've done?-57-7/5-6/89MR. ANGELL. That's exactly what we've done.MR. HOSKINS. My point earlier was if that's how it is, thenwe ought to start saying that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What if we say "taking account ofprogress in resisting inflationary pressures"?MR. HOSKINS. As opposed to continuing to say "pricestability," if [our objective] is really to maintain current rates ofinflation then we've got to be honest about it and say that. If not,if we really mean price stability, then we ought to take actions toachieve that.MR. ANGELL. But I would hold that when you look at the M2growth path over the last 30 months this is an unprecedented M2 growthpath for 30 months in the history of M2. We have never had a 30-monthperiod of growth this low and this stable. And we've got time [lags].So, it seems to me that we are going to have the burdens and the painis going to show. You don't get there cheap. I guess I'm somewhatmore optimistic in regard to what the record is than you are.MR. JOHNSON. I agree with that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me suggest one thing. When wepublish any change in words it is going to get really very heavilyevaluated at this particular turning point. I feel a certain sympathyfor what you're saying, but perhaps what we ought to do is to--MR. ANGELL. I'll be satisfied to do it next meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. Let's think about that, because Ihate to make that type of decision which we don't mean to be all thatsignificant but can be read to be rather significant. Let's try someformulations between meetings and perhaps come up with a better set oflanguage. Let's leave this particular discussion strictly to therepositioning, if any, of what it is that we have in the directivewith respect to our indicators. President Parry,MR. PARRY. I'd like to address the repositioning issue. Itseems to me that we still ought to keep some statement about inflationup front. I think we ought to remember why we moved "behavior of themonetary aggregates" to where it is. We had a lot of research,conducted by the staff, that indicated that the association betweenthe growth of money and the economy was not sufficiently predictableor stable to rely on it to a great extent for use in terms ofoperating in financial markets. Without taking another look atwhether or not the staff has changed their view on that, why should wemove it up? In addition, if we do move it up to number 1, should westop talking about the way we have been formulating our policy interms of borrowed reserves?MR. ANGELL. You want to take it to two, then?MR. PARRY. I don't want to change it--not until some work isdone that would support such a change. I don't understand what haschanged in terms of our perception about the usefulness of money as aguide to the economy since all those studies were done.-58-7/5-6/89MR. BLACK. When the federal funds rate comes down a littleand the aggregates continue at the rate they have been going, I thinkthe market will be scared very much by those developments. So, thereason I suggested moving that up a little is that they ought to knowthat we are concerned that the aggregates not stay that low forever,but rather that they should move up a bit from where they are. Thework that Don and his associates did alleviates a lot of my worriesabout it because that work pretty well suggests to me around 3percent, which might not be too bad. I don't think that [low growth]ought to go on any longer now; and I'd like the markets to know thatif it doesn't begin to move a little we'll have to do something.MR. PARRY. Are you suggesting that we try to monitor it?MR. BLACK. I always suggest that.MR. PARRY. Well--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. At this particular point, I have anurgent phone call. I was wondering if we could break for coffee nowand come back in a few minutes.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley you have the floor.MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I assume we'reproceeding to discuss the ordering of our concerns.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. KELLEY. I wanted to make a suggestion along that line,if I might. First of all, in the spirit of your comment that anythingthat goes into these directives that is different from what has beenthere heretofore is very carefully scrutinized, we should think aboutit carefully. In that spirit, my suggestion is more in the nature ofputting something on the table rather than trying to push for itsimmediate adoption. I would suggest that we consider reversing theorder of the first two of these considerations that appear in lines 63and 64 of the operational paragraph and give more emphasis to thestrength of the economy as opposed to inflationary pressures. Thisarises out of the notion, discussed here earlier today and before,that in monetary policy price stability is a very important andessential precondition to a larger end--that it's the means toward alarger end of sustainable growth. I think sustainable growth isdriven by a wide variety of different factors as well as monetarypolicy in the interplay of all sorts of things. We carefully tried toassess the risks to our forecast and whether or not the economy mightturn out to be stronger or weaker than the forecast. Everybody hasslightly different views on that, but it does seem fairly clear andfairly consensual that the risks are for a slower economy than we haveseen heretofore. That's not really my point; my point, as I tried toallude to yesterday afternoon, relates to the consequences of eventsfalling out meaningfully on one side or the other of the consensusforecast on the economy. It seems to me that the consequences of theeconomy being somewhat stronger are not terribly severe. For onething, it's hard to see the economy being very much stronger than theforecast given the 30 months of aggregate growth history that Governor-59-7/5-6/89Angell alluded to earlier and given the nature of the incomingevidence on what's going on in the real economy. It's very difficultfor me to see that inflation could get away from us in some way thatwe couldn't go back and reassess. On the other hand, if events fallout on the weak side, I think that the consequences are veryasymmetrical in the sense that they could be much more severe than ifthey should turn out to be on the strong side. If we could beconfident that we could fine-tune this soft landing and have a periodof slow growth that would eventually, at some point down the line,begin to gradually turn up, that would be very nice. But we all knowwe can't necessarily count on being able to do that. And I am veryconcerned about the nature of the factors that Governor LaWarediscussed yesterday afternoon that have to do with the fragility,particularly of the financial structure, at this time. I certainlydon't think I need to go back over that; everybody is aware of that.But there are factors out there of very large magnitude, other thanmonetary policy, that could put us in a situation where we could havea downturn that could feed upon itself with very severe consequencesin the larger picture of the economy and the society. Indeed, shouldwe get into a severe recession with ballooning deficits it could turnout to be very counterproductive in making long-term progress towardprice stability. So, it seems to me that largely as a result of theasymmetrical consequences of how events might turn out, this might bea time that we should give more priority overtly to what's going on inthe economy relative to what's going on strictly in the narrowerconsideration of inflation. So I would propose for consideration,either now or later Mr. Chairman, that those first two considerationsbe reversed.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, having heard the beginning of thisconversation and doing a little arithmetic, there are eleven membersof the FOMC at the moment and five various elements, to which you havejust added several more. Since whatever we do will be read veryclosely, I would feel very uncomfortable crafting that language now; Iwould suggest for the Committee's consideration that in the periodimmediately ahead Don Kohn contact not only the Committee members butall the other Presidents as well and see if we can lay before theCommittee at our next meeting some alternatives which capture the typeof issue you and others have raised to see whether in fact we do wishto make changes. I would think it's probably impracticable to try tomake changes now, and I would offer as a consideration that weessentially think about this a little more because there's a lotgreater sensitivity to this than we would like. And I think a littlethought would be useful.MR. KELLEY. Well, as I indicated early on, I entirelysubscribe to that notion; but I did want to get that on the table.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would not personally object, Mr.Chairman, if you choose to incorporate the gravamen of what GovernorKelley is saying even in your testimony where you're not as bound--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the testimony is on the 20th andby then I think we will have gotten basically the thrust of this.-60-7/5-6/89VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We can leave these words where theyare but try and get some--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it would be worthwhile--if thereis going to be a table, as there invariably is, on the Committeemembers' and the Presidents' forecasts--to bolster that a bit bygetting some of the characteristics of what the individual views inthat table basically are and put them not only into my testimony butin the document as well. If there are no objections to that as aproposal I would like Norm to read us just the operational paragraph,which captures what I believe is the central tendency of theindividual members' decisions. We do have a substantive issue on thelanguage, which is not just arbitrary--whether we say the Committeeseeks to decrease "somewhat" or "slightly" the existing degree ofpressure. I would say the presumption is slightly, but is there astrong view either way on that question?MR. JOHNSON. Well, the reality of it is clearly "slightly."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, we ought to be clear on that.MR. BLACK. [Unintelligible.]MR. JOHNSON. I would prefer "somewhat" but that would gowith a different change.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't you use "slightly."MR. BERNARD. It would read: "In the implementation ofpolicy for the immediate future the Committee seeks to decreaseslightly the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. Takingaccount of indications of inflationary pressures, the strength of thebusiness expansion, the behavior of the monetary aggregates, anddevelopments in foreign exchange and domestic financial markets,somewhat greater reserve restraint or somewhat lesser reserverestraint would be acceptable in the intermeeting period. Thecontemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent withgrowth of M2 and M3 over the period from June through September atannual rates of about 7 percent. The Chairman may call for Committeeconsultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations thatreserve conditions during the period before the next meeting arelikely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outsidea range of 7 to 11 percent."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would you put that to a vote?MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Guffey YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesPresident Melzer YesGovernor Seger NoPresident Syron Yes-61-7/5-6/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I gather that for those who wish torevise their forecast for submission in the Humphrey-Hawkins testimonyand report it would be useful to have the revisions, if there are any,by July 12th. That's next Wednesday, I believe.MR. ANGELL. How many did you throw out on both sides to getthe central tendency?MR. PRELL. The ones that I showed throughout that range--MR. ANGELL. Three on each side?MR. PRELL. We'll have to look at this again and see how thegroup decision was reached after we've seen the revised numbers.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next meeting date is scheduled forTuesday, August 22.END OF MEETING-62-