Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeOctober 3, 1989A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 3, 1989, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellGuffeyJohnsonKeehnKelleyLaWareMelzerSegerSyronMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Hoskins, and Stern, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal and Parry, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, andSan Francisco, respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Kohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPatrikis, Deputy General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. R..Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey, Ms. Munnell,Messrs. Promisel, Scheld, Siegman, Simpson,and Slifman, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne,1Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, Lang, Rolnick,Rosenblum, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond,Cleveland, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas, andAtlanta, respectivelyMessrs. Guentner and Thornton, Assistant Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of New York and St. Louis,respectively1. Entered meeting prior to discussion of current monetary policy.2. Left meeting prior to discussion of current monetary policy.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofOctober 3, 1989CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. Would somebodyplease move the minutes of August 22?MS. SEGER. I'll move it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Cross, you'vehad a dull few weeks!MR. CROSS. I'm not even going to report today!MR. BLACK. That probably means he doesn't want anyquestions!MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Cross?MR. HOSKINS. Where are we relative to our ceiling [onholdings of foreign currencies]? Do you anticipate our having to domore in the intermeeting period ahead in terms of raising the [$20billion] ceiling?MR. CROSS. We are at just under $1-1/2 billion below theceiling. Whether it is going to prove necessary to request a furtherchange in that depends very much on how things develop over the monthsahead. But we do have $1-1/2 billion which, if we share 50/50 withthe Treasury, means that there could be a substantial amount ofintervention--$3 billion worth--before we would come up against theceiling.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Sam, there were a couple of things that Ithought didn't come through quite clearly in your report. First ofall, the G-7 Communique said it looked like the dollar was out of linewith existing fundamentals. I certainly disagree with that, but Iguess one could debate that point. But what the Communique also said,specifically in follow-up language, was that the G-7 would consider itcounterproductive if the dollar rose above current levels or fellsharply. In terms of exchange rate strategy, my understanding wasthat there was certainly no implication in there about a concertedattack on the dollar. You mentioned that the strategy was generallyto resist upward pressure, but there were times repeatedly when therewas a concerted effort to drive the dollar lower and then, as itratcheted down, to hammer it when it even started to show any upwardpressure from lower levels. So, I think it's a bit of a semanticissue to talk about resisting upward pressure when in fact it was aclear strategy to ratchet down the dollar. Even though there were notmassive levels of dollars sold, that kind of strategy--especially whenwe've never participated in Far Eastern markets on a regular basis--inmy opinion was just grossly destabilizing. I thought it was a scaryevent, and I can't see us condoning that sort of a strategy. I thinkit's potentially very, very dangerous.10/3/89MR. CROSS. Well, the words in the Communique were exactlywhat you said and exactly what I read in my statement--that a furtherrise or an excessive decline could adversely affect the prospects. Iwould say, though, that there is a very, very major difference betweengoing in and hammering the dollar down in falling markets andresisting it when it is rising. We didn't always resist itimmediately when it showed any increase; we resisted when it wasrising and let the market take it down some. Obviously, the marketknew that the G-7 was trying to guide the dollar down some. But thepoint I was making was that we did recognize and try to take accountof, as much as we could, the risks that could follow if we really didgo in and hammer the dollar down while it was falling, which we didn'treally do.MR. JOHNSON. Well, let me ask a question. Is there any kindof technical agreement within the G-7 on a targeted band on exchangerates now? I'm certainly not aware of any. And if there is, what isit specifically?MR. CROSS. So far as I'm aware, there is none.MR. JOHNSON. There is no quantitative understanding aboutranges?MR. CROSS. I am not aware of any target ranges that are inexistence. While there were some months and months ago, I don't thinkthose have any relevance at the present time.MR. JOHNSON. Well then, how did you know where you weregoing?MR. CROSS. Well, we were talking every day--MR. JOHNSON. What was your objective?MR. CROSS. Our objective was to curb the dollar's rise andto have it decline some. We did not want it to fall an enormous--MR. JOHNSON. But where?MR. CROSS. We discuss every day what to do for the followingday. It had fallen a little from time to time; it did not fall inmassive amounts on any day. We discussed with the others, based onthe closing level in New York, say, on Tuesday, what might be asensible target.MR. JOHNSON. Just put yourself in the position of somebodyin the market. If the market concluded that what the Communique meantwas that the G-7 wanted a lower dollar, that is [not the same as]resisting [a rise] from current levels. So they're trying to figureout where the fundamentals are; what is the target that goes alongwith the fundamentals? It sounds like even we don't know. There isnot even an understanding about where the dollar ought to be.MR. CROSS. There is an understanding that the rise that hadoccurred was not helpful. And there is an effort to bring aboutgreater stability and to reduce the dollar somewhat. But no one knowsthat you need to move the dollar down to XYZ point in order to assure10/3/89that it meets with these longer-term [fundamentals]. So theintention, as far as I'm concerned, was to try to take away some ofthis upward momentum and to let it ease off somewhat. But, as I say,it hasn't fallen all that much and we haven't driven it down thatmuch. We're now at levels we saw in August--that's less than twomonths ago--and that we saw earlier in May. I'm sure that if thedollar were to show a further significant rise this approach wouldchange.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me answer, Governor Johnson. Thebest way of defining what was involved is that it was not a range forthe dollar, but how much the various governments would be willing tocommit. I think the best way of describing the agreement is thatthere would be moderate intervention and if that intervention knockedthe dollar down significantly, which it did, that was fine. But if itdid not, there was no agreement to just use unlimited resources tobreak the market. That was an original proposal which had been shotdown. And in a sense, rather than talk in terms of what was theultimate goal, I think the more appropriate issue as to where therestraints were and what the guidelines were was the degree ofresources that were being placed into the markets.MR. JOHNSON. Well, since there was no notion on where thedollar should be but there was a commitment of dollars, what wouldhave happened if the dollar had collapsed and yet you'd only spent athird of your commitment?MR. CROSS. We would have stopped.MR. JOHNSON. You would just keep spending it?MR. CROSS. No.MR. HOSKINS. Where do you stop?MR. JOHNSON. But where do you stop?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's why in various meetings thecentral banks that were involved in this insisted upon looking at whatwas going on in the secondary markets--so that any evidence of acumulative deterioration would have induced a real pull back. Itreally wasn't country versus country. It was finance ministersagainst central bank governors. If you're having trouble finding outwhat the ranges are or what the policy is, [that is because] you'relooking at a committee. They tried to get a consistent day-by-dayscenario, but as Ted Truman put it, there were too many branches ofpossibilities. As they went day-by-day, the restraint or thecriterion was the amount of resources that were available, not aparticular target.MR. JOHNSON. Well, if that's the case, I think it's evenmore dangerous than I thought it was when I first started thisconversation. We spent $400 million and we intervened five times inthe market yesterday with the dollar down to around 139 for the yenand 1.87 on the D-mark, and yet we don't know where we're going.MR. CROSS. We entered in for almost all of that after thedollar had moved up from that 139.10/3/89MR. JOHNSON. Well, up a fraction.MR. CROSS. We knew of some points that were particularlysensitive in the market as the dollar got up close to 140 [yen] and wewent in again in order to try to keep it from going through the 140level. We didn't do enough to keep it from going through.MR. JOHNSON. Hearing this description, I think there's arisk that risk premiums are going to continue to grow. With as muchuncertainty as there is in here, you can imagine the uncertainty thatmight be out in the market if we can't even figure out what's goingon.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's not quite fair.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You're shooting the messenger here,Governor Johnson! [Laughter].MR. JOHNSON. Well, I realize there is a resistance to a lotof the [intervention] strategy here [among Committee members], but Ithink we ought to step up that resistance.MR. BOEHNE. I'd like to pursue this conversation along asomewhat different line. If I were in the market and saw this kind ofintervention--and the dollar has come down--one of the reasons I mightthink it would come down is that if governments are going to spendthis kind of money, they must have a second act. And the second actmight be some understanding as to some basic policy changes. So, myfirst question is: In these discussions about intervention, is theresome kind of understanding that the intervention will be followed upwith more fundamental changes in economic policy, whether on themonetary side or the fiscal side?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The answer is "no."MR. JOHNSON. The market thinks so.MR. BOEHNE. I think the market would think so, because mostpeople probably would agree that intervention, except in raresituations, has a rather temporary influence unless it is followed upwith something more fundamental.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ed, that is true among academicians; itis not true among finance ministers. There is an belief now,particularly among the Japanese, that sterilized intervention can putthe exchange rate where they want it.MR. BOEHNE. Well, that leads into my next question; I thinkyou touched on it. Is the United States leading the charge on this oris it more a consortium of finance ministers who are leading thecharge and central bankers are acting as their agents? Or is there alot of enthusiasm on the part of central banks? I'm just trying tounderstand.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is no enthusiasm among any of thecentral bankers. I don't think even the Bank of France isenthusiastic. The two leading prongs are the U.S. Treasury and theMinistry of Finance of Japan. There has been a pulling and tugging on10/3/89 -5-this of rather large dimensions. My impression is that in the eventthis all fails and the dollar starts to creep back up thisintervention effort will be abandoned. What we have to be carefulabout it is that as it becomes more and more difficult, they will wantto increase [the amount of intervention] more and more. What we havebeen fending off, successfully so far, is pressure that was not toosubtly brought forth before the G-7 meeting to bring the central banksinto this whole game. In other words, essentially the G-7 would startto control monetary policy. And I think that was fended off prettyabruptly. There was a feeble attempt to put that in the Communique.That was knocked out very quickly before things got moving. Ourproblem, basically, is that at this stage we could probably as centralbanks--we could at the Fed--create a really big fuss about this. Asyou know, legally, the presumption is that the President, through theSecretary of the Treasury, has full control over the issue ofintervention policy. It has never really been tested. We have alwayshad a partial voice; in other words, when Messrs. Brady and Mulfordstarted to talk about [a target of] 125 for the yen and 1.75 for theDM, I protested to a point where I suggested that they would pull thesystem apart. And I got that eliminated. So, they did have targets.The trouble is if we ever tried to get to those targets, we'd have theworld's most awful mess on our hands. There is a limit as to what wecan do short of confrontation. I don't think it serves either the Fedor the country to try to be actually up front and to bring thisoperation to an abrupt halt. I think we could do it. In other words,if that were our objective--forgetting all the secondary costs--I haveno doubt that we could do it. I just think that it would be farbetter not to try that and, hopefully, keep this constrained at alevel where the damage is minimal. I disagree with Manley on theissue of the secondary effects being scary; on the contrary, I wassurprised at how minimal those effects were. Having seen an earlierversion of intervention really almost kick over the bond market, Ithink in the last 10 days we got away with really minor results. Idon't think we can depend on that continuing. I think that if wehammer at these markets, something will crack.MR. BOEHNE. In your judgment, what will it take to get amessage to our Treasury and the Japanese that--. I guess what I'msaying is: How long is it going to take for them to tire of this?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me start with the Japanese.It was very clear to me, walking into the G-7 meeting, thatHe strikes me as a fixedexchange rate man, an interventionist who is willing to expend largeresources to create changes.he came over to me just before the G-7 meetingstarted and said if we can't get the Germans to join us we would liketo join you, meaning the United States, in extensive exchange rateintervention. This is a different Japanese Ministry of Finance thanones we have dealt with earlier. With respect to the Treasury, it'sbasically Mr. Mulford with whom we are dealing and we have hadphilosophical and other differences with him on this and other issuesfor quite a while. We do have significant influence in thatoperation. In other words, it's not without possibilities. I don'tknow what the end result of this thing will be, but if the dollar allof a sudden starts to strengthen I will try as hard as I can toconvince Secretary Brady that this is a futile effort, that the10/3/89markets are trying to tell us something, and that to fight against itis a rather fruitless task. Whether I will succeed, I don't know.Vice Chairman Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. A couple of points: first of all,there's absolutely no question that a perception--whether it's realityor not--that the central bank is trying to beat down the dollar is avery, very dangerous thing; we would all agree with that. What maynot be agreed to or perhaps understood is the amount of effort thathas gone into trying to minimize the kinds of problems that couldarise in the current circumstances both with our own Treasury andelsewhere. Maybe that hasn't been pristine pure or perfect in itsexecution but I think the thrust of the effort has been in that vein.But, again, the real question is the one that Ed Boehne started to askand the real debate, it seems to me, should be on the thresholdquestion of where we are. Obviously, Governor Johnson says in effectthere are no imbalances. That isn't quite what you said but it's--MR. JOHNSON. I don't say that. I recognize that there areimbalances. The question is whether they can be financed or not;nobody knows. The market is deciding they can and we are trying tosecond guess the world economy--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think that is really where thedebate should lie. I don't think it's a question of interventiontactics per se. I think the real issue is the implications over timefor where we are and where we are going with regard to the globaleconomy and our national economy. In terms of some of the attitudesthat go into this kind of convoluted point we're at, there are verysharp differences of opinion about the implications of the currentsituation and the outlook for the world economy.MR. JOHNSON. But why should central banks be participatingin this exercise? First of all, we've been making statements aboutprice stability now to the point where I think we have almost been a"johnny-one-note" on that issue. And people, I think, are starting tobelieve us. For us to be countering that with this ridiculousapproach just doesn't make sense; [it introduces] a potential doubtout there. If central banks continue to participate in this kind ofstrategy and show even a compromise on it, I think to some extent themarkets are going to say this is a joke--in fact, they are balancingthe goals of the current account versus price stability. Now, myposition is well known in wanting to go gradually on this goal; but Isure don't have any current account goals ahead of our goals on pricestability. And I think we'd be announcing to the world that we are atleast equally concerned about bringing the international currentaccount into balance as we are about conditions of domestic inflation.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't think that's the questionhere.MR. JOHNSON. But that is the question.MR. ANGELL. That's the key issue.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I agree that is the key issue butthe question is: Are those goals compatible in any reasonable senseover even a 5-year period?10/3/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can you hold it? Presidents Black andHoskins wanted to get in here.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, most of what I wanted to cover hasbeen covered by various people. I wanted to start off by saying thatI think this issue is more important than any of the ones we have onthe agenda. Despite the Japanese belief that sterilized interventioncan have some permanent lasting effect, I don't really buy that. AndI think this does put us into a dangerous position. As Sam indicateda while ago, we can drive the dollar down and the Treasury has avested interest in that so as not to show a loss on its operations.You could say that we do, too, although I'm sure that that's notanything that would motivate us.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is not the motive of Treasury.MR. BLACK. Oh, I know that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In fact, I just very recently have beenarguing that the accumulation that we have to date does raise thatissue; and this was before the Shadow Open Market Committee raised thetest. They are only now becoming aware of that excess block ofreserve currencies--that the foreign currencies that we have are apotential political threat whereas it was perceived that we all of asudden [could] lose a part of our cash.MR. BLACK. Well, the next point I was going to make was thatI was sure you were making just that sort of argument and I wanted tocommend you for having done that. I do think one issue remains andthat is one that Governor Angell and Governor Johnson raised lasttime: whether this really can fall in our existing directive tocounter disorderly conditions. To my mind, it might go a littlebeyond that. And I realize the [unintelligible] of the constitutionis the Treasury [unintelligible] and I think you had to cooperate; Iwould support that. But I think it does behoove us to continue, asyou are doing, to try to educate them that this path is fraught with alot of dangers. At some point if we continue to get pressure from theTreasury to do this kind of thing I think we ought to at least take alook at the directive and maybe expand it--if we think that'sappropriate--beyond disorderly conditions. I wouldn't want to gobeyond that myself but maybe the Committee could. I realize you'vebeen on the side of the angels in this and--MR. ANGELL. That is correct.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I want to say that there's only one ofthem on which I have been on the side of.MR. BLACK. Well, I was going to commend you but at the sametime criticize the fact that we unavoidably and inextricably got drawninto it because of the Treasury's primary status in this thing. Iwould express the hope that this study we have undertaken couldconvince some of those who really don't know that much about it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One of the things that I intend to do isto convey the substance of this meeting to Mr. Brady.10/3/89MR. BLACK. As I said, I knew you were on the side of theangels! Others may argue, but Wayne has had very close contact withangels and he says that that is exactly right! If there's anyone herewho's equipped to speak for the angels I think he really is.MR. GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Well, I won't go back to my objections to thewhole policy because I've done that before. So, let me startsomeplace else, and that is that in this room it seems to me we havesome concerns about whether or not we're going to be hanging togetherin terms of making decisions down the road. In the spring we had adissent when we went to $15 billion. Then we went to $18 billion andI guess now we're at $20 billion. It seems to me we had two dissentson the last go-around. So, I think that this issue is one that coulddivide this Committee and it's not the right issue to be fightingover. The right issue to be fighting over is price stability; and Ithink most people in the room agree with that. So, my only questionto you--and I hope you do convey the feelings to the Treasury ifthat's really the sticking point because I think it's more importantto have good relations on this Committee than it is with the Japanese,and I would cut it that way--how far are we willing to go in spendingresources along this line? I'm sorry it's too far for me; butapparently we're not picking a limit. We may go on up and I thinkthat would be bad for this Committee--you'll get bigger and biggersplits.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Well, it seems to me that we are pretty wellagreed on the efforts to [discourage] intervention. I would say thatwe only have one factor that we can [use] and that is for you to makeour viewpoint known as best you can to the Administration. My concernis that if we were to do something of a confrontational nature wewould be forced or required to do things that we wouldn't want to do.I don't understand. If we were to back away, Manley, I don't know--MR. JOHNSON. Let me say, Bob, that if that's the case, Ithink we're going through a silly exercise in approving limits.What's the FOMC meeting on this issue for? Why do we even care aboutit? Let's just turn over open market operations on foreign exchangeto the Treasury. What are we going through this silly exercise for ifwe don't have something to say about it?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The point is we do.MR. JOHNSON. But it is just--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, that's not fair. We basically havesomething to say; maybe we've got 40 percent and they've got 60percent, but it's not zero.MR. JOHNSON. Well, we have an account in which we acquireexchange reserves and we are supposed to have authority over thataccount. As Bob Black said, we certainly we have a responsibility toserve as agent for the Treasury in their actions on foreign exchange.And the last thing I would want to do is question that authority. Wecan certainly do what they instruct us to do on their account; I would10/3/89never resist that. But acquiring exchange reserves on our accountwhen we are totally opposed to the direction of policy that takesimplicates us in the policy, I think. Now, I'm not for confrontationeither. As a matter of fact, I consider myself to have been simmeringa long time on this issue because I've generally been approving thesethings all along both at the Subcommittee level and at the higher FOMClevel. I have never felt that dealing with disorderly conditions orresisting pressures in one direction or another was something worthfighting over. It was worth cooperating and maintaining this wholeatmosphere of coordination and cooperation. But when I perceive thatwe're getting to a point where we are literally taking risks and weare moving in a direction counter to our whole philosophy, it seems tome that we've got to stand up and be counted here. This whole thingruns the risk of implicating us in something when we are out theresaying we are standing for price stability. Now, I think we can havea debate here about how fast we want to go toward that goal; but it'sgoing to take even longer if we participate in these kinds ofactivities. And I just think that at some point we have to give aclear message on what our point of view is on this. Continuing toacquire exchange reserves and exposure on our own account is reallyrisky, especially given what I know about people over there runningthings at the Treasury. I don't think it's Nick Brady myself. Ithink you have a green-eyeshade person in David Mulford over there whodoesn't know what he's doing. And I think it's very risky to turnover policy to somebody like that. I think Secretary Brady is capableof being brought around on this issue and maybe that's where [weshould go]; I know the Chairman has been effective in talking to himbefore. I wouldn't be making these points if I wasn't worried. Ithink this strategy that we are pursuing is very risky and it makes uslook bad.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I have some of the same concerns and I haveraised them, in the fundamental sense, as we had these votes. But Ithink the Fed is in the fire and this is not the time when you fightthe philosophical battle. It almost has to be resolved when you arenot in the middle of the program. I guess the way I look at it isthat if we were to get our backs up and refuse to participate at thispoint in time we'd, in effect, be embarrassing the United States ininternational policy circles. And I can't think of a dumber thing todo in a political sense. Even if we could defend it on pricestability grounds, or try to, I think we would be painted with adifferent brush. [It would raise the question] as to why we have thisarm of the U.S. government that has this kind of independence to pullthat sort of thing. I think that's quite possible. Beyond that, interms of market perceptions, I don't share your concern, Manley, aboutthis intervention somehow really undercutting our credibility in aprice stability sense. I think it would be far more damaging if theFed refused to participate here and that became a cause [celebre].Then market participants would be very concerned because of the splitbetween the Fed and the Treasury and what that might imply in terms ofU.S. economic policy.MR. JOHNSON. What do we do if this continues?10/3/89MR. MELZER. Well, we have this study going on, but therecomes a point where--purely from a financial point of view--looking atour balance sheet, we have more holdings of foreign currencies than isreally justifiable in a financial sense. I guess that would define alimit. But I have some hope that if this proves not to work--andgiven the path the Chairman is taking--that the Treasury will changecourse. I have some hope that rather than through brinkmanship--MR. JOHNSON. But what if they don't? If they don't, whatare you going to do?MR. MELZER. As I say, I think there could come a time; but Idon't think this is the time.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Manley, I think what we have to tryto do is what the Chairman has been trying to do at one level and Samand Ted [have been trying to do at their levels]. If you really wantthe worst scenario that we're all so terrified of, I'll tell you howyou get it. That would be to advocate this and then have our 40percent taken away so it's nothing. And then you would have yourgreen eye shade guy running the shop.MR. JOHNSON. I agree with that, but I can't buy the scenarioin which that's going to happen in a credible way. Is the Treasurygoing to go to the Congress and say that somehow we are acting againstthe national interest of the country?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's not.MR. TRUMAN. Absolutely.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, that's not the scenario.MR. JOHNSON. But how is that going to work, Ted?MR. TRUMAN. They have done it on several other issues.MR. JOHNSON. I'm just asking: How is that going to be aneffective argument?MR. TRUMAN. They did it on debt strategy, so it's clear thatthe same man who did it to us on the debt strategy could; I don'tthink there's any doubt that he wouldn't do it on this one. And thetrade issue is the gut issue in Congress.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The point is that there is thatdanger; it raises the specter of what a fight will alter. That is theway this plays out. And if it's precisely that, that couldprecipitate the collapse in the dollar and the rout in the bondmarkets and the stock markets. That's what I think we have to be socareful of.MR. JOHNSON. Well, as I said, I think confrontation has itsrisks too. You have two scenarios: one is that we confront themarkets and we can say interest rates are going to be higher than whatwe forecast because the Fed is going to confront the Treasury. Andthey are going to resist with interest rates any attempt that the-10-10/3/89Treasury makes on the dollar. Now, I'm sure that that would throwsome heat into the markets.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But that's a different debate.MR. JOHNSON. But it certainly would [give] comfort on theprice side.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's a different debate; that getsto the heart of the question of how do you get from here to there. Itseems to me that's a different issue.MR. JOHNSON. I don't understand. Look, the markets have aright to be concerned if the Treasury and the Fed can't coordinatepolicy. That's what it's all about here.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The problem is we don't have anycoordinated policy. We've got a lousy fiscal policy and a pretty goodmonetary policy. That's at the heart of the problem.MR. JOHNSON. I don't disagree with that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have too many policy objectives andonly one policy lever.MR. JOHNSON. But I do think there is a risk for us thatwe're going to be implicated in talking out of one side of our mouthabout price stability goals and yet agreeing to constantly floodingthe market with dollars trying to get the dollar below where thefundamentals are taking it with relative interest rates. Now, you canargue about relative real interest rates--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That is a different issue. Thequestion in terms of the price stability goal is: How do you get fromhere to there? There are a lot of variables that go into thatquestion of how you get from 4-1/2 percent inflation to 0 inflation.MR. JOHNSON. You can still get there with Treasury pursuingwhat they have been pursuing, but at much higher interest rates--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well?MR. JOHNSON. --and much lower growth, and even a recession.Maybe that is what we will pursue.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's the debate; that's the rightissue: How do you get from here to there?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Most of the questions I wanted to asked werealready asked by Tom Melzer. But it seems to me that the UnitedStates has a strange [institutional] situation. Domestic monetarypolicy is the role of the independent central bank. Internationalpolicy is the role--on a 60 percent basis, at least--of the Treasury.Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to ask a question but I think Jerryanswered it already: Have you been faced with sort of a Hobson'schoice in the sense of being involved in something that I think almost-11-10/3/89everyone here is skeptical of--sterilized intervention--believing thatwe were better off over the long course of time maintaining that 40percent, say, rather than [our] just getting out at this point in timefor the reasons Tom Melzer noted? I think an important factor inwaiting to see how long we want to remain a player is having somenotion of how long this process will go on. It seems to me that itmight be useful--I would hope useful from your perspective--when yougo back and talk to the other people with whom you have to negotiateto indicate the degree of discomfort that many people have on theissue. But I agree with Tom; I just don't see at this point how wecan back out of it. But I think we do need to have some notion of howlong this will go on.MR. HOSKINS. Or how much.MR. SYRON. Yes.MR. HOSKINS. Isn't that the question?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Part of the problem is that analyticallywe have been projecting a declining exchange rate for quite a while onthe grounds that we've always perceived it as being out of sync andtoo high. And the failure [of the dollar] to do that has led us totemporize on this issue on the grounds that it would cure itselfeventually--in other words that we might have to engage in this[unintelligible] just for the sake of appearances on the grounds thatthe markets would then take over and that [problem] would disappear.That hasn't happened. And that's what the problem is; and it's stilla problem with respect to the forecast.MR. HOSKINS. For coordination purposes I think we've alwayssaid--at least I've said all the way along that I'm willing to spend$100 million here and there but not $40 billion, $20 billion of ourown. We are beginning to talk about potential impacts on monetarypolicy and influences that are about to get negative on thisCommittee.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that the markets are beginning torecognize the Federal Reserve's commitment to price level stability.Mr. Chairman, you've certainly contributed to that and I think othermembers of the Committee have in regard to the one voice that we havein this area. But we can't have that commitment to price levelstability without having a strong dollar. That is, a strongcommitment to price level stability [requires appropriate] interestrate differentials and the dollar remaining strong. It just seems tome that we need to understand where our commitment is. And, Mr.Chairman, this discussion seems to indicate a very strong feeling inregard to the direction and the kind of policy we should engage in.But I think one can go so far as to say that the Treasury certainlywould be dissatisfied to be without us. That is, the thought that wemight pull out of this is indeed some force; and my dissent is in thatvein. My dissent is to contribute to an environment in which theTreasury recognizes that it may not wish to go it alone. I agree it'sbest for us not to get out. But sometimes we have to act like wemight get out in order to [achieve our objective]; and it's to yourleadership that I entrust that we do it.-12-10/3/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess virtuallyeverything has been said around the table. I don't have too muchconcern about the actual profits and losses that the System willsustain in terms of a rising dollar. I'm not terribly concerned aboutthe price stability issue in the sense that with sterilizedintervention I think for some long period in the future we can goabout a price stability objective without much problem. What I amreally concerned about, however, is bringing this issue to aconfrontational stage outside of the confines of this Committee andthe Treasury, because as soon as the public and the market perceivethat there's a split I think we have the real possibility of acurrency crunch that we will not want to face. We'll have to gotogether at that time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As you know, it already showed up on thefront page of The Wall Street Journal last Friday.MR. GUFFEY. Yes, I know. I'd like to ask a question: Howfar can the Treasury go in the sense that they have a stabilizationfund that is authorized by Congress? Is there no limit to what--MR. JOHNSON. They can go on forever, Roger, when we keepwarehousing their currency.MR. GUFFEY. Well, they still have to get authorization forthe Treasury to get dollars for us to warehouse.MR. TRUMAN. No.MR. CROSS. [They warehouse] foreign currencies with us, sothey--MR. GUFFEY. So there is a limitation.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The problem there though, Roger, isthat you give the Congress a choice. If you really do say you aregoing to give the Treasury some more money or you are going to balancethe budget, which way do you think they're going to go?MS. SEGER. Balance the budget, of course, Jerry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I just have one comment. I wascomforted by your statement that central bankers were lined up almostuniformly against the ministers of finance on that. Do you know howstrongly they are arguing their position with their minister offinance counterparts as you are clearly doing in this country?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd say [it depends on] who controlsthis. The Bundesbank controls their exchange rate operation but theyare pressured from the other side. I'd say that [unintelligible] wasquite strong. The others I would say varied. Actually, hasbeen unfriendly to this heavy intervention.MR. JOHNSON. That's good.-13-10/3/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And I assume as a consequence he wouldindependently, or in support of--MR. JOHNSON. What about the Canadians? They are not happyabout it either, are they?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As far as I can tell. That would be myimpression but I can't remember any real--MR. TRUMAN. There is some. I think the Canadians have somedifferences of view within the central bank.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think we have talked about most of the issues.Clearly, you are in an awkward position. Just as one person aroundthe table, I think the worst thing this Committee could do is to leaveyou hanging, given the awkwardness of where you are. Despite where weare on the fundamental policy issues and the difference with theTreasury, my question is: Given the situation that we are in, how canwe be the most helpful to you as a Committee in this very awkwardpredicament that you find yourself in?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me find out whether or not thediscussions with Messrs. Brady and Mulford on this help or hinder--meaning whether or not the real deep-seated concern of this Committeeinduces them to be antagonistic or conciliatory. At the moment, Ithink it is frankly somewhat useful to have some rumbling of a minornature at this stage because if it ever was to break then I would beconcerned what would happen to the markets. But I think professionalnotions of discontent are not adverse provided they do not, forexample, get into an Allen Murray front page article in The WallStreet Journal that the Federal Open Market Committee is revoltingagainst the Treasury on exchange rate policy. And they are preparedto do that because that little thing they put in last Friday was muchstronger than the reality of it was. So, that's a story that'ssitting there ready to explode.MR. BOEHNE. It probably will be in The Wall Street Journalnext Monday, given the minutes to be released this Friday afternoon.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It may be.MR. BOEHNE. I would think that Manley and Wayne better takea walk.MR. JOHNSON. Well, as a matter of fact, I am going to be outof town. I'm going to be hiding out.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And I'll be in Moscow already--SPEAKER(?). Maybe you'll be safe there.MR. BLACK. May we all take off that day, Mr. Chairman? I'dreally like to take off. Well, Monday is a holiday.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, that's what I mean.-14-10/3/89MR. SYRON. Columbus Day.MR. BLACK. It'll be in the paper Tuesday, then.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I just want to say two things, primarily becauseI've been one of the people concerned about the strong dollar--notbecause I don't like strong dollars on the face of it--but becauseI've been concerned about the impact on our manufacturers' ability toproduce or to export. But having said that, I don't believe the wayto get the dollar down is to bomb it through intervention. I thinkthe best way to do it is to deal with it in a monetary policy way eventhough the [unintelligible] said we don't believe in that, I do. Interms of Manley's concern over the possible market impact of thisbombing effort, I think the reason we haven't seen it yet is thatthere are many people in the markets--maybe not in New York but inother parts of the markets--who really do think that there will besome monetary policy follow-up to this bombing. And if that does notoccur in the next couple of weeks, then I think we're going to get thebond market impact etc., in spades. So you can write that down aswoman's intuition speaking. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I trust that ends our conversation?Does anyone want to make a last comment on this?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Can I make the last comment?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay.MR. SYRON. You can approve his transactions.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I want to come back to this pricestability issue. Obviously, that is the overriding goal for centralbanks. But I think we have to be a little careful about how wearticulate that goal. If we articulate it in a way that creates orreinforces the perception that we can get from here to there in acostless, painless, way I think that can be very, very dangerous. Andit's in that context that I worry about large current accountdeficits. I certainly don't view them as a goal, as I'm sure youknow, Manley.MR. JOHNSON. Sure, but--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The question--if I can just finish--is whether the presence of current account deficits in excess of $100billion in perpetuity are compatible with an orderly and relativelypainless ability to reach that goal of price stability.MR. JOHNSON. And all I'm saying, Jerry, is that I don'tknow; I don't think anybody knows. It's a debatable issue. But totry and say beforehand that the dollar has to be at some level thatsome committee decides--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's a different question.MR. JOHNSON. But it's not; it's the same.-15-10/3/89VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's not.MR. JOHNSON. A committee is a group of people.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I just stop here? This actually isa legitimate discussion, but not for this section. Let's leave thisfor later this morning and then resurrect it because it really getsinto the fundamentals of the monetary policy debate. With some fearand trepidation I request the ratification [of the foreign currencytransactions]. Would someone like to--MS. SEGER. What happens if they are not ratified?MR. CROSS. Ted's salary for the next 4,000 years--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a motion on it?SPEAKER(?). So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, hopefully?MR. JOHNSON. Well, since I dissented [before] I don't knowhow I could--. How do I vote in favor of previous transactions?MS. SEGER. Just abstain.MR. TRUMAN. Maybe the General Counsel can speak to this, butisn't the issue here that he has done his job within the guidelinesand the Committee is ratifying the transactions?MR. JOHNSON. I think Sam has done his job very well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's what you're voting on.MR. JOHNSON. Okay.MR. ANGELL. He's done it too well.MR. BLACK. What you are saying, then, is that it was thewrong job in your view?MR. JOHNSON. Yes. It was very good in mechanics, but--MR. BLACK. But it is the wrong job.MR. BOEHNE. That's what we--[Laughter]MR. JOHNSON. All right. Well, I certainly want to make surethat that is the way it's written and the way it's understood.MR. TRUMAN. Virgil [Mattingly] is nodding.MR. MATTINGLY. That's all that you'd be doing, Governor.-16-10/3/89MR. JOHNSON. What does the sentence say again--in terms ofwhat we're voting for?MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. CROSS. Approve the transactions that I have alreadydone.MR. JOHNSON. Well, how about the manner in which youconducted the transactions? Really, that's a different statement.MR. CROSS. No, it's the matter of the money.MR. HOSKINS. It's an obligation we have already passed [on].MR. JOHNSON. Yes, but I voted against that.MR. TRUMAN. Yes, but he does [operate under] certainprocedures in the Authorization and Directive and the question iswhether he followed the guidelines and procedures.MR. JOHNSON. But I abstained on the warehousing [vote] aswell.MR. TRUMAN. I understand that.MR. CROSS. That's a different issue in my opinion.MR. TRUMAN. The issue is whether the transactions have beencarried out consistent with the Authorization and the Directive; it'sthe same thing as for the domestic operations.MR. MATTINGLY. It's the same as the vote of directors of abank ratifying loans made by the bank. The loans are [already] made.MR. ANGELL. Okay, here's what I'm going to do. I'm going tovote on the affirmative on this one because this has only to do withwhat has taken place. I dissented in regard to the Authorization,which was a proper dissent. So, I'm going to make that distinction,Manley. You do what you think.MR. JOHNSON. I'm still trying to understand what this is allabout.MR. ANGELL. Well, in other words what we're doing now issaying that we did transactions. [The question is whether] they wereauthorized. In other words, are they approved?MR. KOHN. The guidelines [that] the Committee has passed bymajority vote--MR. SYRON. The Committee passed by majority--in other wordsit is ratifying.MR. JOHNSON. Okay, is that the way it reads?MR. CROSS. My understanding is did I act within theauthority authorized and provided for by the Committee even though I-17-10/3/89recognized that certain people didn't agree or did not favor the waythat was--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's the reading.MR. JOHNSON. As long as that's the way it reads, I agreethat there is no problem.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The analogy, I think, is that anytime someone dissented on monetary policy grounds they would have todissent on Mr. Sternlight's operations.SPEAKER(?). It says "ratified."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's true.MR. TRUMAN. Okay, then you're fine. "Ratified" is the wordthat is used in the minutes.MR. JOHNSON. Okay.MR. TRUMAN. I'm not quite sure what it means; maybe we canget the lawyers to write us a memo.MR. BOEHNE. I'm not asking.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I agree that there have been noobjections. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you. This is going to be an anti-climax! [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Sternlight? PresidentParry.MR. PARRY. You said that you think the markets areanticipating further easing of some magnitude in the near term?MR. STERNLIGHT. Of modest magnitude. I think there is anexpectation, on balance, that the greater likelihood is for someeasing down the road. If I drew up a central point consensus,something within a few months would probably capture it.MR. PARRY. I bring this up because the Bluebook seemed tosay the opposite--that [the market] does not now appear to beanticipating any near-term change of policy. I think it hasimplications for what might happen to market rates relative to thechoices we make. So I just want to--MR. KOHN. My judgment would be, President Parry, that if themarket had to bet whether policy would go one way or another they'dbet that policy would more likely be eased than tightened. If youlook at the term fed funds markets and fed funds futures and thingslike that, they don't really have much ease built in there. On theother hand, surveys such as the money market services survey do show alittle downtick by the end of the year of maybe a quarter of a point.So it's a little; I don't think they have much built in there. It's-18-10/3/89essentially flat with maybe some bias towards ease before the end ofthe year.MR. FORRESTAL. Peter, do you think that bias is based ondomestic considerations or foreign exchange issues?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it's a mixture of both, PresidentForrestal. Those who have that expectation anticipate seeing a bitmore softness in business. But they think the foreign exchange factorcertainly would be working that way too.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I have a question not with regard to Peter'sreport on the operations but on the seasonal borrowing program. Webasically hear about the borrowing within [unintelligible] ratherhigh. And I'm not sure that fundamental underlying conditions arethat different. It's easy to believe that people are perhaps usingit, hopefully, advantageously. I just raise the question: Are wegoing to take a look at the use of the seasonal program before we getinto next year?MR. KOHN. We could certainly do that. That request has beenmade elsewhere in the System. Governor Angell has asked that samequestion. The seasonal borrowing is about what it was last year. Sothis is really the second year--MR. KEEHN. At this point, Don, or--MR. KOHN. Seasonal credit is a little higher than it was,but the spread is a little wider than it was. For the October 5thperiod last year seasonal borrowing was $433 million; I don't knowwhat will come out this year.MR. KEEHN. Well, I think you're right. It seems to me itcomplicated the operation of the Desk on the way up and it's likely tocomplicate it on the way down. If people are using it for differentreasons [other than] seasonal borrowings, I think it makes sense totake a look at it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Mr. Sternlightat this time?MR. HOSKINS. Just a minor one. Would we have done outrightpurchases if we hadn't had the intervention?MR. STERNLIGHT. Oh, I think it's likely. The foreignexchange intervention wasn't adding as much as at some earlier pointsin the year but it was still adding fairly substantially. So, withoutthat factor, we would have had to be doing some outrights as currencyin circulation was increasing.MR. HOSKINS. Would that cause you any concern?MR. STERNLIGHT. I wouldn't say it was a problem at all inour execution of operations. As a mechanical factor, we're amply wellinformed about the extent of the foreign exchange intervention and wejust fold that in as a reserve factor in our planning of operations.-19-10/3/89MR. HOSKINS. I just meant the substitution of the currencyin the portfolio for coupons and bills.MR. STERNLIGHT. No, I wouldn't say it's any problem in thatway.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I have a motion to ratify thetransactions of the Desk since the last meeting?MR. JOHNSON. So move.MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Prell, would youbring us up to date on the economic situation?MR. PRELL. I'll try, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Prell? GovernorJohnson.MR. JOHNSON. You mentioned that you expect some stimulus tothe housing market but you are forecasting weakness in investment.Earlier, in previous FOMC meetings, you had said that declines inlong-term interest rates stimulated investment in the housing market.Yet this hasn't seemed to occur. How long do you expect the lags tobe after a decline in long-term interest rates before you seesomething in the investment in housing? You mentioned that the levelof houses for sale was revised up. But I don't see any pickup inhousing. And nondefense capital goods orders, excluding aircraft,seem to be at a lower level in the third quarter than the secondquarter. I just see nothing out there that points to a pickup incapital spending and yet we have had this decline in interest rates.MR. PRELL. I don't think we expect to see any dramaticinterest rate effect in the trend of capital goods outlays. The lagsthere are too long. The [interest] elasticity is too low. We didn'treally think that was going to move that series around very much.It's true that the orders trend, as I suggested, has not beenespecially strong of late. If you start dissecting the data and youtake account of declining computer prices and so on, I think there isa sound case for expecting relatively moderate growth in realequipment outlays. And that's what we have in the forecast. We don'thave an acceleration; we have a deceleration in the forecast.MR. JOHNSON. Okay, I agree with that, I think. But whatyou're saying, though, is that this decline in long-term interestrates hasn't had a stimulative effect on this.MR. PRELL. I don't think it has had a large effect, no. Wehaven't had a large enough change in interest rate levels to greatlyalter businessmen's assessment of the profitability of investment overthe long run. On the housing side, we have lowered our third-quarterforecast for real construction outlays. We were disappointed by theAugust housing starts. While the average in the past couple of monthshas been up a bit, it hasn't been dramatic by any means. A lot ofthat weakness has been in the multifamily sector; that's a very-20-10/3/89volatile number. But the single-family starts in August also were ashade on the weak side. What we think is happening, though, is thatwe see some pickup in housing demand as manifested in existing homesales. And in new homes sales, the information from surveys aboutconsumers' perceptions of home buying conditions has moved in afavorable direction with the decline in interest rates. We'reexpecting a modest boost to overall economic activity in the nearterm, this quarter, from residential construction. But that's a smallsector. And despite the secondary effects that it can have onconsumer expenditures and so forth we don't think it's going toprovide a tremendous thrust to the economy. We do look for a positivenumber, though, in the fourth quarter.MR. JOHNSON. I want to follow up on one last thing that Iwas talking about yesterday in the Board room when we were discussing[unintelligible] and I still want to try to understand this. Youindicated then at the beginning of your presentation the need for someslack to get inflation down further in the economy. But I'm stilltrying to understand conceptually how that works to some degree. Ifmonetary policy maintains nominal demand at potential output or at thefull employment unemployment rate--say it maintained nominal demandconsistent with potential output growth--is the need for slack becauseof the rigidities in the system? Does the adjustment process causeyou to get more inflation mix than a real mix temporarily?MR. PRELL. I think that's the case. If you had superrational people who perceive that all of a sudden monetary policy wason a track that was going to hold nominal aggregate demand expansionin line with the trend rate of real output growth, then expectationswould change and wage bargaining would revolve around that kind ofexpectation. You could have an instantaneous downward adjustment inthe rate of inflation without any significant cost in real output. Ofcourse, there are contracts and other impediments so that even ifexpectations adjusted dramatically--MR. JOHNSON. Okay. I want to understand what you're saying,though. Is it that even if we bring nominal demand in line withpotential output, that actual output has to slow for a while relativeto potential because of the contracts [and other] rigidities in thesystem? Okay, that's the--MR. PRELL. I think you'd have a hard task to bring nominalaggregate demand expansion down immediately to that noninflationarylevel. I can't envision that happening without an enormous jolt tothe system.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, well I can't either. But I'm still tryingto get--MR. PRELL. But if there were no inflexibility in the form ofcontracts and so on and if you had absolute credibility--if you couldannounce today that you are pulling on to this track and everyonebelieved you--then presumably everything would flow through and realeffects would be minimal.MR. JOHNSON. Everybody understands that we have nominaldemand that is greater than that; that's why we have 4 or 5 percentinflation in the market. But if you were to work nominal demand down-21-10/3/89gradually in line with potential output and you maintained it there, Iguess I would have a little trouble understanding why you wouldnecessarily have any inflationary experience.MR. PRELL. Well, I think you put your finger on theappropriate facets of the system here that impede that kind offrictionless movement toward lower inflation.MR. JOHNSON. As I say, if you were to lower nominal demand--just lower it, even if it's currently above potential output--whydoesn't that lead to some slowing in the inflation rate even thoughthe real economy might be slowing but still not performing relative topotential?MR. PRELL. At this point we feel the economy is, in a sense,overemployed. In that kind of situation the competition for resourcestends to put upward pressure on wages and prices. And until wedevelop a bit more slack, we think that's the direction in whichthings are going to tend to drift. We've been generous, in a sense,relative to what the models would tell us. We have not really taken ahard view that we're below the natural rate and that there aretremendous acceleration forces here. We have rather modestacceleration in the forecast. But the historical evidence isreasonably compelling that in the short run there is this kind oftrade-off and you don't get the frictional movement to lower inflationrates without any output loss.MR. JOHNSON. Well, I think the historical record does showthat if you reduce nominal demand there is a mixed effect--that youget a little of both.MR. PRELL. Right, precisely.MR. JOHNSON. The more flexible the markets are, the betterthe mix.MR. PRELL. Well, that's why we are being reasonablyoptimistic. We think perhaps there is some greater flexibility. Wethink there is also some residuum of fear here about loss ofemployment and so forth that may not have existed in earlier years,but that workers are aware of because of the turmoil in the '80s andthe exposure to international trade,MR. JOHNSON. I'm just saying that, given all that, it'sstill not clear to me why the economy can't grow around its potentialrate while you're restraining demand even though the mix does[unintelligible]. I think that's a central debate.MR. PRELL. Sure. This is not something we feel we knowabsolutely. But we're hard pressed to explain what we have beenobserving without some sense that, as the economy got tighter, thatexerted some inflationary pressure. You could play some games here inguessing what inflation expectations were at various times during thelast several years and make that consistent with the pressures in thelabor market in terms of the unemployment rate level not having been asubstantial explanatory factor. But it looks to us that, as we gotdown into the 5 to 6 percent unemployment rate range, there was somepressure on wages and prices.-22-10/3/89MR. JOHNSON. I don't disagree.MR. PRELL. So the question is: How do you unwind that? Ifyou could bring about a sudden powerful expectational change, thatmight help to minimize the need for any loss of output in order tomove the inflation rate back down. But otherwise we think there aregoing to be some frictional costs here.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I'd like to ask two questions related to thenear-term strength of the economy. Based upon the statistics that wenow have for the third quarter, do you think there is much of a chancethat the actual growth rate was in the 3+ percent area? And relatedto that, you have a very substantial decline in nonfarm inventories.Is that just what is happening as a result of aircraft? I seeaircraft exports are up and are very strong.MR. PRELL. You're talking about the fourth quarter, right?MR. PARRY. Third and fourth, [unintelligible] inventories.MR. PRELL. Yes, the fourth-quarter inventory picture ismuddled by the aircraft deliveries and gyrations in oil inventoriesthat we inferred will occur because of a surge in oil importsrecently. So there are those technical considerations. Basically, wehave underlying that a rather moderate rate of inventory accumulation.On third-quarter growth, 3 percent or 3-1/2 percent is certainlywithin our confidence interval. At this point, looking at the laborinput, a number in the two's looks like a better guess. But I knowthere are others who have looked at the data and come up with highernumbers. This is our best guess at this point with a lot of datamissing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no further questions, Ithink it's time for us to do a tour de table. Who would like tostart?MR. FORRESTAL. I'll start it, Mr. Chairman. Let me say atthe outset that I'm very pleased that the staff has extended theforecast through 1991; I think that does give a longer-term and morestrategic focus on policy. With respect to the national economy, Mr.Chairman, we think that the Greenbook is about right for the next fewquarters in terms of real GNP. We don't have any basic disagreementsthere. Also, our outlook for inflation is a little closer now to theBoard staff's than it was at the last meeting. We've seen someimprovements. Having said that, I think that we've been helped,obviously, by some special factors along the way, and I'm not surethat those are going to continue indefinitely. But more importantly--and perhaps where we might have some slight disagreement with thestaff--is that we think the unemployment number may be a little lowerthan the Board staff's number; and that suggests to me that pressureon wages, as Mike has indicated, might begin to appear. We've hadgood numbers, as we've been observing, right along. Thesecompensation gains have been smaller than we might have anticipated.But I do sense that there may be some deterioration in labor costs.We've had an increase in strike activity in 1989, which perhapssuggests a bit more militancy on the part of unions. Also, as the10/3/89fear of recession begins to wane, there may be more of a tendency onthe part of business to accommodate some of the labor demands that Ithink might come along. I put that together with what I see in ourown District with respect to the labor situation--I think things aretight--and that's where I see the pressure. That all suggests to methat it's going to be difficult to make much progress on inflationthis year. Our forecast would suggest that some further tighteningalong the road is going to be necessary if we are going to get theinflation rate down lower.Turning to the District, things have turned around a little;deceleration of economic activity has about come to an end and there'smuch more optimism among people generally. In other words, theconcern about recession has abated. Construction activity remainsparticularly soft--both residential and office building activity. Wedo have some better activity on the industrial construction side,which is stronger in our District than anywhere else in the nation.And on the housing and real estate situation generally, we're hearingquite a lot of concern expressed about properties being put on themarket as a result of the thrift insolvencies. People are afraid thatas these institutions come on the market there's going to be anoverhang, which will affect the market adversely. Automobileinventories remain a significant problem in our District. They aremuch higher than in the rest of the nation even though recent autosales have been better. There is an interesting development in thetextile area. The textile producers have been doing very, very wellin terms of their sales but they are very concerned about imports,which are up about 11 percent from a year ago. Domestic demand fortheir goods has offset the danger of the imports but they're afraidthat as domestic demand begins to slacken off, as they think it might,the imports will begin to affect them adversely. And I think this issignificant because they have been very, very aggressive, as you know,in lobbying for protectionist legislation. I can't help but note thatRepresentative Jenkins from the State of Georgia has assumed a higherprofile in the Congress; he has been the one leading the charge forprotectionism for the textile industry. So that's a bit worrisome, Ithink. I have just one other observation and that is that oilexploration and production in Louisiana are picking up; the number ofoffshore rigs has been increasing since April and that reverses adecline earlier in the year. Natural gas is also doing well. Inagriculture the picture is mixed because there apparently has beeneither too much rain or too little. In our case, recent heavy rainshave been a negative factor in many areas of the Southeast. But ingeneral, Mr. Chairman, things are looking better in the Southeast onaverage than they did at the time of the last FOMC meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think the tone of myreport is probably going to be a little different from some others.The economy in the West currently is expanding at a healthy pace, andgrowth actually appears to have strengthened a little since our lastmeeting. Improvements in trade and service activity account for muchof the recent strength we've seen. Apparel sales are reported to bestrong and, of course, toward the end of the quarter there were quitestrong sales of autos. We've seen good growth in tourism activitythroughout the entire area. Construction, both residential andnonresidential, and real estate activity are strong in California,-24-10/3/89Nevada, Washington, Oregon, Hawaii, and much of Idaho, although someslowing in home sales recently has appeared in southern California.Reports of weakness are focused, as they have been for the lastseveral meetings, in Arizona and are associated primarily withconstruction. The Northwest is actually booming. I don't thinkthere's any word that would be more appropriate. California-stylebidding wars on single-family homes have become common in the PugetSound area. Manufacturing firms throughout the Northwest plan toexpand employment facilities and equipment. Now, in two hours thecontract at Boeing will expire; 43,000 workers in Seattle and I think12,000 in Wichita and 1,700 in Portland are covered by that union.But the chances look less than 50 percent that there will be a strike;it requires a two-thirds vote. At this point, if there is not astrike, I would assume that that strength would continue for theforeseeable future.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are they voting today?MR. PARRY. I don't know if they vote today, but theexpiration of the contract occurs today at 10:00.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I heard something about their voting.MR. PARRY. That could be, but it does require a two-thirdsvote for a strike.At the national level, the economy--to us at least--appearsstronger than at the time of the last meeting. We've revised ourestimates of third-quarter growth and now expect an increase of around3 percent, which is somewhat different from that in the Greenbook.Also, I wouldn't be surprised to see stronger growth in final demandthan projected in the Greenbook, especially in 1990. Quite frankly,looking at a lot of private forecasts, I see more centered in the areaof 2 to 2-1/2 percent than I do under 2 percent at this point. If thegrowth does not slow as rapidly as projected in the Greenbook, then itseems clear that upward pressures on underlying inflation willpersist.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, on this give and take, the NewEngland economy is far from booming. The slowdown that we are in themidst of continues. It's not cataclysmic but it does seem steady.Interestingly, the earlier declines in the southern New Englandstates--the big states such as Massachusetts and Connecticut--have nowspread to the three northern New England states. There are a varietyof factors: a quite poor tourism season, absolute declines ofemployment of a substantial magnitude, particularly in theconstruction area and also in manufacturing. In the case ofmanufacturing, I think that's a bit of a spillover from the slowdownin manufacturing in Connecticut and Massachusetts. In the case ofconstruction, it just reflects overbuilding and a lot of excess secondhomes on the market. With respect to our manufacturers with whom wehave contact, we get an interesting pattern. We tried to separate outwhat they tell us about the national economy from the regional economyand we get a very distinct difference in responses. With respect tothe regional economy, everyone is really quite pessimistic; but intalking about the national economy, while no one is what we would call-25-10/3/89euphoric or expects a runaway boom, the general response we're gettingis that they expect a rather moderate and steady [growth], with someadjustment to the capital spending levels, but not a great one. Thereis not a great concern about inventories on their part. In retailactivity within the District we see some significant problems, withthe beginning of some inventory problems there. Labor markets aregenerally mixed. The agreements and settlements that have beenreached generally have been well behaved although there are stillsubstantial pressures at the low end of the labor market. At thehigher end of the labor market things really have been softening quitea lot.As far as the national economy goes, we have been generallycomfortable with the Greenbook forecast with two caveats: (1) theGreenbook does have the saving rate declining, but we question whetherit might possibly decline even more and consumption come up somewhatmore; and (2) we have a concern about the pattern of wages. This isreflected in other things that have been said: whether in theemployment cost index, particularly when one starts to disaggregateand look at what is unionized and what is nonunionized, there reallyis a dramatic change in that decomposition over time; and whether inthe future, particularly if the national economy remains relativelyrobust, we might not have the kind of good behavior we've had in thatarea. Overall, we think the risks are about evenly balanced betweenthe economy growing too fast or starting to slow too much, although wedon't see any signs really of cumulative softness. I will finish bysaying, as you indicated earlier when we were discussing the foreigncurrency issue, that before very long we're going to be in a situationwhere we have to decide as far as inflation goes just what we want toaccomplish and in what kind of time period--what constraints we feelare on us and how the mechanisms work. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I find myself in a little differentposition from the first three speakers. We really haven't changed ourview of the economic outlook very much from what we had last time.The Greenbook projections seem reasonable to us; the staff always doesa good job. I don't think I will ever understand how Mike Prell isable to answer so many questions so well! But since there is someonus on us to say how we differ, I would say that our best guess isthat the downside risk is a little greater at this point than theupside risk, for a couple of reasons. First of all, I don't think wehave yet seen the full effects of all the tightening that we haveundertaken over the last year and a half. Secondly, a lot of theimprovement that the Greenbook projects is based on the externalsector and that, in turn, has an underlying assumption that the dollaris going to continue to depreciate at a rather steady rate. That'scertainly a plausible position, but I think one can make some casethat there is certainly more than a small possibility that the dollarjust may not decline for reasons that we don't well understand. Idon't think we fully understand why it was strong before we startedintervening; it may well be that that strength is going to resume,particularly after we are out of the market. If that were to be thecase, then real net exports and real GNP might come in a bit weakerthan what the staff is projecting. On the inflation side, I found thestaff's efforts to estimate the magnitude of the effects of theprojected depreciation of the dollar extremely helpful but rather-26-10/3/89disturbing, because even with these alternative projections we didn'tshow much progress on inflation through 1991. But again, we findourselves in a rather unique position in that we think inflation maydo better than the staff thinks. I feel rather uncomfortable withthat because I remember--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I assume by that you mean down?MR. BLACK. We think we will have less inflation than theyprojected. The reason I feel uncomfortable with that is that overtime I think most of our System policy errors have been made by havingbeen too easy rather than by having been too tight. And the outlookis dependent to a large extent on what I think is an unusually highdegree of credibility that policy now enjoys. My feeling is that weprobably have a higher degree of credibility now than we have everhad. And I think your statement in response to the Neal resolutiondid a lot to strengthen that. So, I'm a bit more optimistic on thisthan I have been. But I hope that doesn't translate into the wrongkind of policy for the Committee because I'm not ready at this pointto relinquish the reins and say that we have this battle won, by anymeans.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. My views have been deviating a bit from theGreenbook in recent months and the deviation has grown. In terms ofthe economy, looking at the latest statistics and our own internalforecast and talking to business people around the District andelsewhere, I'm somewhat more optimistic about the outlook for realgrowth going forward. It looks to me like the economy, all thingsconsidered, is in remarkably good shape. And I expect that's going tocontinue. On the price side, too, I'm more optimistic in the sensethat I think we have an opportunity to make more progress againstinflation than the Greenbook envisions. I say that in part because ofthe course of monetary policy over the last 2-1/2 years, but also inpart because business people I talk to are clearly reporting anabatement of inflationary pressures. That has been going on forseveral months despite the fact that there are many tight labormarkets in our District; that doesn't seem to have been translatedinto wage pressures. I can only presume that concern about jobsecurity and the well known international environment--where foreigncompetition has been so very important--have served as restraininginfluences. I must say, having given that optimistic assessment, thatI hate to go back to an old and somewhat unhappy topic but I do thinkthis is all jeopardized by the course of the dollar, should itcontinue to decline. I think that would back up very quickly intodeterioration in the inflationary situation and outlook and,ultimately, into the growth outlook as well. So I think there aresome very serious risks there.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think the bearishness in New England iscontagious; it's moving down the Atlantic coast. There clearly hasbeen a shift in sentiment in my District away from one of optimismtoward more concern about the economy. That is particularly true inthe real estate business. Residential construction is very soft and,looking out over the next several years, it's likely not to strengthen-27-10/3/89a great deal. Just looking at the underlying demographics, I wouldn'tbe surprised, for example, if a good year for housing starts might betwo-thirds of what we have been used to in recent years. There issome pessimism in the manufacturing area, partly because of what hasbeen happening to the dollar. The retailers are very cautious oninventories: inventories aren't going anywhere; they are essentiallyflat. People in capital spending still have fairly good back ordersand I think are feeling good. Nonresidential construction is quiteweak in New Jersey and Delaware: Pennsylvania tends to lag thosestates and we're going through an office building boom which I thinkwill leave us in a glut position. I think we clearly are in a slowingposition. With the national economy perhaps growing 2 to2-1/2 percent this year, I would guess measured GNP in our Districtwould be about flat. The unemployment rate, which has been well underthe national average and still is under the national average, isnonetheless rising. It's still tight at the entry level and that,too, I think will carry forward given the demographics. But it isbeginning to loosen up further up the ladder.As far as the national economy goes, I think there is thisdichotomy between what I'm seeing in my District and the nationaleconomy. It seems to me that the Greenbook is about right. Onepoint, however, is that the change in the composition of demand, asshown in the Greenbook, does seem to have some implications for risks.Essentially, what we have is a move away from exports and a move awayfrom capital spending in that we're counting on consumption and, tosome extent, housing. I have some doubts about housing picking up andthat leaves consumption. So it seems to me that we could end up withsignificantly less growth and perhaps even more growth. But my sensehere is that the change in the nature of the composition probablyleads us to a slightly greater risk on the down side going out into1990, given the mix of output that we have had over the last year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, the overall situation, particularlyas it relates to the Midwest, is largely consistent with a patternthat has been developing over the past several months--namely,moderation in many sectors. It is not in any way a sense ofdeterioration, but a tendency [for activity] to come down toward alevel more consistent with our forecast. This moderation isparticularly true in the heavy manufacturing part of our economy. Forexample: orders for the large trucks, Class A trucks, have slowed veryconsiderably; orders for heavy construction equipment are downsubstantially; and some categories of machine tools are also off.Offsetting this, construction activity in the District continues to bepretty strong, stronger than the national numbers. Certainly, theautomotive sector is difficult to read. I agree with Mike'scategorization; I think the strong sales level in August that wascarried over in September is largely for the 1989 [models] and is inanticipation of the substantial price increases for 1990 cars. Also,there are very heavy incentives on the 1989 models. As a consequence,dealers are selling out of their inventories and the order level fromthe dealers to the manufacturers I'm told recently has all butcollapsed. As a consequence, the auto production schedules have beenreduced substantially in the fourth quarter and the reductions plannedfor the first quarter of next year are even more substantial thanthat. So, anybody who is dealing with the auto sector is beginning to-28-10/3/89take on a fairly bearish tone. In the agricultural area, the news isgood. The harvest has started and we are anticipating good productionon both corn and soybeans--not record crops, but substantially higherthan last year. And our expectation is that, within the District, theUSDA estimates of production are probably a little on the low side.On the price front, it's hard to get a good sense of where prices aregoing, at least from the reports I get. The Chicago purchasingmanagers' index came out earlier this week and the price component ofthat was at 50. I think that's reflective of the comments that Ihear: some prices are up and some prices are down, but there's nodecided trend one way or the other. On the wage front also there isno change. The settlements, in my view at least, continue to be quiteconstructive and not indicative of the wage pressures that you mightexpect. On net, I think the economy is moving along on a constructivebut moderating trend. Not unlike the Greenbook, I think the outlookfor the balance of this year and, indeed, the early part of next yearis assured, but I'm beginning to get concerned as to what acontinuation of our current policy may mean as we get further out intonext year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, on the national picture our viewwould be pretty well along the lines of the Greenbook. We would notfind anything about which we would have serious disagreement. Asseveral others have pointed out, the forecast of inflation runningthrough 1991 remains quite troublesome--certainly to me.Looking at our District, it's very difficult to come up withadjectives to characterize what is going on. If I were an optimistI'd say we were having modest growth. If I were a pessimist I'd sayit has turned very sluggish. Not knowing which I am, I'll try todescribe a few of the elements. Where we had had some strength inmanufacturing, those gains are slowing. The slowdown in electronicsseems to be in line with expectations. In petrochemicals, inventorieshave been building and prices have been soft, with a result thatseveral plant expansions either have been delayed or canceled. Retailsales have shown modest improvement with the exception of auto sales,which had been stronger and now are showing declines in many areas.Two of our weakest sectors, energy and construction, have begun toshow small gains; but residential construction continues weak as doesagriculture--both cattle and crops. The statistical data continue toshow what I would say is modest growth. We have had rather extensivediscussions over the last couple of weeks with various businessmen andothers in our District. The attitude has changed, even in Houston.Growth seems to have leveled off there as it has [in Southern Texas];and they were two particularly strong areas. The way that they arecharacterizing the situation is that they think our economy either hasstalled or is shortly headed for a stall.MS. SEGER. Is that becauseMR. BOYKIN. That could be a factor!SPEAKER(?). He's back.MR. BLACK.-29-10/3/89MS. SEGER. I thought he supported all expenditures that wentinto that area.MR. BLACK. Well, I'm talking aboutMS. SEGER. Oh, excuse me.MR. BOYKIN. Well, a considerable difference--MR. KELLEY. Approximately the same magnitude.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. The Tenth District economic conditions continueto improve slowly; I think they trail the national improvement.Nonetheless, improvement does show in retail sales, which were up overa year ago with inventories, we're told, well in line. With respectto [agriculture], the good news is that the drought has been broken,although crop estimates for the spring-planted crops are a fourth to athird below what would be an average crop. The bad news is that therains have been so excessive that [farmers] are going to have a hardtime getting the milo bean and corn out of their fields. As a result,I'm not sure what their conditions will be. But farm land values havecontinued to increase; in our last quarterly survey they were up overthe three categories, roughly 2 percent over the quarter before, andthat's eight consecutive quarters in which those land values haveimproved. The OPEC agreement to raise its production ceilings hadvery little effect on oil prices, but the drilling activity hasincreased modestly most recently. The rig count is about 259 in theDistrict, about 5 percent below a year ago; but it is improving on amonth-to-month basis. Most of that exploration is for gas; they havefound a big gas field over in eastern Oklahoma and Texas which isbeing exploited apparently by some of our drillers who are going southand going to help your economy, Bob. Construction activity has beenmixed, to be sure; nonresidential construction has increased from ourlast meeting here, whereas residential construction has fallen off.With regard to my view of the national economy, I wouldaccept readily the Greenbook forecast; I think it's appropriate.There are some within our own Bank who believe that forecast is alittle stronger than they would project. But my own view is that it'sabout on track; given the underlying assumptions, I think it's a goodforecast and one we ought to be happy with.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. The District hasn't changed much since Ireported last time. We are continuing to have very high operatinglevels across almost all industries. We specifically targeted capitalexpenditures this time to see if the presumed slowdown was occurringand at least from the anecdotal [evidence] the answer to that is yes.Most of the firms we surveyed have orders to carry them through nextyear but there is a clear slowing in the order books for producers.We still have a couple of geographic areas in the District that arereally quite strong. The Columbus area is one of them. We are seeingwage pressures there. Service-type industries will be looking at 6percent increases in wages. But overall, we haven't seen a majorchange. Just to put it in perspective, Ohio is at about 4.8 percent-30-10/3/89unemployment and I believe Pennsylvania is around 4.3 percent. So,we've got pretty robust economies but they're not expanding at rapidrates. And I think both [unintelligible].In terms of the Greenbook, we have very little disagreementwith respect to the longer-term outlook for real growth. Of courseI'm disappointed, as everyone else is, with respect to the inflationprospects. In light of the discussion this morning and thealternatives shown in the price forecast, we seem to be workingagainst ourselves. When we tried to bring down the dollar it cost usa half a point out there in 1991, if I read the chart right. So itseems to me that that's an issue that we have to grapple with at somepoint along the way. I'm not sure I'm ready to grapple with it todayafter this morning's discussion, however. That's all I have to say.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. The pattern in our District is the same as I'vebeen reporting. We have had sluggish employment growth all year bothin nonagricultural payrolls and in manufacturing, and that patterncontinued in the most recent period. The only manufacturing sectorthat showed any growth was chemicals. There was particular weaknessin electrical equipment: Whirlpool laid off 850 in Portsmith,Arkansas; GE has announced layoffs of about 800 coming up inLouisville; [unintelligible]. Having said all that, though, I thinkwe also have had very slow labor force growth. Unemployment rates arestill relatively low; St. Louis just published an unemployment rate of5 percent, its lowest in a number of years. And there has been apickup recently in nonresidential and residential constructioncontracts. Even at GE, for example, the feeling is that this processisn't cumulative; they see a bottoming out here. I think they feelthat with these announced layoffs their production will be in linewith demand. They see next year as being relatively flat but theydon't see a continuing deterioration. One final thought--which Imentioned last time and it continues to be the case--is that I've beentraveling around the District a little and it's very hard to findbusinessmen who are worried about the economic situation. Nobodygrabs you by the lapels and says: "This thing is going south and youbetter do something about it."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. On the real economy, growth seems to becontinuing at a fairly modest rate as compared to what looked like aslippage earlier. So, as far as the economy's performance, there issome inertia there that is satisfying, I think. I don't see it muchdifferent than the Greenbook has in terms of the pattern that may bedeveloping. Did you say, Mike, that manufacturing inventories werecoming out this morning?MR. PRELL. Right, and they were up $12 billion at an annualrate.MR. JOHNSON. As opposed to a stronger--MR. PRELL. It was $50 billion in July.MR. JOHNSON. And that is a good sign.-31-10/3/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And the inventory/sales ratio went from1.64 to 1.56.MR. PRELL. You're ahead of me on that; I don't have thosenumbers.MR. JOHNSON. Well, that's a good sign in that the bulge ininventories in July did not carry forward.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. A good part of that is a big increase inauto shipments and sales.MR. JOHNSON. Right, but there was some uptick even ex autos,if I remember, before July.MR. PRELL. Right, there was a pretty broad--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I was referring to the sales.MR. JOHNSON. Yes. In spite of all that, I still see it likethe Greenbook forecast--some winding down in the economy. I don't seeany signs of acceleration, taking all the regions on balance; I stillsee some gradual slowing going on. So, I perceive a little moredownside risk than upside risk. But I want to associate myself withGary Stern and others who earlier indicated a little optimism on theinflation front--that inflation seems to be looking better and itseems to go beyond just the food and energy components. But as evenMike Prell said, a lot of the ex food and energy improvement seems tobe associated with the dollar, to some extent. I'd be quite alarmedif we continue to contaminate the environment we have for improvementwith a drop in the dollar. I'm not saying we ought to be targetingthe dollar, but given the fact that we are at high capacity levels, wedon't have a lot of fudge room there unless the economy were to slowfurther and we could absorb some decline in the dollar. So, that is abig, big worry. And even though I think the risks are still towardthe down side, the current environment is not very promising for anyflexibility on policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that the picture is a mixedpicture. I'm somewhat on the optimistic side, as are Gary Stern andManley Johnson, in regard to the output-price tradeoff. It seems tome that in the second half we are in a 2-3/4 percent inflation mode ascompared to 6 percent in the first half. I would agree that neitherone of those was sustainable. That is, I think we had accidentalfactors giving us too high inflation numbers in the first half and weare getting some benefits in the second half that are not sustainable.But I would tend to expect inflation in 1990 to be within the 3percent range. I don't call that good at all. My goodness, we aretwo years delayed in terms of being at 3 percent and I think we doneed to make more progress. But I think our ability to make progresson the inflation front can best be done by not creating recession-likeconditions. And I'm optimistic that that will not occur. M2's growthover 26 weeks is now back up to 4-1/2 percent, which seems to me tomean that we have made some progress in that regard. Commodity pricescontinue to soften, but I think it's a rather moderate softening andnot a precipitous one. It seems to be a softening that reflects the-32-10/3/89monetary scarcity that occurred earlier; and I think that needs to bewatched rather carefully as I think money growth needs to be watched.But I do believe there's a different tone around in regard to how onecan profit by engaging in various economic activities. I think profitprospects or speculative gains by holding land or real estate or anyinvestments are probably being diminished somewhat. And it doesn'tseem to me that this is going to lead to a sustainable level ofinvestment activity in many of these areas. I am as bullish as thestaff is in regard to exports. In fact, I have exports slightlyhigher with a stable exchange rate, whereas the staff is calling forexports to decrease dramatically--well, I'd call down to 5 percentsomewhat of a dramatic decrease. I believe that we have had thebenefit of having American manufacturers compete in the world marketsright here in the United States; I think they are getting better and Ithink there is motivation to hold costs in check. So, I think it's anoptimistic outlook; but there are some areas, like the airlinebusiness, that are showing some signs of change. So it lookssustainable.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I have adopted a self-imposed taskof delivering jeremiads from time-to-time about things that are goingon that are somewhat outside the economy and present a backdropagainst which we need to apply policy. I'm not going to repeat thatthis morning, but I would just like to get on the table the fact thatthere are a host of very important challenges and problems in theeconomy that are very urgent and on which, in many cases, we seem tohave an opportunity to make some substantial progress. They are noteconomic in many cases; but in virtually every case they aresubstantially impacted by economic events and economic conditions. AsI look at the economy, I'm close to where I think Governor Johnson andPresident Black and others are in that it's hard for me to see wheremeaningful strength can come from and relatively easy to see whereweakness can come from. And that gives me some pause. I wouldsuggest that we ought to be rather sensitive to emerging weakness andbe quite careful that we don't induce something through policy thatwould turn out to be counterproductive to society in a larger sense.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Jeremiah Corrigan!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, in terms of the near-termoutlook I'd be in the moderate but steady camp that somebody--I guessDick Syron--mentioned. As I said to you this morning, there is someevidence of a lessening in prices for some raw materials andintermediate goods and even some evidence of modest improvement inavailability of deliveries. But all-in-all as I look at the currentsituation, my bottom line is that I fear it will be weaker and myinstinct is that it will be stronger. Therefore, I think it's aboutbalanced. But let me take up a further [unintelligible] in terms ofthe intermediate-term outlook. The staff has taken the forecast inthe Greenbook through the end of 1991 and I think what the staff issaying is very, very revealing. You may not like it, but I think itis probably the most exhaustive and professional insight that you canget. What does it say? It says: 2 percent growth for three yearsrunning; the unemployment rate rising to 6 percent; the saving ratefalling again to 5 percent; the CPI with or without food or energystuck in the 4 to 4-1/2 percent range; compensation per man hour stuck-33-10/3/89at 5 percent; the fiscal deficit still over $100 billion; and thetrade and current account deficits at the end of 1991, even with somedepreciation, still around $100 billion. Net external liabilities atthe end of '91 are going to be $1 trillion and portfolio net incomeflows are going to be minus $50-odd billion. It seems to me that whatyou get out of that is an intermediate-term outlook that I consider tobe in some ways as good as you can expect but in other ways very, veryrisky and dangerous. It tells me, as we all know, that we have anabsolutely lousy policy mix in this country. It tells me that thereare great risks of a renewal of protectionist attitudes in thiscountry. It tells me that there are risks even in terms of theability of this country to provide leadership. And it certainly tellsme that there are very grave risks in the economic outlook in terms ofgrowth, inflation, and the exchange rate. I think the exchange raterisk over time is clearly on the down side. That's one of the reasonswhy, though I may not agree with the analysis, I certainly agree withthe stated concerns about the dangers of beating up on the dollar.But I don't consider this three-year outlook anything but troublelooking for a place to happen somehow or other.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I can't worry about where we're going in twoyears because I don't think most of us can forecast even two quartersahead let alone two years ahead. Looking a couple of quarters ahead,though, I do think that the slowing that we have seen is going tocontinue. What concerns me greatly is the weakness that I see invarious manufacturing areas. And the weakness in manufacturing, Ithink, is more serious than the overall weakness. The PurchasingManagers' Survey for the last five months or so has indicated thisslowing; I have other sources of information as well. Just to repeata couple of things that Si Keehn said about the auto industry: usingthe current production schedules for the fourth quarter this will bethe weakest fourth quarter since 1982 and you may remember that 1982was not exactly a hot year for autos. Even if you pick up thetransplants which, of course, have become very big and very importantover this last seven years, it still will be the slowest fourth-quarter production since 1982. Frankly, one of the reasons two orthree of the auto manufacturers have announced incentives for their1990 models even before they are readily available is that they are sonervous about the weak demand. In some cases, they do not have enoughorders even to start their plants running to produce the 1990 models.So, I think the people who looked at the August auto sales numbers andread them as a sign of strength got the wrong message. It was end-of-year close-outs that they really pushed. It's just about 180[degrees] away from a strong story; it's a weak story.Also, if interest rates actually perform as the Greenbookassumes--if short-term rates are basically flat during the year aheadand long rates rise slightly--I'd be very hard pressed to expecthousing to improve. Maybe I'm missing something and maybe consumersare interested in buying more, but the builders--at least in thebuilders' survey that I read--are feeling rather negative. That'sparticularly true in parts of the country that have been alluded tohere earlier. The export situation really has to be watched. I thinkthe strong dollar that we have seen over much of the year, until the[unintelligible] began recently, has had an impact on export growth; Ibelieve it's going to have an additional impact because there are long-34-10/3/89lags involved here. Also, there has been a rather significantdeterioration in profits going on. The IBM announcement a couple daysago of disappointing earnings in the third quarter and expectations ofdisappointing earnings for the full year, I think, is a great concern.They have announced that they will offer early retirement to some morepeople, which is not exactly very IBM-like. If you read the pressrelease carefully, it mentions that the strong dollar was one of thethings contributing to their deteriorating profits because of thetranslation problem--the profits that they are earning abroad and thenbringing back into their consolidated earnings report for thiscountry. It's my personal observation that when a company experiencesprofit deterioration, that eventually impacts on its willingness andability to expand and even to modernize dramatically. So, I'mprobably a touch more concerned than the average around the table.And if the stance of monetary policy is what we're assuming in theGreenbook, then I think I would be a lot more nervous than the averagehere. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Well, I'm kind of sorry I didn't get in ahead ofPresident Corrigan because he summed up so perfectly my own views ofwhat some of the risk factors are in the near future--accidentslooking for a place to happen. I'm very concerned about the fact thatthe outlook is for sluggishness with no real progress on any of ourmajor problems. It seems to me that the greatest fragility in what wesee going on right now is the possible effects of the dollar'sbehavior. While I understand that solving the current account crisisand the trade crisis is a necessary part of our planning, or hopefulplanning, it seems to me that it is not going to get solved all byitself just by driving the value of the dollar down. The dollar isbehaving right now like a strong swimmer. But sooner or later, eventhe strongest swimmer is going to go the bottom if you push his headunder water again every time he comes to the surface. And I worrythat any kind of a free fall in the dollar in the near future coulddrive people away from dollar-denominated securities and reverse thisinterest rate structure very dramatically by forcing the financing ofour deficits back into our own markets. And that would rob us of themonetary policy flexibility that we need in order to keep some sort ofan even keel through this perilous period. So I'm worried, and that'sthe issue that I have come to focus on--worried and frustrated, Iguess, sums it up.MR. JOHNSON. I wish I had said all that. That's good.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I suspect this may be an appropriatetime to break for coffee.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Kohn.MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Kohn?MR. HOSKINS. Don, on your longer-term projections, I don'tknow what you're projecting for 1991. The Greenbook tells us we will10/3/89have 4 percent inflation or so in '89, '90 and '91. So, given theforecast for inflation, it seems to me that we're implying somewhathigher than a P* kind of M2 growth. In other words, don't I have tosee some 2-1/2 or some 3 percents, on average, over time to--MR. KOHN. Well, eventually you would have to see that. Youwould have to see 3s [in M2 growth] to imply price stability; this isin line with Governor Johnson's question earlier. If you look at thefinancial indicators that were distributed--the last chart, chart 9has the P*--we are assuming 6 percent M2 growth in 1990, about in linewith nominal GNP, and a small decline in velocity. In 1991 we have 5percent, a bit lower than nominal GNP, and a small rise in velocitysince we have this upward drift in interest rates in that year. Thosetwo taken together imply in the P* model--to keep P* just a littlebelow P--a very mild deceleration in inflation, not a rapid one. Theline is tilted down but not at a very steep angle.MR. GUFFEY. We're having trouble seeing that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What would happen if P actually reachedP* at the end of '91? What is the gap at the moment in that?MR. KOHN. I can tell you that in a second. Well, at theend, if P were lower than--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, equal to the P*.MR. KOHN. Well, given the money growth that we've assumed,that would require then that prices come in less than the rate--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's what I'm saying.MR. KOHN. --and presumably we would have that P equal to P*.That would imply very little further downward pressure on--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, no. If at the end of 1991 P* isunder P, then that gap is the measure of how much prices would fall ifP were equal to P*. I'm asking--MR. KOHN. Right.MR. BLACK. How big is the gap is what he's asking.MR. KOHN. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. On the chart it looks as if it could beas much as 2 percent.MR. KOHN. At the end of 1991 P* is 1.345 and P is 1.381, so[the calculation] is .04 over 1.38. It's about 3 percent, I'd say, orwhatever .04 over 1.38 is.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. .04?MR. KOHN. Well, .04 over 1.38. So it's 2-1/2 percent or so.MR. TRUMAN. 2-3/4.-36-10/3/89MR. KOHN. 2-3/4.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible] a P* operation is thatwe could get a lower [inflation rate]. I'm not saying it's forecast;but it's not an argument that you could get a lower inflation rateconsistent with that money supply growth [unintelligible].MR. KOHN. I'm not sure I understood what you just said.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'll say it again very explicitly.MR. KOHN. I'm sorry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The hypothesis that employs the M2growth, which is better, is therefore not inconsistent with a lowerinflation rate than is in the Greenbook for '91.MR. KOHN. Right. Actually, relative to the Greenbook, in'91 the P* would give you 3-1/2 percent on the implicit deflator. TheGreenbook has 3-3/4 percent, so it's not much different. I thoughtwhat you were getting at is what it would imply for '92. Presumably,that is where you're coming out of '91 and that would imply somefurther deceleration.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, '92 is an easy forecast; it's '91that--MR. HOSKINS. Can I follow up? The shorter-term problem,from my perspective and not obviously from other people's around thetable, is that we're going to have a growth rate--going into thefourth quarter and starting the first of the year--of around 6-1/2percent. Isn't that kind of a speed problem in the sense that we areaccelerating?MR. KOHN. Well, if interest rates were to hold steady, Iwould not expect money growth to accelerate in the first quarterparticularly.MR. HOSKINS. Okay.MR. KOHN. Presumably, if interest rates didn't come down wewouldn't get the acceleration; I would expect M2 growth perhaps todecelerate slightly. But it would be basically in the 6-1/2 to 6percent area in the first quarter.MR. HOSKINS. It's just a problem for me to look at M2 growthof 5.2 percent fourth quarter-over-fourth quarter the previous yearand your projection of about 4.5 percent [for 1989] and now to see youproject that M2 growth is going to go back up to 6 or 6-1/2 percent.The argument generally has been that the cost of bringing it downbecause of interest sensitivity is too high--you get big swings in M2.But you can turn that around and say you can bring M2 down withrelatively small swings in interest rates.MR. KOHN. In the short run that's right. This is thephenomenon that we discussed in July, I believe, when we were talkingabout the long-run ranges. The staff forecast with relatively flatinterest rates was consistent with M2 growing about in line with-37-10/3/89nominal GNP. So if you think you're going to have nominal GNP growthon the order of 5-1/2 or 6 percent next year you're going to get M2,given that we've had a little decline in these rates, on the order of6 or 6-1/2 percent, just mechanically working it through. But youcould raise interest rates a bit and you would get a little lowernominal GNP. You would also get even more impact on M2 given thatinterest rise.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. A theoretical question, looking out and goinginto next year: If the capital gains legislation were to pass--andthere is a lot of discussion about windows and that sort of thing--what kind of effect will that have on M2 as we go into next year?MR. KOHN. We discussed that to some extent. If there is, itcould be a bit of a replay of 1986. If people realize a lot ofcapital gains quickly and then store the money waiting to pay theirtaxes next April, for example, we could have some temporary upwardmovement of M2 or a [unintelligible] level of demand for M2 in theshort run, which would then come back presumably after the taxes werepaid. It would be a little different than we saw in 1989 when wethought people were surprised in April by their tax returns and theydrew down their M2 balances and then had to move them up. You couldargue in this case that, perhaps having learned from 1989, peoplemight deliberately make a decision on the basis of taxes in that theymight be more tempted to take some of the capital gains they got andleave them in M2 and have that ready--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Wouldn't that degree of sophisticationimply more M3 than M2?MR. KOHN. Depending on who's doing it, yes. If it were--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If somebody were sophisticated enough toact in context of that law, one would assume it's more an M3possibility.MR. KOHN. Possibly. I think there are probably a number ofhouseholds with very high wealth and, therefore, potentially high M2holdings who--if they were to park it there temporarily--could dothis. Presumably, if there were a mood shift out [of M2] into M3-typeliabilities, such as large time deposits, etc., from the bank andthrift perspective they would have to issue fewer other types of M3liabilities. So, I'm not sure whether that would really affect thelevel of M3 so much. I think there might be some impact on M3.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody else? Why don't I get startedon policy issues. This ought to reflect much of what I've beenlistening to here because I, too, think the outlook is mixed, withsome key timing points in the period immediately ahead. It's fairlyclear that the evidence for weakness, if one looks at that part of thespectrum, is most persuasively coming from the orders pattern,specifically in durable goods. The nondefense capital goods area,excluding aircraft, clearly is scaling back at a fairly pronouncedpace, including declines in backlogs in nominal terms. What's unclearat this stage is to what extent that order easing is a reflection ofreal underlying weakness in capital equipment or merely an order-38-10/3/89adjustment process to a significant decline in average lead times onthe deliveries of materials and parts. Obviously, if you're bringingthe lead time down from, say, 90 days to 60 days--that's not theactual number--one can collapse the unfilled order pattern and orderswould fall without affecting total plans for shipments. If that is amajor cause of this phenomenon, owing to the fact that the order leadtimes are now probably at rock bottom, at least in the context of thiscountry, it would follow, therefore, that within the next severalweeks we should begin to see some firming in orders. The purchasingmanagers' order data have stopped their accelerating rate of decline;in other words, they are still implying a decline but the decline hasstopped accelerating. And there is some evidence popping up in avariety of different places that suggests that maybe the softening iscoming to an end. I don't think we're going to know that for anotherthree or four weeks.The one aspect of the issue which I must say concerns me isthe notion that this may be something more than that. The argumentfor it being more than that is the continuous, cumulative decline inprofit margins that has occurred since the spring. It's clear thatwhat has occurred is that the slowdown in volume, coupled with theprice slowdown, has had a significant impact on the revenue side; theslow volume clearly has raised fixed costs and especially theextraordinarily high interest payments of the corporate sector. Infact, the series that we produce internally--the ratio of grossinterest payments by corporations as a percent of gross cash flow--hasspiked up in the last two quarters partly, I suspect, as a result ofthe interest increases that are going on but also because of aslowdown in cash flow, which is another way of saying that there ispressure on margins coming from this gradual slowing up. It is notreflected in the Greenbook too much, so maybe these numbers are not anissue of concern as much yet. But I do think that the capital goodsmarkets are the key to this outlook. If capital goods hold up, Ithink there's very little chance that this economy can move down; infact, if capital goods markets hold up we might exceed the Greenbookeasily. But if the capital goods markets continue to erode and thenaccelerate down, then we get a significant backing up of in-processinventories in the system. We look at inventory data of purchasedmaterials, goods in process, and finished goods from the establishmentlevel. But there's a very significant part of all of thoseinventories which are really in process. If you consolidated themunder their final sales level, for example, you'd find in the capitalgoods area that the proportion of inventories that were [in process]would be very high and that would tilt over the capital goodssituation; even though the inventory sales ratios don't lookformidable, you do get enough pressure to create some recessionaryforces. This is the downside argument. The upside argument isbasically that if this process were underway, it's already overdue onthe basis of historical experience. This economy doesn't work thatslowly. In other words, when you get these types of patterns, theytrigger things and they go at a much faster pace than anything that wehave seen. That sort of suggests that this might be a false move.In any event, when I look at this and translate it intopolicy, it says to me at this particular stage that the argument formoving in either direction is rather dubious at this point. One majorreason is that if we were to move down--well, let me put it this way:Moving up at this point strikes me as very unsupported. I don't know-39-10/3/89a reason for doing that and nobody around here even remotely suggestedit. But moving down right at this moment [is problematical], in lightof what is presumed to be an increase in the Bundesbank rates onThursday and a coordinated attempt on the part of the G-7 to now putmonetary policy on the table and bring the dollar down--and believe meit will succeed; it will go right through the floor. If we were toget anywhere close to moving rates down in conjunction with theBundesbank move, I'm fearful that we would get too much marketresponse as the new G-7 coordinated monetary policy endeavors to bringthe dollar down. And I think that would create some really majorproblems for us. I conclude, therefore, that at least where I'd liketo come out would be alternative B, asymmetrical toward ease as we arenow. And I would keep a close eye on the order patterns because we doget information coming in continuously. If the patterns weakenconsiderably, I think that probably would be suggesting to us that thecapital goods markets are beginning to slip off. I don't think that'swhere the odds lie, but it is still a disturbing possibility. If themore probable event occurs--namely, that the economy is about tostabilize--I think we will know that in several weeks. In any event,I would like to suggest as a policy position alternative B, asymmetrictoward ease. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I'd like to associate myself with thatview. I'm not sure I'd explain it the same way. My major concernright now--even though I think there is a downside risk and we oughtto be prepared to use our flexibility to ease at some point--is thatthe atmosphere is not right. I think there are still some questionsgoing forward and we ought to wait and look. My major reservation atthis point is what is going on with the dollar and the fact that anyattempt to ease now, even if we thought it was the right thing to do,would have great risks because the perception [would be] that ourgoals were associated more with some dollar level than our view aboutinflationary risks. And I really don't want our policy tied in withthat. So, I prefer to maintain our flexibility going forward.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I would certainly support alternative B, but Iwould have a preference for symmetrical language because I think thedata to date suggest that the risks are equal on the up side as wellas on the down side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I would certainly support yourprescription for policy in the short term. I think it's exactly ontarget with respect to the dollar. Any easing at this point would beassociated with dollar movement and that has very grave risks, as youstated. I think we're at a point where we ought to be fairly happywith the state of the economy. Clearly, there are risks and they havebeen articulated very well; I don't minimize them. But I certainlyfind it very hard to imagine a stronger case for leaving policyunchanged at the moment. I, too, would prefer a symmetrical directiveonly because I think that the risks are about evenly balanced.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.-40-10/3/89MR. LAWARE. I'm strongly in favor of alternative B. I thinkthe risks of easing because of the dollar situation are significant.Therefore, I would prefer the symmetrical language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. My concerns, again, remain in the longer term,not this short-term consideration. My fear in the longer term is notthat inflation is going to get out of hand on the down side. It seemsto me that if it's going to get out of hand it's going to be on the upside. That seems to me to be where the risk is: trying to head off arecession that is not there will always bias us toward inflation andvolatility in the inflation rate. I would prefer the "B" path. I'mnot so comfortable that I'd want to tighten right now but I would haveasymmetry in the other direction on the notion of getting the M2 pathbelow 6 percent for next year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Like many others, I'm happy with the currentstate of the economy. But also like many others, I'm not happy aboutthe outlook, particularly on inflation, as we go out a couple ofyears. I know the errors that such a forecast has. I understand theconstraints that are on us as far as the dollar goes. Because of mylonger-term concerns on inflation I'm very comfortable with "B," but Iwould also prefer symmetrical language in the hope that the marketwould see symmetrical language as no change.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Alternative B, and I think asymmetrical is fine.I could also live with symmetrical. I should say that while thismakes good economic sense, I think it is going to be somewhatconfusing to observers of this whole process in that we have beenintervening to drive down the dollar and, if the Germans raiseinterest rates, there will be an expectation that this is acoordinated effort. And if we don't follow through--I agree we shouldnot follow through, that's not my argument--I think it will raise anumber of questions and will sire a number of speculations about wherethe Fed is in all of this. That's more politics and public relations,but it is nonetheless part of the world.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I'd be in favor of alternative B and asymmetriclanguage. It seems to me that what we're basically saying is nochange in policy. A word change is awfully minimal; nonetheless, I'dprefer remaining with asymmetric language at this point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, I too favor alternative B. I have a mildpreference for symmetric language just against the circumstances inwhich we find ourselves. There are indeed a lot of problems thatmight impinge upon us, but it seems to me that the best policy we canadopt, given all these potential problems, is to try to keep theeconomy on a relatively even keel. And I think "B" accomplishes that.I certainly wouldn't want to see M2 growth in the near term--by that I-41-10/3/89mean the fourth quarter and going into next year--go above thatassociated with "B." I do think our credibility is very important andI think we have to be very careful about that matter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I also prefer alternative"B" with asymmetric language toward ease. It seems to me that thereis more restraint in place than I think some of the words so far havesuggested. We have had monetary restraint sufficient to turn theforeign exchange value of the dollar around. We have had monetaryrestraint sufficient to take commodity prices that were rapidly risingand turn them into falling prices. We have had monetary restraintthat has taken the PPI on a year-over-year rate of change basis frommoving up to moving down. To think you can get lucky enough in thatkind of environment to do that and have no change in monetaryrestraint and to think that that restraint is going to be just righton the other side does not follow the logic that I know of. So, I'mquite suspicious of the fact that we may be getting further into thisprocess than we know. We need to be watching very carefully to seewhat occurs. Now, I would be delighted if we could just say: Well,we're going to pull the monetary aggregates down and we're just goingto have them under restraint; but I think all of us know what happensif you go into that mode. The demand for money has to increase duringa period of time in which price level stability is much more of aclear possibility. So, I think we have to watch very carefully allthe signals that have served us so well in keeping this economy goingfor so long and yet provided the restraint that we needed. I believethat it's not so important at this point whether we ease a quarter ornot here or there except that I don't want any timing with the dollar.But 25 basis points one way or the other doesn't make or breakanything. You could make way too much of that. But it doescontribute to the possibility of orderly markets that are soimportant; the whole housing industry, it seems to me, needs orderlymarkets. I think a very steady, careful, easing ought to be done;it's unfortunate that the G-7 took away what I think may be a time inwhich we may need to act. I think it's essential that we take thistime to wait, but I am more inclined, I guess, than some others tobelieve that an easing is going to be necessary.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I support alternative B withasymmetric language toward ease. That's where we are now and I see noreason to change it. I concur with Governor LaWare that the risks onthe dollar are certainly there; you articulated them beautifully. ButI also believe that that's going to have to be played out on a day-by-day basis. It's a little hard to know how that's going to go. Ithink that you and the Committee can and will adequately take thatinto account as events unfold. Meanwhile, I think the potential forweakness in the economy and the consequences of it--if we get it andit gets away from us--are severe. I may be a cockeyed optimist but Ithink there's a possibility that we will continue to get betterinflation results than expected. As a consequence, it seems to methat your proposal is appropriate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.-42-10/3/89MR. MELZER. I favor "B." Symmetrical language would be mypreference but I could live with asymmetrical toward ease. I wouldjust comment that several months back I was concerned about the degreeof the restraint. I'm not sure what to make of M2. But in terms ofsome of the narrow aggregate and reserve measures, I take some heartin the fact that they had a pickup in September and are projected topick up [further] through the end of the year. So, I think that theshift that Governor Angell was concerned about to some extent hastaken place, at least based on those [data].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MR. SEGER. I favor alternative "A" because I think we doneed a slight degree of easing; actually, I believe the differencebetween "A" and "B" is basically a slight one.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That means easing immediately?MR. SEGER. Yes. I don't think the 25 basis points is goingto pour rocket fuel into our engine. Anyway, my main concern, as Iindicated, is in the auto area and possibly in the capital goods area.In regard to the impact on the foreign exchange markets, I think thedemand situation there is one of great strength for the dollar, whichis why we had to be in there doing this heavy intervening and sellingof dollars along with the other central banks. If we drop theinterest rates slightly, then that would allow Sam Cross' people totake two days off and maybe that would be good. So, I don't thinkthat that would be a real danger. Finally, just thinking back to ourdiscussions here earlier this year about inflation, the actualperformance of price indexes has been far better than any of usdreamed. And I don't think the apparent shortages that were soworrisome are there now. While I don't think inflation has gone away--and I say that so Lee Hoskins will understand--nevertheless, I don'tthink it is accelerating either. So, I would be more comfortable withalternative A.MR. LAWARE. Martha, the Bluebook says that "A" is related toa 50 basis point drop. Would that change your view on that?MS. SEGER. I'm sorry, I meant 50.MR. LAWARE. Okay.MS. SEGER. No, it wouldn't.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm comfortable with alternative B.I guess I prefer symmetric but since we have asymmetric, that's fine--just leave it there. I would come out there pretty much on thegrounds of my own assessment of the domestic economy, although theexchange rate situation makes it a bit more compelling. I would note,Mr. Chairman, tongue somewhat in cheek, that I'm not prepared to makethis argument, but much of the earlier discussion today would not beincompatible with tightening monetary policy.MR. ANGELL. Do you mean drive the dollar higher?-43-10/3/89VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. A whole variety of things: thedollar, price stability, making room for export growth. You couldmake a pretty good argument based on the discussion around this tablethat we should be tightening policy. I'm not prepared to make it.MR. KELLEY. You'd get a pretty darn good argument if youdid!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'm very sympathetic to the pointthat Lee Hoskins made because I tend to focus on the longer run, as Ithink he does. And I think our long-run problem is inflation ratherthan recession. I'm also sympathetic to the points made by those whofavor symmetry just because I'd like to send a signal to the marketthat we don't really approve of the G-7 action. But I also shareWayne's feeling that monetary policy has been a little tighter thanmost people assume and that it may be [sufficient to] hold down theinflation risk. So, I think your original formulation is probably thebest one for now; I would go with "B" asymmetrical on the easing side.MR. GUFFEY. [Unintelligible] and I think most of thecomments around the table about using monetary policy with respect tothe dollar are right on the mark. I don't think the old adage "youcan't serve two masters" is to be taken lightly. I think monetarypolicy should be devoted to domestic economic policy and not to thedollar. And further, with respect to the prescription for the periodahead, I would accept "B" but would want a symmetric directive. Iwanted that last time, as you may remember, and I've seen noaccumulating evidence that suggests we are any closer to a recessionat this meeting than we were at the last meeting. As a matter offact, in my own view, we're further away from it. As a result, Ithink there's a greater demand for a symmetric directive than therewas last time. Therefore, I would prefer "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I favor alternative B. My preference also wouldbe for symmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The consensus is obviously alternative"B" with some concentration for asymmetric toward ease, which I wouldlike to take a vote on. But I will say that since there's enough inthe way of desire for symmetric language, should the evidence emergethat action is required I do think it might be useful to have atelephone conference and discuss what the issues are; they are likelyto be subtle and the Committee's views would be useful. In any event,I would like to propose a vote on alternative B with asymmetriclanguage toward ease. Would you read the directive so stated?MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. Taking account of progress towardprice stability, the strength of the business expansion, the behaviorof the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange anddomestic financial markets, slightly greater reserve restraint mightor slightly lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in theintermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected-44-10/3/89to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period fromSeptember through December at annual rates of about 6-1/2 and 4-1/2percent, respectively. The Chairman may call for Committeeconsultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations thatreserve conditions during the period before the next meeting arelikely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outsidea range of 7 to 11 percent."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Guffey NoGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesPresident Melzer YesGovernor Seger NoPresident Syron YesVICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, could I raise anotherquestion before we formally adjourn?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I wonder what the sentiment aroundthe table might be, looking forward to our next meeting, to ask Mr.Prell and Mr. Truman and Mr. Kohn and others to do a specialpresentation for the Committee where we would take a look at thisquestion of price stability in five years in some systematic way. I'mnot suggesting a forecast but alternative scenarios, problems,obstacles, and costs, so that we could really get a systematic feel ofwhat kinds of problems would be involved in that kind of underlyingpolicy goal. I don't think--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible] suggestion.MR. PARRY. One [other point]: I'm sure you all got thisletter to respond to by the end of October or early November fromRepresentative Neal and that kind of information might be useful. Idon't know what we're all going to do about that but that kind ofinformation might be an important--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What is the deadline for answering thatletter?MR. PARRY. The end of October or early November is myrecollection.MR. HOSKINS. He just said as soon as possible.MR. PARRY. Well, he says he'd like to make it a part of therecord and he will be doing the hearings in late October or earlyNovember. And we assumed that---45-10/3/89MR. LAWARE. We are not all going to answer that separately,are we?MR. ANGELL. Do we want the FOMC [to respond]?MR. FORRESTAL. That's the question I was going to raise--noway.MR. JOHNSON. I think we ought to [respond] as the FOMC.MR. ANGELL. I would think we should have one response.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do we all agree?MR. FORRESTAL. That's what we have done in the past.MR. HOSKINS. Well, I'd like to discuss that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, putting aside this other view,I don't want to prejudge the letter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We will discuss the letter at ourluncheon.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We have to deal with that. Butquite apart from that, I really think that we ought to put thisexercise under a microscope so we really have a--SPEAKER(?). Well, this is something [unintelligible].VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I'm just trying to formalizethat.SPEAKER(?). Yes, I agree.MR. HOSKINS. What model are we going to use?MR. ANGELL. The model that works.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's why I want to look at it.MR. KOHN. I think this will be something of a time consumingexercise at the FOMC meeting as well as for the staff between here andthere. Aside from this Neal question which, if it needs to beanswered by early November would precede the FOMC meeting anyhow, wedo have a two-day meeting scheduled for December. The Novembermeeting was to be a Tuesday afternoon meeting in any case. So beforePresident Parry brought that up I was going to suggest that maybe weschedule it for the December meeting, but I'm not sure how itinteracts with this Neal letter. We could have a Tuesday afternoon/Wednesday meeting.MR. ANGELL. Well, how about a Wednesday morning meeting with[Wednesday] afternoon?MR. KOHN. Some Presidents don't like that when they haveThursday directors' meetings.-46-10/3/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The answer to that letter has to comelong before any of this other stuff occurs. And I'm not altogethercertain that the answers to the letter per se are going to be reallytied up in any analytical issues. I think what's involved here islooking at the problems in financing the large budget deficit, notpressures on the money supply. What we really have to deal with,crucially, is what real rate of interest is consistent with a path ofmoney supply which itself is consistent with zero or moderateinflation. Because it's the real rate of interest that will tell us,literally, the capabilities of bringing the system into balance. AndI'm not sure that that really gets to this letter or anything relatedto it.MR. JOHNSON. Plus, it seems to me that there has always beena [unintelligible] definitions which has to be addressed as well. Youcould probably go around this table and find half a dozen differentviews about what price stability is. I know I have one.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but I bet you they don't differ bymore than 10 percentage points.MR. BLACK. That's exactly the problem.MR. BOEHNE. Well, if we have to reply to this letter overthe next month, and if we're going to have a two-day meeting inDecember anyway, this idea of price stability isn't going to go stalebetween now and Christmas.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I wouldn't think so.MR. BOEHNE. So, I think we ought to let it flow into ournatural schedule.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. There is a fundamental problemthat we have with this whole procedure in the sense that there are alot of [unintelligible] things that have to be done in economicpolicy. And with fiscal policy now out of the game, and reallymonetary policy and sterilized intervention being the only[unintelligible] there's an awful lot of mischief that can occur. ButI think it's those types of questions that we need to ask.MR. BOEHNE. I agree.MR. ANGELL. Well, the model that we're going to use is goingto be rather important. It seems to me that if you're going to usethe Phillips curve trade-off model you're going to defeat the Nealamendment.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What you want to do--MR. ANGELL. [Unintelligible] if you want to defeat it, justuse that model and you will guarantee a defeat.MR. BOEHNE. On the other hand, if you think you're going toget this like a free lunch, that's not realistic either.-47-10/3/89MR. SYRON. And it depends on the time periods you're lookingat. I think the Neal letter is consistent with looking at this over along period of time. Most people don't behave--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. [Even] over five years there aregoing to be costs.MR. SYRON. There are going to be costs but there is going tobe a benefit in that over the long period of time after thatprosperity will be greater.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, at a minimum, just having afocused Congressional examination of this process cannot be bad.MR. BOEHNE. I'd rather Congress be debating this aboutmonetary policy than a whole lot of others things they could bedebating.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Exactly. I think it forces them tofocus on the--MR. BOEHNE. Right, I agree with that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. --costs and benefits. Whatever comesout is unlikely to be anybody's--MR. BOEHNE. But I think it's also a good opportunity, eventhough fiscal policy is in a state of paralysis, to remind peopleabout what good things could happen if it weren't.MR. JOHNSON. How about Bill [unintelligible] might testify?He had--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I think he would say that.MR. LAWARE. They might come to that conclusion anyway ifthey examine the costs of getting there. They may say "Oh, no way arewe going to pay that price." That's the danger on the other side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I will tell you: If you went back to the1960s I would say you probably would have had 2 to 1 against it as faras economists are concerned. I bet you now it's 1 to 2 the other way.MR. BOEHNE. It probably is.MR. ANGELL. That's right.MR. BOEHNE. That's probably right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The old Phillips curve trade-off was onethat everyone believed: either you got lower inflation and higherunemployment or the reverse and that was it. But now I think there'sa much more sophisticated view of that relationship and it differs.MR. BLACK. We can use a long-run perfectly vertical Phillipscurve and I wouldn't have any objection to that.-48-10/3/89MR. BOEHNE. The truth is we don't know. We can have ourbiases but we don't know.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, that's about the best.MR. BOEHNE. And what you have is an array from the mostoptimistic and least costly all the way over to something that wouldbe fairly costly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. Also, I think in all of our mindsis the thought that over the next five years we really believe in someway or by some means that there is going to be a recession. Andthat's going to be the period in which the price [improvement] occurs.MR. BOEHNE. Right. But, with the exception of Lee here,probably few people would be willing to precipitate a recession topull it off. But, if one occurred, we'd be willing to take advantageof it.MR. HOSKINS. I never said I wanted to precipitate arecession. I object.SPEAKER(?). That's why I said--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think lunch is served.END OF MEETING-49-