Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 18-19, 1989A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Monday, December 18, 1989, at 1:00 p.m. and continuedon Tuesday, December 19, 1989, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellGuffeyJohnsonKeehnKelleyLaWareMelzerSegerSyronMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Hoskins, and Stern, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal and Parry, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, andSan Francisco, respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Kohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPatrikis , Deputy General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey,Promisel, Scheld, Siegman, Simpson, and Slifman,Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1. Entered meeting after action to approve minutes of November 14,1989 meeting.2. Attended Tuesday session only.Messrs. Coyne and Winn, Assistants to the Board,Board of GovernorsMr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of Governors,Messrs. Brayton, Gagnon, Ms. Rehm, Messrs. Small, andTryon, Economists, Divisions of Research and Statistics,International Finance, Research and Statistics,Monetary Affairs, and International Finance,respectively, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, Lang, Rosenblum, andMs. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of San Francisco, Richmond, Cleveland,Philadelphia, Dallas, and Atlanta, respectivelyMessrs. McNees and Miller, Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of Boston and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Vangel, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof New York3. Attended Monday session only.4. Attended Tuesday session covering discussion and action to adoptdomestic policy directive.5. Left meeting before discussion and action to adopt the domesticpolicy directive.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofDecember 18-19, 1989December 18, 1989--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern is on his way, but wecan get started. First, may I have a motion to approve the minutes?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So move.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Prell, would youlike to start us off?MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just wanted to make afew brief comments before my colleagues make their presentation. Aswe listened at the last couple of meetings to the remarks of variousCommittee members regarding their expectations for this session, Imust say that we were more than a little concerned. The potentialscope of the discussion seemed to encompass not only more than wewould have time to prepare or present but also more than we know orthan anyone knows. So, our first job was to narrow the focus of ourpresentation to the issues that were both manageable and relevant tothe Committee's policy concerns. We concentrated in particular on thequestion of the costs, in terms of unemployment and lost output, thatcan be expected to be incurred with an effort to achieve pricestability within a five-year time frame. Surely, our [unintelligible]not only are of importance but also [the degree to] which positiveanalysis as opposed to personal value numbers can be brought to bear.One that comes to mind immediately is that of inflation measurements[and how] one wishes to quantify this price stability goal. In thelist of discussion thoughts we distributed were those other questionsto which some theoretical and empirical analysis probably can beapplied, although I must admit that research to date has provided few,if any, definitive answers. Be that as it may, what we are presentingtoday certainly addresses some of the most urgent [concerns] facingthe Committee, given present economic conditions and where we standrelative to the ultimate objective of price stability. On that note,let me indicate that we have three speakers: Dave Stockton and LarrySlifman from the Research Division, and Peter Hooper from the Divisionof International Finance. Dave will begin.MESSRS. STOCKTON, SLIFMAN, and HOOPER. [Statements--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's an extraordinarily interestingjob, gentlemen.MR. ANGELL. It truly is.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The floor is now open for questions orcomments.MR. JOHNSON. Just one question. When you compare thesesacrifice ratios from the models with the historical experience youuse an unemployment rate. I guess that's one way to do it. But itdoesn't seem to take into account that there will be changes in12/18-19/89productivity and substitutions of capital for labor. I was justwondering [unintelligible]. It struck me that even though the costwas fairly significant--in real output terms you lost about 2percentage points of real GNP growth--the change in nominal GNP wasdramatic and the decline in the CPI inflation rate was from somethinglike 12 or 13 percent annual rate down to about 4 percent in one year.Now, I know I'm not talking about relative to potential, but GNP wasgrowing at about a zero rate in '81 or so and the change in the growthrate was from about zero to minus 2 or something like that over the'81 and '82 recession. I'm not sure that that's the best example butthat one just strikes me as something quite significant. We saw theinflation rate come down from what people thought was a core rate of10 percent; people were talking about projecting 10 percent outindefinitely. The actual rate was running 12 to 13 percent, I think,at an annual rate. And we had about a 9 percentage point change inthe inflation rate in one year with about a 2 percentage point changein the real growth rate. That struck me as a significant adjustmentwithout the kind of dislocations that might be implied here. Ifyou're looking at cumulative effects over the whole cycle onunemployment, I know the unemployment rate got a lot higher. But thereal output sacrifice in terms of growth rates wasn't very large atall when you consider the dramatic change in the inflation rate.MR. BLACK. I think one could also argue that our credibilitywasn't as high during that period as it might be in the future.MR. JOHNSON. Right.MR. BLACK. Which would have made it even less.MR. JOHNSON. Right.MR. STOCKTON. I think the point to remember, though, was notso much that the swing in the GNP growth was zero to minus 2 but thefact that the unemployment rate ran up to 10 percent and then camedown quite slowly. In addition, inflation in general in that periodprobably slowed a bit faster than the models might have expected butthen it plateaued and didn't slow much [below that rate] beyond thatpoint.MR. JOHNSON. I agree, but I'm just saying--MR. STOCKTON. So, the output losses in some sense should bemeasured from potential output--how much output do you actually giveup relative to what you could have had, had you been operating at thetime at potential, in order to bring inflation down. It does raise anissue, which I don't think we were able to address very well, simplybecause there aren't that many episodes upon which to base it, andthat is: Would you get a more rapid bang for your buck out of a verydeep downturn in overall economic activity and a very sharp rise in[un]employment than if you went through a long protracted period ofsmaller [declines in economic activity] but [more persistent]unemployment? The models that we looked at, the [Board] model inparticular, don't distinguish between those kinds of events. In fact,there may be some expectational effect--even though we're not going tobe able to see it very well with this one episode--where, if theeconomy sinks and people expect you to keep the pressure on, you wouldin fact have a larger effect on overall expectations than you would12/18-19/89inching the unemployment rate up to 6 or 6-1/2 percent over 5 or 6years.MR. SYRON. I think that's a very relevant point with respectto looking at the '81 period that was being talked about because,while I'm not disagreeing on the point that we had no credibility inthat period, that was a case where [we] demonstrated a willingness toreally hit the economy over the head with a sledgehammer to getinflation down. And it may be that this kind of shock effectoccurring all at once rather than by a gradual approach--. I thinkit's not clear how much credibility that--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think there was a very important eventthat occurred prior to all of this and that was that long sequence ofinflation going up successively; it was ratcheting up. In otherwords, the lows were always higher than the previous low and the lowprevious to that; and the highs were higher. And people like MiltonFriedman were projecting [it would move] progressively ever on upward.At that particular point in that period, the System had maximum publicsupport and minimum credibility.MR. JOHNSON. That's what's so striking about it: the factthat people were projecting continued [increases in inflation]. I'mstill amazed thinking back on that. I remember how painful it wassitting there going through it. But I'm still struck by what appearsto be a fairly small sacrifice when you consider what people thoughtit would take to unwind inflation like that. The only thing is thebaggage we've been left with: all the debt buildup in the '70s thatresulted from that and the exposure to the safety net that resultedfrom cracking it.MR. GREENSPAN. Yes. Our short-term models are poor but ourintermediate-term models are really extraordinarily difficult to dealwith. In these different and separate models, to which I think youare referring, are a lot of very interesting results. But they giveyou really quite different scenarios as to what would happen undervarious conditions. I think what we're dealing with is a verydifficult conceptual problem of how our economy functions, especiallyin the growing world environment, under these different scenarios. Ithink what you succeeded in doing was getting some idea of dimensionon some of the areas, but the range of error has to be awfully high.And I think all we can do is pick up one or two major notions. Bob.MR. PARRY. I'd like to ask an opinion about the credibilityissue. If one had a Neal resolution, and in addition to that hadpublicly announced some kind of multiyear path on something such aseither nominal GNP or money, do you think that that would have asignificant impact on credibility? And, therefore, would that leadyou more in the direction of faster adjustment than was incorporatedin the model?MR. PRELL. We were looking to you folks to address that. Iam sure you must sit around and talk about it and have views about it.MR. STOCKTON. My own view is that it would be difficult toexpect an immediate adjustment and a response to that. If you lookback at inflation expectations survey data, for example, in 1979 therewasn't an immediate reaction to the announcement of a change in12/18-19/89Federal Reserve operating procedures. There was, however, after theeffects of the implementation of that policy became clear. It seemslikely that it would be difficult to gauge what period of time itwould take to establish that credibility or by what channels one wouldbe able to do that. But I guess one wouldn't want to bet on having avery large immediate initial effect from simply signing on to the Nealproposal; but that's [as] opposed to some other kind of commitmentthat might tie the hands of policymakers, etc.MR. PARRY. Well, first of all, the strong credibility[model] assumed that it would take 2 years before it was believed andthat's a fairly long time. In addition to the Neal amendment, I wasthinking more in terms of setting year-to-year targets, which is onequestion I might ask.MR. PRELL. You're [layering] on top of an ultimate objectivethe things that are in the targets and so on?MR. PARRY. Right, which has to be--MR. PRELL. Clearly, we haven't always achieved our monetarytargets; so whether that in itself would have a great additionaleffect isn't clear. On the other hand, if [you look] back to theearly '80s--a time in which we were perceived, correctly or not, to beon a monetarist sort of approach--maybe that will bring back thememories that what was needed at that time was a very hard-nosedapproach.MR. PARRY. But the targets don't have to be in terms ofmonetary aggregates. They could--MR. PRELL. But then you will recognize that the structure ofthe system, the behavioral relations, are not normal--certainly inthat in the short run you might get a variety of mixes of output andprice movement given nominal GNP growth. I suspect the more you seekto tie your hands in the way [policy] seems to be directed towardprice stability the more it does [unintelligible] to credibility. Butas I said, rolling on top of that ultimate objective, [if] that [isperceived] to be strong, it's almost a sufficient condition in itself.MR. PARRY. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Well, I want to echo Chairman Greenspan'scompliments to you. Even though you [prefaced] your remarks by sayingthat it shows how little we know, I still think it has been a veryfruitful exercise and certainly fulfills what it was that we wereasking for in terms of this kind of a presentation. One interest thatI have is in terms of the base case. You were suggesting that therecould be a continuation of this impact into 1996 and 1997 that mightinvolve an outright deflation. Consequently, it was nice to look atthat earlier tight money phenomenon because it also brought the rateof unemployment down to its natural rate. And what I'm asking is:Since we're already getting something we don't know about, maybe wemight as well go ahead and do another five years because we're onlydoing more of that which we don't know about; and thereby, we wouldhave a base case movement to zero inflation in 1995 and then [we12/18-19/89 -5-could] look at the adjustment to the natural rate of unemployment.And that would also give us an opportunity to look at the currentaccount deficit. That's because I presume that taking the base case[up to] 1996 will cause an interest rate adjustment, which I presumewould [work] through to both the budget deficit and also the currentaccount deficit because of the interest rate effect. And [we could]see how that might follow through for the next five years. Would thatinvolve too much more?MR. HOOPER. We'd have to consult with our model experts onthat.SPEAKER(?). Well, it certainly would be hard to do in a dayor two. But a few weeks' work [unintelligible] to what you've seenhere.MR. ANGELL. But you could suggest that the adjustments wouldnot necessarily be that we would let deflation occur but that we wouldmake adjustments in the direction that I've indicated. And that wouldthen be pluses for the federal budget deficit and pluses for thecurrent account in the ensuing period after 1995. I also wanted toget your reaction to the oil price shocks. It seems to me that maybethe oil price shocks are not unrelated to monetary policy. That is,if we decided to leave the inflation rate at 4-1/2 percent, we mightbe more apt to have an oil price shock, or a so-called oil priceshock, than we would if we proceeded in a tighter fashion.MR. HOOPER. Yes, we really would, because some of thoseunderlying factors would tend to increase the probability of oil priceshocks. If we continue the growth of oil demand [unintelligible], wewould see production outside of OPEC about flat, so that wouldincrease the chance of something happening there. If world growthwere to go significantly below potential, that would certainly reducethe chances of oil price shocks.MR. ANGELL. But on the fiscal side I'm afraid it works theother way. That is, at some point in time if we pursue, for example,the alternative of earlier restraint, then we increase the risk ofeither tripping the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings [provisions] or gettingchanged legislation.MR. HOOPER. What matters here is what's happening to realactivity. If we're holding the oil price unchanged in real terms sothat greater inflation results in an increase in the nominal price butnot necessarily [unintelligible] your question. Clearly, there arefiscal shocks; we've had a more expansive fiscal policy than--MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that the Committee ought to keepin mind when we talk about these sacrifice ratios that we could take,say, alternative 2 of pursuing a [constant] 4-1/2 percent inflationrate or alternative 3, say, assuming a rate of increase in inflationof 1 percent a year, or we could go with 4, which would be our [pricestability] objective, and then we would follow those alternatives out.There's no guarantee that one would not encounter even more likelihoodof a serious financial upset that might engender a significant [risein the] unemployment rate. So it seems to me it might be possiblethat the cumulative sacrifice we're talking about might be higher12/18-19/89under a constant inflation target or an increasing inflation target--if anyone wanted to do that--than it would be under a zero inflationtarget.MR. PRELL. It could be. A sense of this financial upsetthat you refer to might be one of [unintelligible] or sharperadjustments. [Unintelligible] you might get [unintelligible] byhitting the system without regard to the financial dislocations,affecting expectations more strongly. You're just perhaps, with thefinancial effects, layering on another contraction of[unintelligible], which means you get more bang for your interest ratebuck in slowing the economy and inflation [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me follow up on that issue. Myimpression is that they would not get what you're suspecting at 4-1/2percent because the model would tend to keep the unemployment ratefrom moving dramatically. The way the econometric structure is puttogether you don't get the type of dynamics that probably would occur.Since I haven't asked the question in 6 months on the crucial area, orone of the crucial areas of this whole business of tradeoffs--thePhillips curve or the variations thereof and the relationship betweenwages on the one hand and the gap on the other in whatever variationwe're looking at--could you review what our experience has been in thelast several years? The unemployment rate has come down, obviously, agreat deal; the wage rate has gone up some but less than I suspectearlier configurations of the model would have indicated. Could youaddress that question specifically with respect to how important thatis? In other words, is it a minor issue or one that gives you concernabout the range of potential error in these various differenttradeoffs, projecting them out for a five-year period?MR. SLIFMAN. Well, on Exhibit 10 the chart in the lowerpanel shows the simulation in the wage and price sector takentogether. So, it has the Phillips curve and then also the mark-up.To be sure, you can see that in 1984, as I said, there was asubstantial error; but it had dissipated over the subsequent year anda half. And in the most recent period, this dynamic simulation of thewage and price sector together measured on the price variable has beenpretty much right on track. Now, we also did some simulations of thewage equation alone. Again, it is true that there was a period wherethe model was tending to overpredict the actual experience--thatactual wages were falling faster than the model would have predicted.So, between '81 and roughly '85 there was a period of overpredictionin measured growth rate terms. But since about the middle of 1985,again measured in growth rate terms, the model has been pretty muchright on track.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're using the same structure?MR. SLIFMAN. This is sort of estimating it up through--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. '79.MR. SLIFMAN. '79 and then--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. All of these simulations are out-of-[sample] simulations?12/18-19/89MR. SLIFMAN. Right, correct.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. When was the structure last estimated?In other words, when did you actually fit the last set of parametersinto your structure? When was it last re-estimated?SPEAKER(?). The equations on which the future simulationswere based in the presentation today were estimated within the lastyear. But the basic structure of the wage and price simulations inthe model, in terms of the variables that appear on the right handside, take the form in which they entered and have been essentiallyunchanged since probably 1980-1981.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Have the coefficients changedmaterially?SPEAKER(?). The coefficients have changed some; and it turnsout that if we take the exact specifications and add them up[unintelligible]. If you simulate that sector forward for 1989 ittends to overpredict both the rates of wage and price [unintelligible]maybe 1 percentage point or more. So, you get probably three-quarters--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's right. I think that[unintelligible] interesting. My problem with out-of-sampleprojections is that an out-of-sample projection from a model which isawful never gets published. People go back and re-estimate thestructure. And I just want to make sure we know that what we'redealing with here are endeavors that fit the system; I don't know towhat extent the structure will change in here. The only reason Iraise the issue is that I get a little concerned about the the size ofsome of these numbers, as though we know them with some degree of[precision].MR. PRELL. Sure. We [don't] make any strong claim forprecision here. The basic question is: Is there any relationshipbetween the slack in the economy and wage and price [behavior]?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The answer is unequivocally "yes" on thebasis of that, which is important--MR. PRELL. Now, obviously, we're making our decisions as wego along. Some notion of how much effect we're going to get forvarious--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I grant you: Knowing the sign is veryimportant.MR. PRELL. Let me just say, and Larry referred to this, thatwe have had underway a comprehensive examination of this issue; had itnot been for the overload we reached when you requested this briefing,we would have had it done by now. It will be available before verylong. And it will explore all of these specifics as well as amplifywhat already has been indicated about the various tests that we did tosee whether there were structure changes.MR. STOCKTON. I would just add, on the basis of the workwe've done to date, that we have done an experiment that is, I think,12/18-19/89exactly like you would wish us to do. That is, taking ourselvespersonally out of this, we went into the published literature andpulled out three different published equations and paradigms. We putthem through a test using data as they exist and what people areactually using and did a series of stochastic simulations [and ranregressions] out of sample. The results of those show what I guessyou'd expect them to show. All the models were misspecified to somedegree or another. That is, they all perform worse out of sample thanthey do in sample. But the standard error on the equation that isquite similar to the one that is used in the quarterly model was byfar the smallest for a 4-to-8-quarter-ahead forecast, a standard erroron the order of 1-1/2 percent. Now, that 1-1/2 percent is small interms of econometrics and what you're actually able to do in real timeforecasting. But it's huge, I would imagine, from the perspective ofthe Committee in terms of the kind of errors that you can expect tosee over a horizon as short as 4 to 8 quarters. But I think that'sabout as much science as we can bring to bear on the issue at themoment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think that's a fair statement.Lee Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Yes. Again, I think the staff did a good jobin terms of laying out alternatives; let me compliment you on that.And I also compliment you on that last statement because I thinkthat's absolutely accurate. We have poor tools and we do the best wecan with them. Several comments have already been made, most of whichI agree with. I think Manley was trying to get at the idea, and Ishare some of its content, [unintelligible] that the 1980 examplessurely must be an upper limit to the sacrifice ratio, if you want toput it that way. That's just an observation I want to make about it.Now, I'm also struck that the [policy prescription] not only of aMilton Friedman but a James Tobin in the late 1970s and early 1980s[implied a] horrendous cost to keep inflation down for a very longperiod of time. Again, not to be overly critical of these kinds ofexercises, I think the staff itself in 1983 ran roughly the same kindof experiment here at the Board. We looked back at that exercise andfound that it substantially overestimates the cost--at least it lookslike it does now--of getting inflation down. So, I think we do runthe risk of seeming to err at least on one side in these exercises--unless you bought the full credibility model, in which case we'dprobably run the risk of erring on the other side of it. Having saidall that, one observation I'd make, which I think Governor Angell wasgetting at, is that we are measuring the cost of reducing inflation.If one is trying to make a decision about whether or not it'sworthwhile doing, one needs to measure the benefits of having a zerorate of inflation--that is, in the next 5 years out or 10 years--andthen compare that with the cost of the transition, because many of usbelieve there are some gains to maintaining price stability in termsof economic performance.Finally, I have a couple of specific questions and I'll justrattle those off: 1) Why do international investors lose confidence inthe dollar when we've stabilized it? 2) I'd like you to explain to methe relationship of real interest rates to the deficit. And 3) Iguess Wayne has already made this point, which has to do with oilprices; I would concur with his observation that in a price stability12/18-19/89case you're much more likely to have oil prices in real terms perhapsdeclining rather than rising.MR. HOOPER. Well, let me address the question about thewillingness [to hold] dollar assets in exchange for disinflation.Clearly, the rise in real interest rates would be in favor of thedollar; but in that case, the current account deficit is persistently[growing]--we're up to 1/2 percent of GNP and it's widening inabsolute terms. And the U.S. [external] debt is growing to levelsthat perhaps could be a source of concern at some point. As to whenthe shift in [unintelligible] takes place, that would be hard to say;and it's one of the reasons we considered two clearly markedalternatives, obviously, since [unintelligible]. But we certainlycouldn't rule out the distinct possibility of some movement againstthe dollar as the amounts of the external debt and debt payments beginto stabilize [unintelligible]. The second question was on--MR. HOSKINS. How real interest rates are related to thedeficit and what economists might have to say about it empirically.MR. PRELL. Well, we know there's a reigning opinion on this.Clearly, it has become much more fashionable in recent years to takethe view that there is not the kind of correlation that has beenconventionally [believed]. The Board model, in estimating theserelationships does find the more traditional [unintelligible] budgetdeficit does [tend] to raise interest rates. We may live in a more[unintelligible] world but we can't detect it; it means[unintelligible] this correlation. But if this [unintelligible], whenthere is a [big] increase in government debt relative to the size ofthe economy it does tend to raise interest rates. In our baselinewe've assumed that if the size of the government debt relative to GNPis [trending] down, it would tend to allow real interest rates to[decline].MR. HOOPER. On the question about oil prices: yes, clearly,as we discussed before, if they were not very [successful] in slowingreal output, the implications for real oil prices would tend to bemore favorable. If we go back to the early 1980s, for example, thedifference is that oil prices were at substantially higher levels tobegin with; and perhaps part of the more favorable outcome then had todo with the fact that we were beginning to be on the down side of anoil price shock. We also had a very small rise in the dollar. Bothof these tended to reduce somewhat the [costs] of disinflation in theworld in that period, relative to a period when oil prices and thedollar were moving differently. At this point we are at a very lowrelative level for real oil prices. We're [assuming] the productioncosts are insensitive to oil prices in some of the marginal areas.And the outlook for production outside of OPEC does not lookparticularly good. So it's a very low downside limit on the oil pricesituation this time as compared to the early 1980s when there wasclearly a very strong downside potential.MR. HOSKINS. I'd just comment on Mike's budget [response].I think that was a fair statement on the deficit. You also mentionedthe possibility of [spurious] correlations. Some people argue that itmay be the level of government expenditures that is correlated withdeficits. That's one source of it. Another source would be a changein savings based on something like appreciation of the stock market.12/18-19/89MR. PRELL. Well, we don't deny the existence of differingviews on this; and we view this as a legitimate area for continuingresearch. But this is the model we have at this point and the onewe've found best fits the historical experience. But we [realize] itis an area of continuing debate.MR. STOCKTON. In the forward-looking model, individuals areassumed to look forward and see the increased tax liability thataccompanies the increased spending today. That is imposed in somesense in that model. Most independent tests don't seem to find theoffsetting private savings behavior with respect to [unintelligible].But it does not have the same kind of real interest rate effect as inthe Board staff [model].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, Wayne Angell and Lee Hoskinspretty well asked my question but I'd like to ask it slightlydifferently. I'm looking at Exhibit 8. When you look at the fourcharts there: you have the GNP deflator at zero in 1995; you have theunemployment rate in 1995 at 7 percent but the line is heading down;you have real GNP above potential growth; and you have interest ratescoming down. Using the assumptions that are behind this, it seems tome that if all of that would happen it would be a very favorablepicture. The question then, of course, is: What happens after 1995?I know you haven't done that work. But at this point do you knowwhether you would expect continued decreases in the rate ofunemployment, continued growth of the GNP above the potential rate,and interest rates possibly coming down a little more if we couldreach this point by 1995?MR. SLIFMAN. Well, it's not so much a matter of what wewould expect; it's really a question of what policy actions would betaken at that point. We expect that the policy action that would betaken at that point would be to ease monetary policy further to bringdown real interest rates as a way of trying to continue to supportreal GNP and bring that unemployment rate down closer to the naturalrate. So, the point that I'm trying to make is that you end thisperiod with an unemployment rate, in this model, that is stillsubstantially above the natural rate. It does [pose] this continuousstrategic problem because, with the unemployment rate above thenatural rate at that point and with essentially no inflation, themodel then would want to produce an outright deflation, at least forsome time. That's really the point I was trying to make.MR. BOYKIN. Well, I guess I would always assume, maybeerroneously, that of course we would make the right policy decisions.And with the unemployment rate holding steady there for 3 or 4 yearsand the downward slope of that line, I wondered whether we couldexpect that to continue.MR. SLIFMAN. Well, that downward slope--and maybe it's aproblem of the way we charted this--the rate is only going from 7.2percent down to 7.0 percent. So it's--MR. BOYKIN. Yes, but it's the right direction.MR. SLIFMAN. That is correct.-10-12/18-19/89MR. PRELL. When we tried [unintelligible] we have to bringit down and you get an overshoot in deflation. That's the basic[thrust]. One could come up with an infinite number of year-by-yearpaths here. But we have a couple of things that we think are broadlyrepresentative of the problem that you face.MR. SLIFMAN. Let me also just reemphasize the point thatthis model does not incorporate any credibility effects. It seemslikely, if one were successful in bringing down inflation the way thatthis particular simulation shows, that probably over time thecredibility effects would begin to build. So the final result interms of the costs probably would not be as high as this simplesimulation of the model itself wants to produce.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I have a couple of questions and a couple ofcomments. First of all, in regard to using the Hoey Survey: I knowthat you've all known him for a long time; I think if you administeredtruth serum to him he would be the first to tell you that this is avery shaky, flaky, sort of survey and he wouldn't want you using it asan indication of inflation psychology. Although I understand the needfor a number, that doesn't make it good. Secondly, as I read throughhere, I'm trying to figure out the answer to the question: Credibilitywith whom? What group is it that we're trying to impress or convincethat we're committed to price stability? Frankly, if you get outsidethe Beltway, most people in America don't know who the President ofthe United States is! And fewer know who the Chairman of the FederalReserve Board is. Other than 32 people on college campuses and 25 Fedwatchers on Wall Street they have never heard of the FOMC.MR. PRELL. Well, a simple response to that is that you wouldthen lack [a forum] to achieve anything by declaring your intentions.MS. SEGER. Well--MR. PRELL. [Unintelligible.]MS. SEGER. We sit here and assume that everybody is sittingon the edge of their chairs waiting to see what the FOMC does. I hateto tell you this, but they're more interested in the Redskins footballgame yesterday.MR. PRELL. We have made that assumption. We clearly--MS. SEGER. I don't want to be disillusioning; maybe I justcome from an unsophisticated part of the country where they likefootball. Also, when you had this list in Exhibit 1 of possibleimpediments to price stability, I agree about a jump in the world oilprices, fiscal policy miscues, etc. But I'm more and more depressedby moves that are taken by governmental bodies that are inflationarythat are not fiscal policy. I'm thinking more of microeconomicthings.MR. PRELL. Those things fall roughly in a class of supplyshocks, along with the oil price change process.-11-12/18-19/89MS. SEGER. I don't call that a supply shock: putting in someregulation that has tremendous--MR. PRELL. But it really is. It reduces the productivitythat exists in capital in many cases or--MS. SEGER. You would call the minimum wage hike a supplyshock?MR. PRELL. Yes; regardless, it shifts that labor costfunction.MS. SEGER. I guess to me a shock is something that justcomes from out of the blue and not something that is legislated bypeople down the street here. That is not the connotation.MR. PRELL. Within our ability to incorporate these things inmodels, they are the same.MS. SEGER. Okay. Also, I couldn't sit here and listen veryeasily to the comments on the early part of this decade and how thedisinflation costs were not that great. Possibly from Washington,D.C. they didn't look that great; or if you were sitting with thesecurity of a government job or a government paycheck, perhaps theydidn't. But I can tell you that there are a lot of people who paiddearly for that disinflation. They lost businesses; they lost farms;they lost jobs, and they're still without them. I'm not saying thatthe fight shouldn't have been waged; it probably should have. Maybenationally the cost was very marginal, but when two states assumedabout the whole cost it looked a little heavy. Also, in looking aheadat sacrifices, I think you have to be much more micro in your analysisand think far more about sectoral differences, because it doesn't allaverage out. I can tell you--pardon?MR. PRELL. One of the things that we know we didn't treat,for example, were distributional effects. That's something you mightwant to take into consideration.MS. SEGER. I think that's something you have to look at,though.MR. PRELL. I think we'd have a very difficult time bringingyou any very concrete quantitative results on that. That isn't to sayit's not something we would want to think about.MS. SEGER. Well, [remember] some of the pieces of 2X4s thatfloated around this building that came in from builders in the early'80s! I think that suggests that at a certain point the sectoralburden gets a little heavy, and they speak out even if it's byflooding [us with] 2X4s. Anyway, thank you. It was a veryinteresting presentation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I had one question, Mike. You mentioned at thebeginning that five years was a relatively short time frame in thesense, I think, that if you didn't get right at it there was no wayyou could slow money growth by enough, quickly enough. I don't want-12-12/18-19/89to read too much into what you said. My question revolves around whatwould happen to the sacrifice ratio if the time frame were longer? Ithink I know what would happen to the expectational effects and thecredibility and so forth. But do you have any sense of that? If youmade it 10 years instead of 5, does the sacrifice ratio come downmaterially?MR. SLIFMAN. In this particular model, to a firstapproximation the model is linear in regard to these sacrifice ratiocalculations. So, if that were to be stretched out over a longerperiod of time it would still require the same cumulative excessamount of unemployment; it would just be stretched out further--if, ofcourse, the amount of disinflation were the same.MR. MELZER. So, it would be the same?MR. SLIFMAN. That's the first approximation; it is notprecise.MR. PRELL. In essence, if you have 2 percentage points ofexcess unemployment for one year or 1 percentage point in each of twoyears, you have essentially the same effect in terms of this.MR. MELZER. And then, if you believed it, it becomes more ofa political question than an economic question--if the model wereexactly right.MR. STOCKTON. Theory actually says that if you were toannounce something that you were going to do in terms of money growthreduction in the future and if you allowed people time to adjust toit, the cost would actually be lower. But in essence, to follow thatline of thought means that if we say we're going to do something twoor three years from now, then the workers at Boeing, for instance,would reduce their wage demands in anticipation of what your[announced policy] was going to be. So, in some sense, while[announcing] what your actions were going to be may work--or it's howthe model works out in theory--it doesn't seem very sensible from apolicy perspective to expect that. In terms of getting to it earlyversus late, the issue really is that five years isn't a very longtime, even in the case where you might have credibility, in terms ofgetting on a path whereby you don't end up the five-year period withsome major disequilibrium or imbalance--like having the unemploymentrate very high. The P* model tells a very similar kind of story tothe Board's quarterly model in that if you end up with a big price gapat the end it must mean either that velocity is very far from itsequilibrium and/or that output is very far from its equilibrium. Inessence, the longer you have to get to this end point, the moreadjustment can occur. Within the five-year period you can reach bothprice stability and some general real output equilibrium much easierthan you can if you try to do it quickly and you have to be pushingvery hard on one particular level.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. I have just a couple of comments, Mr.Chairman. First, I would join those who compliment the staff on thispresentation. It's one of the few times I can remember when we've hadthe opportunity to sit back and look out into the future rather than-13-12/18-19/89dealing with the short term. I suspect, though, when push comes toshove that we're going to be back in the short-term policy making modeanyway.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's always good to have background anda framework with a notion of where we're going.MR. FORRESTAL. Sure, that's right. My gut reaction, as Ilooked at this and heard the discussion today, is that the cost willprobably be greater in terms of GNP output and unemployment than thispresentation would suggest. Be that as it may, the only comment Iwould make is that, even if you accept the zero inflation base case,the question that I ask myself is really a strategic question in termsof future policy and what it means in terms of our future actions. Iquestion whether getting from where we are--at roughly a 4-1/2 percentinflation rate--to zero in 5 years, with the associated cost of a 7percent unemployment rate, will be acceptable to the country at large.That's a public policy question. I guess it raises the question ofwhether or not, in the absence of the Neal legislation or somethinglike it, the country will accept the cost of bringing inflation downfrom 4-1/2 percent to zero. The parallel to the 1979-80 time frame,it seems to me, is not quite applicable because we were coming fromdouble-digit inflation, and I think people clearly recognized thatthat was a terribly insidious thing that was happening. I'm not sosure in the present environment that people will be willing to acceptgetting from where were are in terms of inflation now to zeroinflation. There is an acceptance now--rightly or wrongly, and Ithink it's wrongly--that 4-1/2 percent inflation is not all that bad.As inflation goes up, there comes a point where people get concernedabout it; I think people would be willing to suffer some sacrifice togo from, say, a 7 or 8 percent rate of inflation to something lowerthan that. But to go from 4-1/2 to zero, I think, raises a questionabout the political consequences of getting from where we are in 1989to 1995. I'm not saying that I disagree with the concept of moving inthat direction. But I think a question that we need to ask ourselvesis whether 7 percent unemployment will be accepted by the public atlarge and, particularly, by the Congress.MS. SEGER. You'll find out next year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that is a crucial question, andit's obviously implicit in everything we do. But before we confrontthat question, which I think we ought to discuss toward the end ofthis session, let's find out what we know about it and what the factsare before we try to make political judgments. I think we cannotapproach this subject without raising the issues that you're raising.MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, I can't help but say that I thinkPresident Forrestal is leading up to your agenda as opposed to ours,but there is a nexus here. And that is, if the public thinks that theFOMC is thinking this way, then that means there is no credibility tothe disinflationary commitment.MR. ANGELL. Absolutely.MR. PRELL. And what we were pointing out in the Hoeyexhibit, whatever quality you want to assign to that, was that theredoesn't seem to be an expectation of further disinflation out there.-14-12/18-19/89The basic perception seems to be that the Federal Reserve will resistacceleration [of inflation] but will not run the real risks of subpareconomic performance to bring the inflation rate down. So we're inthat credibility bind, I think.MR. JOHNSON. Well, I don't disagree with that completely.But I would say, if you look at that Hoey survey--and I agree that asurvey is a survey--the fact is that it has been trending downconsistently. You're looking at a point in time as opposed to atrend; you [extrapolate] the trend in expectations and we're comingdown. So I would say that if the Fed has been gaining credibility allalong over the last several years, instead of looking at it at someparticular point if you project that trend forward and assume wecontinue to behave in a credible way you are getting long-term--MR. PRELL. You've got to look at that [as an expectationthat the rate] will go below the actual inflation next year.MR. JOHNSON. Well, I don't know.MR. PRELL. [Unintelligible.]MR. JOHNSON. I have no idea. All I'm saying is that thetrend has been coming down. And it has been coming down on the 10-year survey at times when the one-year expectations and the actualinflation rate have been rising.MR. PRELL. But it has come down toward the actual inflationrate. That rate has been slower.MR. JOHNSON. I don't know what it's going to do in thefuture. I'm simply saying that it's plausible that we're gainingcredibility. If I remember right, and I better go back and look atit, aren't there a few periods when--?SPEAKER(?). Exhibit five.MR. JOHNSON. Exhibit five.SPEAKER(?). That reminds me. Just one other question onyour forward-looking model: Was that a down [unintelligible]expectations?MR. STOCKTON. No, not with a forward-looking model withoutthe [unintelligible].SPEAKER(?). I see; so you just push it.MR. JOHNSON. My point here is that 10-year inflation[expectations] in the last year have been trending below the actualinflation.MR. PRELL. Well, you don't want to extend this forever.Basically, you had a period in which the short-run inflation was verymuch influenced by food and the price of oil, which I---15-12/18-19/89MR. JOHNSON. Whatever. I'm simply saying that the marketclearly was looking through that phenomenon and saying it's crediblefor the long run; we're not worried about these supply-type shocks.MR. KOHN. President Forrestal implicitly raised anotherquestion that President Hoskins also raised, and we wrestled with itto no end. And that is: What are the costs and what are the benefitsof going to zero as opposed to a steady rate of inflation if you couldmaintain it at 4-1/2 percent? And they [concluded] that if onebelieves in one's gut that that's the right thing to do, that's theway we have to go. But looking at the literature, there isn't verymuch out there that enables you to pinpoint the costs of staying at4-1/2 percent, if you were able to, as opposed to going to zero.There are some things we can identify having to do with interactionswith the tax system and so forth, shoe leather costs, and what not.But they are very hard to quantify and, therefore, would be verydifficult to convince the body politic of.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The crucial issue is that it presupposesyou can stay at 4-1/2 percent if you choose to.MR. KOHN. Right; that's correct.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Easier than at zero.MR. KOHN. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me also congratulate the staff;this really was a terrific presentation. There are 3 or 4 main thingsthat I, at least, draw from it. But the first and the most importantis that I think it would be very, very difficult to safely concludethat one could do a heck of a lot better than the summary on Exhibit14, line 1. Now, that doesn't say we can't do better. But to me theempirical evidence, both in the United States and in foreign countriesfor the time periods covered in this exercise and for other timeperiods not covered in this exercise, suggests that you'd be very,very hard pressed to safely conclude that you could do a heck of a lotbetter than line 1 on Exhibit 14. But I think it's also important tonote in that regard that when you look at other countries and othertimes, the cases in which you have seen results that tend in somesense to be different than line 1 on Exhibit 14 have usually beenaccompanied by very, very sharp fiscal adjustments--not the kind ofgradual adjustment that is built into the base case here.The second point I would make is that if you look at thoseestimates of the costs in the qualified way that I have, I think we dohave to keep in mind that these are not small costs in human terms.That's partly, I think, the point that Bob Forrestal was raising. Youstart talking about a sacrifice ratio of 2.2 and 2.2 sounds like alittle number. But in terms of the behavior of the economy over avery long period of time it carries with it some rather profoundimplications. One of those profound implications to me is that wehave to be very, very careful not to leave the wrong impression aboutthis. And the wrong impression in my way of thinking is that thissomehow or other is a "gimme putt," which it is not. I think it'sespecially not when you look beneath some of the numbers that are even-16-12/18-19/89in the base case. It already has been touched on but, for example, ifyou maintain a current account deficit of 2-1/4 percent of GNPthroughout the whole period, I don't know what that means in absolutenumbers but my rough arithmetic tells me that our external debt as apercentage of GNP would end up over 30 percent. We'd be sneaking upon Brazil! I don't know if that's quite right, but it's got to be inthat order of magnitude, which is another way of saying that even inthe base case we are talking about a long period of time in which GNPgrowth is quite subdued by historical standards and, even with that,the external side of our economic and financial situation gets muchworse in many respects.Having said that, I come back to Governor Angell's commentearlier and that is: What do you measure the cost relative to? Ithink it's absolutely unambiguous that if we measure the cost relativeto a strategy of accelerating inflation, that's easy. The cost ofaccelerating inflation obviously would be greater in the fullness oftime. But what about a slower approach to price stability? Or whatabout a goal that looks more like 1954 to 1965 on the chart earlier onin the presentation? I think those are legitimate and importantquestions, Mr. Chairman. From my perspective the basic thrust of whatGovernor Angell said early on is exactly right in terms of "relativeto what?"CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me just add something to this.This is not an all or nothing game. In other words, we don't eitherdo it or not do it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It can be quite plausible to start inthis direction and fine tune it, so to speak, and after a year and ahalf, say, decide that something has been accomplished and that wedeclare victory.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That, of course, is what I'msuggesting. The last point that I would make is: What do we think wecan do to improve the prospects of getting a better result, whetherbetter is defined relative to Chart 14 or something else? Here, Imust say that I'm a little dubious about betting the ranch on thiscredibility thing, because even if you look at the countries that arethought to have very high credibility, such as Germany, you can findthat for periods other than the '81 to '85 period that's on thestaff's chart the costs are there and they are quite real--as I said,even where credibility is thought to be high. That's not to say--whether it's in the context of a Neal [resolution] or something else--that [more] credibility might not get a somewhat better result. But Ifor one would be very reluctant to bet the ranch, so to speak, on theso-called credibility argument. On the other hand, if there were someprospects for complementary policy initiatives that could get at thesavings/investment problem or get at the productivity problem, that'sa different matter. If you had a framework over this 5- or 6-yearperiod, for example, in which productivity growth were on average 1/2point more than it has been and more than is built into these numbers,you would be looking at a different ball game. So, I do think thatthis line of questioning in terms of what helps is not irrelevant; andit gets back, of course, to the all important question of fiscalpolicy. One of the things this says to me is that you've been right-17-12/18-19/89all along; you usually are. We don't need just a balanced budget oreven a balanced full employment budget; we need a surplus. And weprobably need a full employment surplus in this time frame in order tomake either the holes a little rounder or the pegs a little squarer.Any way you cut it up, I think the costs--whatever they may be--obviously are going to be much greater in a context in which thisexercise is approached with monetary policy and monetary policy alone.I think we can perhaps do better than line 1 on Exhibit 14; but I'mvery hard pressed to think how we are going to do better withoutcomplementary policies coming from other areas.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, most of the questions and points that Iwanted to make have already been made. One thing that I get out ofthis is that we get into inflation and we tend to get out of inflationnot so much in a straight line route but over a period of time overdifferent cycles. Someone made the point earlier that inflation hasbuilt up over the 15-year period because it would peak out in asubsequent cycle at a higher rate than the previous inflationary peakand it wouldn't drop as low. And I wonder if that is not instructivein terms of how one gets out of it. As much as I would like to say,for example, that we want to set out on a course that brings inflationdown over the next five years and then we're going to hold it there, Imust say that my reading of history and my sense of what makes acountry like this go doesn't encourage me that that's a very likelyoutcome. What does seem to me realistic--and it is [the course] thatwe really have been following in the '80s, if not by design, certainlyby our actions--is that to get the inflation [progress] we want over aperiod of time we have to bring down the peaks of inflation and tobring down the troughs of inflation from cycle-to-cycle. What isdifferent about the '80s is that we have kept inflation fromaccelerating all that much in this cycle. Now, sooner or later, wewill have a recession. I don't think anybody around the table wants arecession or is seeking one, but sooner or later we will have one. Ifin that recession we took advantage of the anti-inflation[unintelligible] and we got inflation down from 4-1/2 percent to 3percent, and then in the next expansion we were able to keep inflationfrom accelerating, sooner or later there will be another recession outthere. And so, if we could bring inflation down from cycle-to-cyclejust as we let it build up from cycle-to-cycle that would beconsiderable progress over what we've done in other periods inhistory. It seems to me it's [a policy] that is doable in terms ofpublic and political acceptability.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think some [good]questions [have been asked] and perhaps some satisfactory answers havebeen given; but I want to join those who suggested that we have notquantified the benefits of zero inflation or price stability. I thinkintuitively we all would agree that it has benefits; but when we talkabout the costs then in some way we have to quantify the benefits, itseems to me. I don't mean to say that we shouldn't move toward pricestability--or zero inflation, if that is price stability--but ratherthat when we set upon a course such as this we ought to know whatwe're going to achieve if we get to the goal. My own view, looking atthis exercise, is that however good or bad it may be, if we're really-18-12/18-19/89serious about price stability we ought to set off on the course of atight money policy and get it over with and move on to an economy thatcould perform for another number of years in a very satisfactorymanner, if we could check on this beyond five years. But that alsosays to me that in the short run, as we think about what policy shouldbe put in place now, it doesn't worry me as much that with a tightpolicy now we might skim along the edge to a recession. That is tosay, in the immediate upcoming periods, the fear of recession simplyisn't as great after seeing this exercise as it might have beenbefore; because if I understand this correctly, in a recession wewould expect to get some of the benefit of moving toward pricestability. As Ed Boehne or somebody said, I don't think that any ofus is looking for a recession, but I don't think we should shy awayfrom it either.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I have two comments about what Vice ChairmanCorrigan said. I would agree that you don't bet the farm oncredibility; but it seems to me, Jerry, that you're assuming there isno improvement in credibility. And I don't--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I didn't say there was none.MR. PARRY. You did because you said that you thought it wasa zero for the zero inflation base case, which really does assume thatcredibility [unintelligible] in a very standard model way. I think wecan expect better than that--not that we should go to the strong case,but I would expect something better than that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I am not prepared to make that bet.MR. PARRY. You wouldn't expect any?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No.MR. PARRY. All right. Secondly, I--MR.CORRIGAN. Wait a minute. Did you say any credibilityeffects?MR. PARRY. Beyond what is assumed by a model that uses pastexperience as basically conditioning expectations for the future.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You might get some benefits. Butagain, even if--MR. PARRY. So, there's no value in stating your [inflation]objective or having a resolution or anything like that? No valuewhatsoever?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Why are wage rate demands in Germanygoing to be 9 percent next year? Because the Bundesbank doesn't havecredibility?MR. PARRY. So you would assume no credibility improvement?-19-12/18-19/89VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No. I said that if you had a Nealamendment or something like that and certainly if you demonstrably hadother arms of public policy--MR. PARRY. Well, I want to talk about one as well.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm not saying it would be zero, butI'm saying I think it would be a serious mistake to assume that it isvery significant.MR. PARRY. Okay. All I'm saying is that you're citing alimiting case where it's zero.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm not citing a limiting case whereit's zero.MR. PARRY. Well then, I misunderstand how credibility isformulated in this model.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. He's saying that in Germany theBundesbank has credibility; it isn't much, yet it's not zero.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm saying that if you take thatcell on Exhibit 14 where the shortfall from potential GNP is 20percent--MR. PARRY. Right.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. --that is the so-called base casemodel but it essentially has a [unintelligible] of expectations builtinto it. My opening statement was that it would be very hard toconclude safely that you could do much better than that. Then I wenton to say that there are some things that might permit you do somewhatbetter than that. And credibility might help. But I'm saying that Idon't think it's going to help all that much; experience suggests thatwe should be very, very cautious on how much we think it might help.That's what I'm saying.MR. PARRY. With regard to stating our objectives conditionedby, say, the fiscal authorities: It seems to me that if we're going todo that, we would have no credibility because--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Say that again.MR. PARRY. Well, we're in charge of what happens to prices.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's not what I'm saying.MR. PARRY. Well, I didn't understand you then.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm not referring to Federal Reservepolicy. What I'm saying is that if we had a credible fiscal policy inthis country in the first place, or if there suddenly were a sweepingbudgetary agreement struck independently by the White House and theCongress, then it would help.MR. PARRY. I don't deny that.-20-12/18-19/89VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. All right.MR. STERN. An interesting dilemma: If you start with cell 1on Exhibit 14 that is a course in which the higher the sacrifice ratiothat you s-cart with, the greater the burden you place on benefits tomake the whole exercise worthwhile. Or another way of saying it isthe more seriously, it seems to me, you've got to consider stabilizinginflation at the current rate, assuming that's possible--I have somedoubts about that. But if you start with something like that I wouldbe surprised, given what I know about the benefits, whether you cangrind them out and make them equivalent to the costs.SPEAKER(?). But that's a question--MR. ANGELL. You have to take the present value of all thebenefits in the future.MR. STERN. I understand; I understand that.MR. ANGELL. And the present cost of not doing it.MR. HOSKINS. Let me ask you: Would you want to stabilize therate of inflation at 10 percent? Or zero inflation?MR. STERN. No, I'm saying I personally would start with theweak credibility case. So that gets me off to a different start. I'msaying that if you start with something as pessimistic as that I thinkyou have a difficult challenge in a rigorous way to justify it.MR. LAWARE. What happens to credibility if we make anannouncement of a goal and then don't make it?MR. STERN. That's right. I personally don't think--MR. JOHNSON. I agree; that's a good point.SPEAKER(?). I think it's a very good point.MR. JOHNSON. If we bite off more than we can chew and we areviewed as failing, we've lost a lot.MR. LAWARE. Like below ground zero at that point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Like so many others, Mr. Chairman, I wouldcompliment the staff; in fact, I did compliment Mike Prell before themeeting. And I'd like to compliment you in allowing us to talk aboutthese things. I've been attending these meetings off and on for 30years now and almost all the time for 16 years and in that period oftime I don't think we've addressed a topic quite as important as whatwe're doing now. I know no one would have a lot of confidence in theeconometric measures that one would use to determine what the costs ofeliminating inflation are, but what to me comes out as most importantis the qualitative differences between these various approaches. Thebackward-looking model, which is the traditional way we've looked atit here, makes the cost very, very high. But if we can assume that wehave something like rational expectations and forward-looking-21-12/18-19/89expectations and if we can assume that we have some kind ofcredibility and strength in that credibility, then the cost becomesconsiderably less. I think Manley made a good point a while ago,which Lee picked up on, when he said maybe the worst case is the onewe had in the early '80s when we really hit the economy with a bigshock without announcing exactly what we were going to do. I don'tthink we really anticipated ourselves that rates were going to goanything like that high; and yet from this vantage point, it seems tome the costs have been relatively low. There were certainly costs,but they were relatively low. And if something like the Nealresolution passed, and if we could state our targets--I would like tosay over multiple years rather than just one year--in advance and comeclose to these and eliminate this base drift, then I think the costsare not nearly so scary as we seem to be concluding here. Finally,I'd like to pick up on Governor Angell's point about the cost of notaiming at zero inflation, which is the alternative. I think we havehad a lot of experience of that in the postwar period. I think thosecosts are very great; and there are substantial risks that evolve fromthat sort of a program. So to me the case is to try to[unintelligible] rational expectations to the extent that you can andback those up with as high credibility as you can and then the costsof doing what we'd all like to do are going to be lower than theywould be under any of the other possible alternatives.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. As always, I think history is an interesting wayto look at things; and I find this chart on the bottom of Exhibit 2 tobe fascinating with regard to where we have been. My hunch is that ifwe go back, most of the periods with bad inflationary results mayindeed have been the result of some exogenous events or shocks overwhich we had [no control], I suppose, with some exceptions. It's notmonetary policy that has been the cause of that. And it seems to methat that may be [the case] over a long period of time; this suggeststhat what we can do is just put continued pressure on this. If that'sthe way in which we can achieve the best results, I'd be reluctant tobe so committed to an objective of zero inflation that it became[unintelligible]. And I think John LaWare brings up a good point:that if we become that committed to something and then we miss itbecause of events over which we have no control then the cost of thatgets to be very, very high indeed. And I'd be reluctant to be soconstrained.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Lee.MR. HOSKINS. Let me just ask the question again, moregenerally, to anybody who wants to take it on: If you were sitting in1980 or 1979 and you were looking at the estimates that eitherFriedman or Tobin gave to Gary's point you wouldn't do anything tomonetary policy because the costs would appear so high. We are havingthe same debate now but we are looking at much lower costs. So itseems to me that the benefits, whatever they are, of a price stabilitypolicy become even more important because the costs are a lot lowernow than they would have been if we had to do this at some other pointin time. So I think we can trap ourselves with these estimates. Idon't know how they're going to come out. I know what we've done inthe past when we tried to do estimates; and what we've done in thepast is overestimate the cost, at least in several cases that I've-22-12/18-19/89looked at. So I think we have to be cautious about just saying thecosts are high and the benefits are uncertain. It seems to me that weought to look at the benefits and one, of course, probably has to dowith uncertainty premiums built into interest rates. That presumablycould be modeled. We could have some impact that would reducewhatever uncertainty premiums were there. There are a number of otherpotential benefits and I don't want to run through them now. I'm surethe staff is aware of them, but they are also aware of the difficultyof putting your arms around them.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I have to come at this necessarilyfrom a non-professional economist point of view and I happen to have ashare in trying to form policy. So as I listen to this presentation,I try to ask myself: What does it make sense to do? And I see asituation here where we've got huge uncertainties. Many of them arein the model and are admitted right up front; they necessarily have tobe there. A lot of them can't possibly be in the model, even thoughwe may know what some of them are. Then, of course, there are a wholehost of them we don't even know about that might [arise] as time goeson. It's easy to see, as Governor Seger points out, that there arepotential human costs here; and they are huge if we make a mistake.We haven't taken a look yet at what the possible second five-yearsmight be as a result of getting out to where we get in this model.And what, of course, may quite possibly be the biggest threat of allof this is the political threat: that we could very easily set out onthis course, incur all of the costs, and have the political realitiesabort the process before we got the benefits. That might be the worstof all worlds and, possibly, a fairly plausible one. So, what mightmake sense is to do two things that sound fairly simple andsimplistic, but may be a pretty good challenge in themselves. One issimply to work to get the trends moving in the right direction withoutany terribly close attention to the slope of the curve--just get themmoving in the right direction. The second is to work very hard todamp the volatility around the slope of those curves. To me the speedof advance is of secondary importance. If we can get it moving in theright direction, given all of these uncertainties, I think sometimeswe'll be able to make fairly rapid progress and other times slowprogress; sometimes we'll be doing well to hold our ground. If we getinto a recession we might even have to take one step back. Butbasically [we should] try to figure out ways to set up conditionswhere we will be able to get the slope of the curves moving in thecorrect direction over time, without having to give too terribly muchattention to any one particular time period.MR. ANGELL. I have a question for, I think, Don Kohn. Butif the others in monetary research wish to come in, that's fine. It'sdifficult sometimes to know what M2 growth path is really [apt] torestrain when we have changing opportunity costs of holding M2, forexample. So I'm wondering: If we're in an environment in which therate of interest is declining at an annual rate of 100 basis points--or as they did for a good portion of the period from June to December,I guess, declining at 250 basis points annual rate--how do we adjustM2 to know whether or not we still have restraint in place and adeclining interest rate scenario? And how, on the other hand, do weknow that we really have restraint in place in a rising interest ratescenario?-23-12/18-19/89MR. KOHN. That's a very difficult question and one that Ithought about with regard to the Committee's decision tomorrowmorning, in fact, because we do have a situation now in which M2 isrunning pretty rapidly. One can see that it's really a function ofthe drop in opportunity costs of interest rates rather than someoverrun in current-quarter GNP. At the same time, what I was going tosay tomorrow morning is that it strikes a note of caution when themoney supply moves this fast. Not many people would put money rightinto prices; in some sense, it's all a part of a very complex set ofinteractions. And the question is whether the interest rates, orperhaps exchange rates, that have gotten you those money supply growthpaths are going to lead some time in the future to higher rates andincreases in inflation. I think what we've learned over time is thatwhen the money supply grows rapidly over long periods of time, eventhough we can explain it contemporaneously by the past declines inopportunity costs, inflation rate, [unintelligible], it's a cautionarysummons. It's a warning bell going off. The P* model was an attemptto cut through all that and to say: Suppose velocity grows at itslong-run trend and output grows at its long-run trend, then how doesmoney in a statistical sense feed through to prices? And where we areright now is that P* is below P. We've got a sense of restraint on,but I think in one of Dave's charts, Exhibit 4, you can see that theprojected growth in money gets you down where there isn't anydifference between P and P* in the early part of 1990 and then itrises again when money growth eases off. I don't think there's aneasy answer to your question, Governor Angell. Ultimately, you wouldhave to crank the whole thing through a big model of interest ratesand money demand and all that sort of thing. The P* model tends tocut through it a bit. I do think that some attention to these moneygrowth rates when they get very high or very low provides a sense ofdiscipline on the central bank to make sure it's not going too far offthe track one way or another. And that's essentially what P* attemptsto do.MR. ANGELL. Well, take table 1 of Mike's December 14th memo:table 1 does show on the accelerated disinflation path much lower[money growth] rates; and I presume when interest rates are decliningtoward the end then you show somewhat higher rates.MR. KOHN. At some point you have to take account of thedecline in velocity, this so-called reentry problem.MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. KOHN. So, if nominal rates are coming down becauseinflation is coming down, at some point you've got to increase thereal money supply to take account of that drop in nominal ratesbecause velocity will react to that. But there are differentscenarios; you can do it earlier or you can do it later in some sense.MR. ANGELL. Well, Don, I guess the bottom line of myquestion is: Are we somewhat advantaged due to the fact that over thelast 30 months we've had an M2 growth rate of something between 4 and5 percent? Does this give us a better basis for watching this 5-yearscenario than if we were in a period in which we--? I guess what I'masking is: Do we have a start, in your opinion?-24-12/18-19/89MR. KOHN. I think you do, because--putting it in otherterms--what that M2 growth has done with the monetary restraint isthat it in effect contained inflation at least, so that it no longerseems to be accelerating. So you're in much better shape than if youhad started from a position in which M2 had been growing 2 percentagepoints faster and inflation was threatening to accelerate. Then youreally would have more sacrifice to make. The sacrifice ratio mightnot be different, but the total sacrifice might be. So, absolutely, Ithink by acting with restraint over the last couple of years you havesimplified or made a little less painful the job of the next 5 yearsif you were to aim at zero inflation. And by getting inflationexpectations down, as Governor Johnson pointed out, and by getting Ithink a bit of credibility, you can see it in the bond market in 1988.MR. ANGELL. But on Table 1, the Q-4 over Q-4 percentagechange for 1990, I note, is 5 percent; and that looks fairly tough todo.MR. KOHN. Fairly what?MR. ANGELL. The 1990 Q-4 over Q-4 percentage change is 5percent. That's in Table 1 of the December 14th memo.MR. JOHNSON. For M2?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. For inflation?MR. ANGELL. M2.MR. PRELL. There's not an absolute [consistency] with theother forecast materials we provided. We simplified some things anddeveloped a baseline. We don't necessarily capture all the [details].MR. ANGELL. Well, is this a velocity adjustment?MR. PRELL. [Unintelligible.] But we make a certainassumption about the natural rate of unemployment and we mechanicallyderive things that probably we would want to modify judgmentally givenall the other [unintelligible] about economic circumstances.MR. KOHN. Right.MR. ANGELL. So, during a period of relatively slow M2 growthover the last 30 months, V2 has responded somewhat upward above thistrend path.MR. KOHN. That's correct.MR. ANGELL. So we're now getting a little adjustment backthe other way?MR. KOHN. Right. Actually, consistent with the Greenbookforecast we have a 6 percent M2 growth. One of things that we'veadjusted here is an assumption about how banks and thrifts respondwith their deposit rates. It might not be quite the same [assumption]as they use in this other model. So we have 6 percent and essentiallyno change in velocity next year.-25-12/18-19/89MR. PRELL. Using the P* you get the same monetary growth aswe have.MR. KOHN. Right.MR. STOCKTON. With this particular simulation, though,somewhat slower money and somewhat higher real interest rates wereoccurring relative to the Greenbook.SPEAKER(?). Somewhat slower GNP growth.MR. STOCKTON. Somewhat slower GNP growth, right. We did notconstrain ourselves to adhere directly to the Greenbook forecast witha starting off point that assumed, in essence, somewhat tightermonetary policy in 1990.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I would think that probably mostpeople around the table agree with the notion that we want to getinflation down over time but we're talking about how fast. MikeKelley said something about the slope of the line. What I think isthe real issue here, and several people have alluded to it, is theissue of political acceptability. Bob Forrestal raised that. Thereis a question [of our] not being a part of the government set up inthe Constitution; but how long we can squeeze the--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We're going to come back to thatquestion more generally. So I want to--MR. SYRON. Okay. Well, I only wanted to touch on this. Interms of this exchange between Gary Stern and Lee Hoskins, it seems tome that in many ways we can't really compare the willingness of peopleto look at what happened in '79, '80, '81, and '85 with the currentsituation in that, as you said earlier, we were coming off a period inwhich people were afraid our capital markets were going to bedestroyed perpetually--that there was going to be [no] long-term bondmarket. And we had accelerating inflation. So there was much, muchgreater concern and much, much greater willingness to take toughaction in that circumstance. That may have something to do with thefact that of the sacrifice ratios that are shown in Exhibit 9, theratio of 1.8 for that cell [for the 1981-85 period], for whatever it'sworth, is the lowest except for the 1970-72 period when we had [price]controls, than any cell, domestic or foreign, with the exception ofthe one in France. Whereas now, I think we're in a period in whichmost people's expectation is that we have relatively stable inflation.We need to get it down over time, but we have relatively stableinflation. That is dramatically different than the other situation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. What I want to say sort of follows up on whatyou said. I definitely agree with the whole concept of pricestability; I think we ought to state it as a goal and it ought to be areal goal. I really do think there's something sort of even moralabout it--that basically people ought to be able to expect somestability in the purchasing power of the currency and not have toconduct a lot of high search costs associated with the anticipation of12/18-19/89prices. But having said all that, there are a couple of technicalthings I wanted to ask. First, even if one agrees with that, I stillhave trouble deciding on a definition of price stability. I thinkwhat we came up with in association with the language in the Neal billwas reasonably acceptable, because I honestly do have trouble withtrying to say it's the level of the CPI, or the level of the PPI, orthe deflator. There are so many difficulties associated with pinningit to any particular strict quantitative measure that I'm not sureit's realistic. So, it seems the definition of price stability has tohave some flexibility associated with it within a narrow range. Now,I don't know exactly how to do it, but I think if we agree on pricestability we really ought to spend a lot of time on how we want todefine it. Secondly, I think it is important to distinguish thebenefits between stabilizing the inflation rate and stabilizing atsome concept of price stability. In theory, I think if you assumethat people could always anticipate inflation growing at a specificrate I'm not sure the cost of pegging the inflation rate is that muchgreater than the cost of stabilizing the price level. But I don'tbelieve you can do that this way; I'm not sure you could stabilize theinflation rate. But the fact is that if people could always beassured that prices were going to grow at 4 percent, they could takethat into account just like a stable price level. The question I haveis: Are relative prices somehow better behaved in a stable price levelenvironment than they are in a stable inflation rate environment? Idon't know; I'm asking. Is there a reason empirically ortheoretically to believe that relative prices of goods and servicesare more predictable in a price level stability environment versus aninflation rate stability environment?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me stop you right there. Thegeneral question that you raised is really the next topic that we willaddress after coffee. So, let's take a 15 minute break and [return].[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd like to put on the table now somespecific questions relating to our [unintelligible]. Actually, we maywant to combine a couple of them. I'll just read them and put themout on the table as an extension of what we have been doing: Do theCommittee members believe that there are significant advantages intargeting stability in the general price level as opposed to seekingto establish a steady low rate of inflation? This has come up severaltimes but has not been fully addressed. Combining with that: Is aprecise timetable for moving to the ultimate objective importanteither as a self discipline or for expectational reasons or would itbe sufficient simply to focus on maintaining progress in thedisinflationary direction? These are essentially the questions thatGovernor Kelley raised early on and they really are quite relevant tohow we move from our general analytical view of the immediate periodto something somewhat more closely related to policy initiatives. Whowould like to start us off?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Would you repeat the first questionas you stated it?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do the Committee members believe thatthere are significant advantages in targeting stability in the generalprice level as opposed to seeking to establish a steady low rate of12/18-19/89inflation? That is, are we looking for zero inflation or are wewilling to accept, say, 4-1/2 percent?MR. JOHNSON. Let me just repeat the last question I left onthe table, which I think relates directly to your question about whatare the benefits of an inflation rate target versus a price levelstability target. I was talking to Bob Parry during the break andraised another question, which is: If you have an exogenous shock, asupply shock that changed the level of prices either up or down--itdoesn't matter which way you look at it, I guess--would you want to goback to the old level or would you want simply to move forward interms of stabilizing the new shock level? And what are the costs andbenefits of that? But I wanted an answer to that question I had aboutrelative prices.MR. GREENSPAN. Manley, if I might, I'd just say that Iwonder whether that's really an answerable question without knowingthe form of the shock. Clearly, it's the type of thing that we alwaysaddress when we see--MR. JOHNSON. What do you mean?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, for example, it makes a bigdifference when what we're dealing with is a $20 oil shock or a $3 oilshock, or a--MR. JOHNSON. Let's say a big shock.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. What I'm trying to get at is thatI'm not sure that you can answer that in the abstract. Can you?MR. JOHNSON. Well, yes. I would think so.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let's find out if somebody can.MR. STOCKTON. There is some empirical evidence relative tothat point that there is indeed a correlation between the variabilityof relative prices and the level of inflation. Most of thatcorrelation can be explained not by inflation causing relative pricesto vary a lot, but by the fact that there have been episodes whenrelative prices have changed a lot and that has been associated witheither accommodative policy to those shocks or just a significant andpersistent effect on inflation for some short-run period of time. Butthere is some evidence that there is causality from inflation torelative price variability as well. So there's more noise in theprices the higher the rate of inflation. There is also some weakevidence suggesting that the variance of the inflation rate isassociated with the level of inflation, meaning that you have morevariability to overall inflation rates at 4 percent than you would atzero. But that evidence is weak, particularly if you [confine]yourself to industrial economies. There have been some countries thathave run relatively high rates of inflation but it hasn't beenextremely variable and other countries that have had low rates ofinflation but it has been somewhat more variable. So I think there'ssome weak evidence in both those cases that that sort of variabilityand uncertainty is associated with inflation, but it's not strong.MR. JOHNSON. What about the shock?-28-12/18-19/89MR. HOOPER. In terms of what the models might suggest there,for adaptive expectations models, backward-looking models, the oilprice shock will have an impact on the price level for a time. Andthis could work into the wage/price dynamics and have an inflationaryeffect. Now, if you had a system where zero inflation was expected sothat a relative price shock was more forward looking, the inflationaryeffects generally would be small.MR. PARRY. The concern I have with having an inflation rateobjective of, say, 1 percent, for example, is that if you do have anexogenous shock and it is fairly substantial and if these exogenousshocks over time are not random, I think you probably would look backover a period of time--say, 10 years--and find that you had an actualinflation experience that was quite different from what you wanted,which was the 1 percent. It seems to me it is much safer and moredifficult at least to try to maintain price level stability.MR. GREENSPAN. Still on the table are the questions that Iput on plus Manley's addition.MR. PARRY. Well, on the second question as to whether aspecific timetable is necessary, I think we would want to get enhancedcredibility and I would assume that that would be a component of it.But we do [need to] set off our objectives over some time frame thatpeople consider [relevant]. I wouldn't think 10 years would be one;perhaps we would even have some pattern of achievement over, say, a5-year period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I have been repeatedly shocked, or I guessdismayed, by the level of nonchalance evidenced by some of mycolleagues in my previous incarnation on how they felt about thecurrent level of inflation. We have sat here at the Federal AdvisoryCouncil meetings and talked about the economy and almost had to dragout of them some level of concern about inflation. That puzzles me.I'm not sure whether it is because so much more of our economy isindexed today than it was perhaps 10 or 15 years ago or because wehave been through a period in the late '70s and early '80s of highinflation and somehow survived and, therefore, like a battle-scarredsoldier, the second time over the top is not quite as fearsome as thefirst time. But it does bother me. In specific comment on thequestion, I'm bothered by the definition. If zero means no increasein prices not adjusted for technology or quality then I think zero isan unacceptable target. On the other hand, a stable low rate ofinflation bothers me because I think that any level of inflation, aslong as it is perceived as inflation by the public, contributes to thelow rate of savings that we have. You see an exaggeration of it inthe Soviet Union where people convert rubles to goods and there's acertain amount of buy-now attitude because next year the price isgoing to be that much higher. I think that's an unhealthy kind ofenvironment. So, I would be willing to try to develop a policy thatwould lead us to a level of price increase on an annual basis thatreflected, in some sense, the real value added in that price increase.As far as setting visible targets and time frames for achieving thosetargets, I go back to the comment that I made out of turn earlier, andI apologize for that, which was that if we set a target up and thendon't get it--. If Babe Ruth had hit that home run in the 1932 World-29-12/18-19/89Series, whether he pointed to the center field stands or not wouldn'thave made any difference. But, [after pointing to the stands], if hehadn't hit it he'd have been seen as a fool.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, if he hadn't hit it, he never wouldhave been seen as the ball game's--MR. LAWARE. But having pointed, I think we run the distinctdanger of [losing] credibility as well as confidence and then we getinto the position, politically, where we as an institution become muchmore vulnerable. Having said all that, I think that we are in aterribly difficult position. I go back to what Jerry Corrigan saidearlier: that we are no longer dealing with a set of tools in terms ofmonetary policy that can have as much of an impact on the economy asthey once did, because we are so surrounded by external forces likeirresponsible fiscal policies and the fact that we are operating inglobal markets and a global economy. So it is a very tough menu thatwe've set out for ourselves. I'm reluctant to give definitive targetswithin time frames. I'm also reluctant to try to go for somethingcalled "zero" without having a better definition of what that reallymeans.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I was thinking [you meant Manley].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Wrong Committee.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I have been thinking a lot about thetwo questions that you have raised. I have a loose idea rollingaround in my head, and I'm not even sure I like it, but let me throwit out anyway. The idea would be that the stated policy of theCommittee would be couched in terms of a goal of price behavior thatwould be broadly compatible with what we had, say, in the '50s andearly '60s. In other words, we wouldn't get hung up with one[indicator such as the] CPI or deflator, but we'd state a goal interms of trying to return to a pattern that had the characteristics ofthat [earlier period] and we could say that we were going to try toachieve that in the time frame of the mid-'90s. So, it would not beall that specific in terms of a particular price index and it wouldallow for some wiggle for shocks. It certainly would not be timespecific but it would be [unintelligible], Mr. Chairman, as kind of ananswer to both of your questions.But I do want to go back to what I was trying to say before,in part because Mr. [Parry] didn't understand me but Mr. [Prell] did,just so there is no misunderstanding--or hopefully, none. Even if westated a goal in a way that had some give in it but was certainly acommitment that I think would have some credibility gains to it, Istill think that, based on what we know and what we have experienced,the costs of achieving even that goal are going to be large. [Theymight not be] precisely as shown on Mike's page 14, line 1, obviously;I don't know--nobody knows. But I think it's prudent to have in mindthat they might be. Then the question becomes: What can be done thatworks in the direction of reducing those costs? Again, Bob, I didn'tmean to suggest that credibility was worth zip. But I don't thinkit's prudent for this institution in the political world in which welive to bet the ranch on that because if we're wrong we've got a heck-30-12/18-19/89of a problem on our hands. So, if we're going to do this, Mr.Chairman, I think we have to be very mindful of the need one way oranother to try and find--or encourage others to find--policies outsideof monetary policy that would complement achieving that goal in theleast costly way possible, recognizing that under the best ofcircumstances the costs are not immaterial.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. On the first question on stability in the pricelevel or a steady low rate, in theory I think stability in the pricelevel is the right answer. Practically speaking, if we could achievea steady low rate of inflation, I think it would be a heck of a lotbetter than what we've seen for many years. I think it's important inlooking at the price level to look at it over long periods of time. Iwouldn't feel that if we picked the price level and we had a littleinflation that that should be immediately reversed with deflation.But that's, of course, implicit in that. That's why as a practicalmatter I think I would find a steady low rate of inflation acceptable.On the second point, if we don't have a timetable I think that we'retoo easily [unintelligible]. I think we need it as a matter of selfdiscipline and I think it could have positive effects on expectations.But I don't object to what Jerry has suggested in terms of a generalpoint in time when we would like to arrive there. I have a difficulttime in our trying to set out a specific path of how we are to getthere because that runs into the risk of what John was saying--anembarrassment along the way and all of a sudden we will have beenderailed altogether. My general point would be--I've said this atearlier meetings and I've heard some other people say it today--that Iworry about whether we really have the public and political support todo this now. I don't think there's a broad understanding outside ofthis room--and John your comments would reflect that--of the costs ofa continuing, say, 4-1/2 percent rate of [inflation].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's hold it; that's our next question.MR. MELZER. Okay. Well, I won't lecture on that. But myonly point is that, even though I support this direction and I supportsome kind of a timetable on it as opposed to [accepting] the general[unintelligible], I think we have to recognize that our timing is notgreat right now. This is not a good time to be out beating the drumon zero inflation because we don't have the support and we run therisk of getting derailed in the short run.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Tom, I think the reason why it isimportant now is that if we are going in the other direction we verywell better know what the costs are to the ultimate goal[unintelligible]. In other words, I frankly have learned a great dealfrom this exercise by knowing what type of space we have on the otherside if we are forced to go in that direction.MR. MELZER. What I'm saying, Alan--I'm not tending in theother direction--is that we have to be politically smart about how weunveil this thing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh, I don't disagree with that. I'msaying that this is the right time to have this conversation.-31-12/18-19/89MR. MELZER. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's probably the wrong time to go outand tell the public what we talked about.MR. MELZER. That's exactly what I'm saying.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry I didn't intend to interruptyou. Are you--MR. MELZER. No, you made my point much better than I could.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Dick.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I will comment on the two specificsof your question but, in terms of looking at the cost/benefits of thisissue, I think Jerry's point is well taken: We don't know on thattable. I think it's extraordinarily useful but [unintelligible] whatprecisely the sacrifice ratio would be. There has been a lot ofdiscussion of the cost/benefits in present value terms. I think itcould be interesting, possibly, to do an exercise to see what sort ofsacrifice ratio you'd have to have so we'd know how much weight to puton the credibility issue to break even [unintelligible] that works.Because we're still operating in, at least--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How many people we throw out of work isacceptable publicly?MR. SYRON. No, I'm not saying publicly. Actually, what I'msaying is: How many people we throw out of work now will be made upfor in present value terms by the [employment] gains we'll have lateron?MS. SEGER. As long as they're all in Massachusetts!MR. SYRON. It's getting to be that way now.MR. BLACK. That's where a lot of them are.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The real difficulty is that we cannottalk in terms of cost/benefits on the unemployment rate. It is debtthat we--MR. SYRON. You can talk in terms of GNP, though.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You can that, yes.MR. SYRON. That's what I was thinking.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You can, yes.MR. SYRON. I was thinking of present value GNP. But to getto your particular questions, I would find targeting something like asteady low rate of inflation acceptable. I find it consistent withthe statements that you've made in the past about the level; the kindof numbers that you have used are, in fact, the kind of numbers thatJerry used. I think it's consistent with your statement that thatlevel really would not seriously affect economic decisionmaking. As12/18-19/89far as the timetable goes, I think it's hard to say yea or nay. Mynotes on other people's comments around this table suggest as wellthat [the feeling] is sort of yes, but not precise. And that's whereI would come out, in part because of the concerns that John LaWareexpressed. I don't think we get anywhere if we just say we're goingto get there but we're not going to tell you by when. I think we haveto give something like a two-year band or something, depending on thenumber that we pick--saying when we want to get there, say, 1994-96 or1995-97, or something like that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, what's wrong with the 1990s, asJerry--MR. SYRON. I don't think there's anything wrong. I think ithas a nice added--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Again, I don't want to seem like I'mmarketing that idea because I'm not sure I believe it myself. But thefact of the matter is that there is almost this mystique about thatperiod in the '50s and early '60s. People kind of look back and thinkabout it and they say: "Hey, wow." So what you're trying to captureis not a statistical phenomenon but almost a kind of state of mind.MR. LAWARE. Well, we better make sure that we can do it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's the other question that theChairman won't let us discuss until later.MR. LAWARE. Yes, I know.MR. SYRON. Which is the most important.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, the theoretically right answers to yourquestions are that we ought to have zero inflation with a precisetimetable. I think those theoretical answers are wrong in practicebecause we need too much luck beyond our own powers to achieve that.I think we have to be careful here that we don't let perfection becomethe enemy of improvement. I would be quite happy to see us pursue agoal of disinflation over time and not necessarily in a straight line.And if we ever get to the point where we get that state of mind thatwe had in the late '50s and early '60s, then I think we could haveanother conversation around this table to figure our where we'regoing. I doubt if anyone of us will be here, however, to have thatdiscussion because I think it's fairly far out there. I think weought not be precise on the timetable because I'm with John: to statea goal and miss it undermines our credibility. I think what peoplelook at is the progress made; and if over time we can make progress oninflation, that's about all that people realistically expect out ofus. I'd be happy to leave it at that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. I would like to associate myself, first ofall, with what John LaWare said about the perception of inflation.I've been bothered by this for a long time; as I've been saying atseveral meetings, the people I talk to in my District really don't12/18-19/89seem to have much concern about inflation at 4-1/2 percent. As I saidearlier, I think they would if it were at 6 or 7 percent. I don'treally understand why this is happening. I suspect, John, that inaddition to any indexation and so on, that we've had a period ofrelative prosperity in the country and that the fear is greater of theloss through a recession than from having inflation at 4-1/2 percent.Therein lies our problem, basically.Now, on the specific questions: I think that zero is an idealbut it's [not] all that practical to attain. So, I would be happywith a relatively low level of inflation; I think the trend line ismore important than any actual number. I'd be quite content to goback to that nice period of the '50s and '60s when we had relativelylow inflation. On the time frame, it seems to me that we're between arock and a hard place in some sense. Because if we don't announcesome kind of a time frame, our credibility will be affected and peoplewon't believe that we're going to do it. On the other hand, I alsoagree that if we set a precise target and miss it, our credibilitywill be hurt. It seems to me that the way out of it is to have aninternal target of, say, 5 years, and try to achieve that, but notannounce that to the public--but perhaps announce some kind of arange, as was suggested earlier.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Well, I think we've gotten handicapped by thebelief that inflation is a monetary phenomenon and that it doesn'tmake any difference what anyone else does--that the central bank hasthe power to control the price level and that it's for us to decide.I would strongly prefer for us to control the price level rather thanto aim for zero; zero inflation is not a satisfactory target as far asI'm concerned. With zero inflation targeting, I believe that eventswill occur; and if we always in a sense let those events be positivebut never negative, we're going to end up with an inflation ratethat's unsatisfactory. So, I want to go beyond that and I want tohave some periods in which we have deflation as well as periods inwhich we have inflation. I believe it's a commitment to a price levelthat is the most important. If we have a drought and the prices offood and fiber products rise and we say we didn't cause that drought,well, then, what happens when we have more favorable weather thanusual? Do you think we're going to let that kind of supply side[shock] show up as favorable? Do you think we're going to say: "Gee,we're going to take the rate of inflation down"? If we are, then ofcourse we're where we ought to be. It just seems to me that the caseis so strong for wanting the American people to be able to buy homesat a 5 percent mortgage interest rate. People ought to be able to geta 30-year fixed rate at 5 percent. And the benefit to that, it seemsto me, is unusually high. There is a benefit for the FederalGovernment with its debt; the higher the debt grows as a percentage ofGNP the more benefit there is in having low interest rates. Thegreater our external debt the more benefit there is of having lowerinterest rates. To me, these benefits are overwhelming and they areso apparent. We are a reserve currency country. And my goodness wehave seigniorage gains. If the world uses dollars for payments, thatcosts us zero interest rates. It's just very convenient to have thereserve currency position. And we're not competing with the averagecountry in the world; we're competing with the best competitors inthat regard.-34-12/18-19/89Finally, it seems to me that there's basic integrityinvolved. I just don't understand why anyone would want to say theywanted to participate in a lack of integrity, meaning we're [just]making promises. It's our job to make promises in regard to thepurchasing power of U.S. dollars. To me it's a moral question ofintegrity. And I cannot participate--I cannot serve on a Board and anFOMC that doesn't have this integrity. Excuse me for being soextreme! But I don't know how else to deal with it. Now, as for aspecific timetable, yes. I'm willing to go slow and do it by 1995.And I believe we ought to tell people we're going to do it because Ibelieve the costs of doing it are lower if we tell them. Excuse mefor being so one-sided on this.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Angell-esque.MR. HOSKINS. You feel strongly about that Wayne!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'm sort of on the side of theAngells in this!MR. KELLEY. [I knew someone was] going to say that!MR. BLACK. Well, I shouldn't have said it, I guess. Itlooks to me like the first question breaks down into two points: oneis whether we ought to seek a zero rate of inflation or a steady lowrate; the second is whether the Fed should target a zero rate ofinflation or a stable price level. And there are a lot of costs. Donmentioned a while ago shoe leather costs in trying to minimize one'sbalances because of a rise in nominal rates and interactions with thetax code. When you have inflation of any kind, even a low level, youhave all these nonsocial institutions that rise up and use resourcesto help you beat inflation. So, clearly, I think what we ought to dois to aim for a zero rate. Governor LaWare raised some interestingquestions about this because he was saying, I think, that the existingindexes don't capture all the improvements in quality. That iscertainly true. And, therefore, I was glad to see that you got theNeal Subcommittee to. adopt your definition of inflation, which is muchless specific in that we don't have inflation when it no longeraffects the decisions of the decisionmakers.Now, with regard to the second part of the question--theprice level at which we ought to aim, or the zero inflation rate--Ithink we ought to aim at a particular price index, as I think GovernorAngell was saying. Otherwise, I think we're apt to get shocks of allsorts [that induce] deviations from that zero rate. In effect, that'swhere the political pressures are going to arise. So, unless we undothat if it's an upward pressure or undo it if it's a downward pressureand go back to our original target, then I think we're going to haveprice level drift that is not unlike the base drift that we had whenwe targeted the monetary aggregates.MR. JOHNSON. Why is there a reason, though, to believe thatthose kinds of shocks will be different than random--or biased to onedirection?12/18-19/89MR. BLACK. Well, I just think that our whole economic systemhas a bias in favor of inflation. I even think that the FederalReserve has some bias in favor of inflation.MR. JOHNSON. But I think we're talking consensus here.Theoretically, [if] we pursued a zero inflation rate target and wewere not influenced by the politics that were coming later orwhatever, why would we expect those shocks to be anything but random?MR. BLACK. In that kind of world I think that's what youwould expect; but in a political world I don't think they would [berandom]. The answer really, Manley, is that they would be purelyrandom, but it's the political issue that enters in.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the best way to answer that isto count all of the letters that I have received in the last two yearscomplaining that interest rates are too low.MR. BLACK. That expresses it; I wish I'd thought of that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The answer is zero.MR. JOHNSON. Well, you haven't talked to my mother-in-law!They're way too low for her.MR. KELLEY. Absolutely.MR. BLACK. Well, my mother-in-law is an exception to a lotof other--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's put it this way: they don't writeme.MR. PARRY. Do you think the probability of positive energyprice shocks is the same as the probability of negative price shocks?MR. JOHNSON. Well, I don't know what the probability is. Ican't think of any reason why the probabilities of negative orpositive shocks would be any different.MR. PARRY. In energy?MR. JOHNSON. Well, I honestly believe, personally, thatthere's a higher probability of a downward price shock in energy thanan upward one right now.MR. KELLEY. You're right.MR. BLACK. Well, let me answer the second question. I gotus off track I can see. As to the timetable, I would come out rightwhere Governor Angell did on that; and that's where you came out, Mr.Chairman, in your testimony before the Neal Subcommittee. I think inthe interest of credibility we need to pin ourselves down to getthere. If all these simulations we did are in any sense right, youhave less painful results when expectations are forward-looking ratherthan based entirely on past experience. So I would like to see thattied down to a 5-year period, realizing that if we don't hit it that-36-12/18-19/89we would have a few problems on that. But I think if we had thetarget we'd be more likely to hit it than if we didn't.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. It seems to me that the Federal Open MarketCommittee is a policymaking body and that we really can't makemonetary policy decisions in a vacuum. It's awfully awkward to beslavish to any mechanistic goal regardless of the events or theenvironment around us because the environment is constantly changing.And I think decisions have to take that into account. By definition,certainly less inflation is best. But there are these measurementissues, which Governor LaWare has brought up, and I think there areothers as well. Indeed, if we were to aim at absolute zero inflationthat, in effect, might very well be destabilizing for parts of theeconomy. So it seems to me that a more realistic goal is a steady butlow level of inflation. Really, if the level of inflation is movingdown and we are continuing to make progress, that's okay. But if it'smoving up that's not all right, and I would expect us as a Committeeto react to that. With regard to the timing question, for the samereasons it seems to me that it would be very awkward to be precise.Again, if we are making progress that would be the desirableobjective. But because there are so many events out there over whichwe have absolutely no control but that could have an impact oninflation, if we were to be precise about a time I think we'd be putinto a corner and have an economy that we really were not able tocontrol.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. On the timetable question, I think we canestablish a relatively specific timetable because I think we have toprovide more rather than less. In other words, I would suggest thatif we wanted to do that--say, pick 1995 or whatever in the middle ofthe decade--we should also explain what else we expect to happen.What are the accompanying developments? What are we really looking atas best we can judge the situation? That includes being specificabout such things as our not anticipating anything extraordinaryhappening to energy prices or to the dollar or whatever. I don'tthink it's credible to simply say the target is zero inflation by 1995and let it go at that. It seems to me that we should provide moreinformation, and then as things unfold we're in a good position toexplain why we either are or are not achieving the path we set forourselves, or why we have to make modifications because of events wecan't control. I don't think that's terribly different, frankly, fromwhat we're doing right now with the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony. We'resimply going further. There's going to be a lot of uncertainty, butthat's always the case. And if we're providing more information sothat people can understand what our true objective is, and thecircumstances surrounding that objective, and the conditioningassumptions and so forth--if we put it in those terms--I think we cando it. But I think to just throw it out there would get us in troublefrom a number of different perspectives. So, I wouldn't justestablish a zero inflation objective by some time period. As far asthe question of the price level or the rate of inflation: yes,theoretically, I think we want a steady price level. But in practiceI'll take Ed Boehne's suggestion: let's get the rate of inflation downand then we'll worry about what we do next after that.12/18-19/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. On the first question, targeting a stableinflation level would bother me because that implies we can come upwith a specific number and I don't think we have any historical basisfor assuming that we could maintain that particular number. It seemsto me we would have more explaining to do using the zero inflation.In my mind, at least, that implies the definition that's already beenadvanced as far as inflation not entering into the business decision.It seems to me that we give the Committee a little more latitude bytaking into account facts and circumstances as they are developing atany particular time. In my mind we do not get a locked-in mentality;that might not be the appropriate thing to do. So I would favor theconcept of moving toward zero inflation with the understanding of whatthat really meant. I also think that a timetable is important. It'simportant to give us credibility and it's also important on the otherside of it to give us a lack of credibility. It seems to me that theidea Jerry was talking about--saying the mid-'90s or something likethat--would put us in the position of being able to take into accountwhat was actually going on without doing any serious damage. Butdirection is important. And, given the inflationary [bias] both inthe economy and probably within the FOMC, at least on an historicalbasis, it appears that if we don't formulate good policies to try toget to where inflation is not a factor in making business decisionsour decisions are going to lead us inadvertently toward moreinflation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In response to yourspecific questions, my desire would be to achieve some stability inthe general price level provided that that means [stability] at a lowinflation rate. Just to stabilize a general price level could be atany level. If we were to set upon that course today, I'd assume thatwhat we would do is maintain price level stability between 4 and 5percent, which would be acceptable to me at least. With regard to thetimetable, I like the idea of some statement much like Jerry Corriganhas set forth--that is, the mid-1990s. As you testify twice a year inHumphrey-Hawkins, for example, and many other times that you have tomake public statements, I think you could address those issues thateither bring us closer to that goal of price stability in the mid-1990s or away from it. I think it's going to be difficult, if notimpossible, to achieve price stability at some level absent some helpfrom the fiscal side. And I think time after time you have to beatthat drum. This gives you the opportunity to do that. There is oneother issue that keeps coming to mind and that is whether or not wehave the authority--and I'm talking about legal authority, implicit orotherwise--to adopt a goal of price stability, price stability beingzero inflation. We have a number of pieces of legislation that tellus what our goals should be. And they number as many as 10 if you getall the pieces of legislation together. So, if we were to say that asof now we're going to set upon the course of trying to achieve pricestability, meaning zero inflation or thereabouts, by the mid-1990s,and as a result--whether by our making it or not--we got into arecession, I think we'd be challenged as to whether or not our goalwas legal. We can say internally all we want about price stabilitybeing at or near zero, but when we get in public I think you'retalking about something else.-38-12/18-19/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Very interesting point.MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, I don't have the wording in front ofme, but Section 2(A) of the Federal Reserve Act says in the firstsentence, before you get to the Humphrey-Hawkins stuff, somethingabout the growth of money and credit at rates consistent with theexpansion of the productive capacity of the economy. And I think youcould interpret that, with a view to promoting price stability[unintelligible]--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If you go about three or four sentenceslater it probably contradicts that.MR. KOHN. Not quite. Other parts of the Humphrey-HawkinsAct may, but the part in the Federal Reserve Act I'm not sure does.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It says good; do it well. There was oneissue I meant to raise with respect to the question of whether or nota stable inflation rate is different from zero or thereabouts. In ouranalysis of causes of changes in stock prices and other calculationswe make which relate to the real cost of capital: What is the impacton that variable of the level of inflation? My recollection is thatthere's a fairly significant relationship, implying that the higherthe rate of inflation the higher the risk premiums associated with thereal cost of capital. Another way of putting it is that the higherthe rate of inflation over a long period of time, other things equal,the higher is the real cost of capital. I don't remember how robustthat conclusion is, but it was not bad as I recall.MR. JOHNSON. I believe that is true if--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This was just strictly an historicalcorrelation. You can pick up some of the variation in the real costof capital from [unintelligible]. Lee Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I probably should start with a disclaimer thatWayne and I didn't get together and have a coordinated statement here.With that in place, let me start out by saying that we are a centralbank and if we don't speak out for price stability I don't know who isgoing to do it. The integrity of the currency, whether it's a reservecurrency or whether it's our own domestic currency, seems to me to bean extremely important matter. If you want to say it's a moralmatter, I'm comfortable with that as well. There was a Governor here,Governor Wallich, who at one point in time made an argument, if I canparaphrase him, that a society that allows for inflation is a societythat lies to its people. I think he made that statement, and some ofyou may remember it, in this Board Room. And I don't think that's[in]appropriate at all. One point is that if the public isn'tcomfortable with lower rates of inflation, then it's incumbent upon usto do the educating because no one else is going to do that. Withrespect to this idea of zero inflation and some definitional problems,I admit that they are there. I think Governor LaWare said it verywell: that there may be improvements in quality that we need tocapture. But saying that implies that we know what those might be--1or 2 percent it seems to be. We could work to adjust the priceindexes to take account of that just as well as saying that we canallow 1 or 2 percent inflation. The zero inflation concept, at leastas I understand it, really is tied to a price level. Without the-39-12/18-19/89price level tie you have no anchor. I think that's the same thingGovernor Angell was saying. It isn't mechanistic; it doesn't say thatwe have to react quarter-by-quarter or even year-by-year to aparticular set of circumstances that cause inflation to rise. What itdoes say is that over time--and I'm comfortable with your definitionin the Neal Amendment--that the price level really shouldn't rise.That implies some declines in the price level as well as rises. Andthat gets at your question about shocks; I would expect them to be onboth sides. Over periods of 5 or 10 years under a zero inflationpolicy, which is really a price level policy, I would expect that wewould have a stable price level.MR. JOHNSON. But you're saying we wouldn't aggressively easeor tighten if there were supply shocks?MR. HOSKINS. I think the Chairman answered that in the sensethat we have to decide what kind of shock it is. If it is a drought,I wouldn't do anything. I don't see how anything would help. Weexpect offsetting results on the other side of that. With an oilprice shock, it depends on how countries respond to it. That is, ifthey accommodate it--and this Committee at the point in time of theinitial oil price shock, if I remember correctly, decided to partiallyaccommodate it--in order to lessen--MR. JOHNSON. I'm thinking of the negative type shock likedebt--anything that would shock the level down. I think you've got tobe willing to say that.MR. HOSKINS. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. Okay, so you'd aggressively ease in that case?MR. ANGELL. I would respond to a drought.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, how would you respond to a stockmarket decrease?MR. ANGELL. I wouldn't respond by providing the liquidity tomake certain that that event didn't cause the demand for money todrive up rates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In order words, you would supply onlythat much which you feel [unintelligible] and the demand for moneygrowth would drive up--MR. ANGELL. Well, that's the first thing I'd do--supply.Then I would decide whether or not that financial event was going toprecipitate any--MR. JOHNSON. Deflationary impact.MR. ANGELL. --any deflationary impact and I'd watchcommodity prices to see whether that was the case or not.MR. HOSKINS. Let me finish off, then. I would see us makingthe same kinds of decisions and struggling with the same problems thatwe struggle with now, except we would have a framework or anchor pointthat we were working against out there. That's the advantage that I-40-12/18-19/89see, though. I don't see this as being an automatic process. Thereare uncertainties and judgments that we're all going to have to engagein but we would have a frame of reference. And all I meant by zeroinflation policy was essentially to anchor ourselves to a price levelout there some place in the future. The last point: I generallybelieve that people operate more efficiently when they have moreinformation, which is the point that Gary Stern raised. I think weought to be perfectly candid and tell people what we think theconsequences of our actions are going to be; and I'd indicate thatthere are circumstances in which we could get thrown off our pathtemporarily, but that we're after this objective over time. So toanswer your questions: Yes, I would prefer the price stabilityobjective; and I think the time frame is important because it is a wayof providing information to people. I don't know the magnitude ofthat. It may be closer to where Jerry thinks it is--not worth much,but something--or closer to where I think it might be, which is worthmore. The third question that you raised was: Is there somethingdifferent about a 4 percent rate as opposed to a zero rate? I thinkthere's a qualitative difference because I'm anchoring it to the pricelevel. If you're taking 4 percent, or even a low rate of 2 percent,you're arguing that there's some kind of trade-off there. And ifthere's a trade-off there, then why don't we just pick 4 percent? Ormaybe a circumstance will come along where 6 percent looks good. Idon't think that's an appropriate thing to be building into people'splanning horizons. I've said my piece.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I apologize for jumping the gun alittle before the break; I didn't know where you were going with thesecond half of the afternoon. But let me add another point. It seemsto me that if we set a specific time objective two things are going tofollow--the second from the first. If we think we're getting too muchmedia attention and Congressional attention now on the subject ofmonetary policy, we "ain't seen nothing yet!" If we announce a firmpolicy and proceed to put things stringently in force toward that, Ithink we're going to have people looking over our shoulder like wenever dreamed of before. Indeed, we're starting to look over our ownshoulder, which leads to my second point. And that is, I think in theinterest of our own credibility that we would run a risk--it may beeven more than a risk, it would almost be inevitable I think--that wewould have to overshoot. We would have to set policies that wouldovershoot making that goal, and we would run a very severe risk if wedid that. That leads me to say that, as a practical matter, it seemsto me that we would adopt a very tight specific time frame only if weintended to be absolutely single-minded about meeting it. That wouldmean meeting it--whatever shocks might show up, whatever uncertaintiesthere may be in the information that's available to us, and whetherthey should happen to have severe consequences--regardless of whatother national priorities might come along that would have an impactupon by monetary policy. And it's hard, indeed impossible, to foreseeall those things. When I spoke in terms of getting the trend in theright direction, Jerry, I'd be perfectly comfortable with a definitionof getting a trend in the right direction as: having a properly andcarefully defined but very general definition of price stability bythe mid-'90s. That's a level of specificity that I'd be happy to livewith as being a way to move toward getting trends in the rightdirection and sustaining them.-41-12/18-19/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I just realized as I sat here how old I'm gettingbecause I took the first economic courses I ever took in the '50s,before any of you were born! But I will tell you what they wereteaching then--especially Manley, pardon me.MR. JOHNSON. Hey, I was born before the '50s!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. 1850?MS. SEGER. That's what I was referring to--1850! Seriously,first of all, in the '50s we were taught that deficit spending was not[only] okay but it was great because we had to prop up this weak kindof economy. Secondly, some of the gurus of the day--people likeSamuelson and Slichter--were saying that you needed to have inflationof 2 to 3 percent per year to assure prosperity. Again, none of youremember this but you can go down to the library and pull out thebooks and check to see if I'm right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I remember.MR. BLACK. I remember, too.MS. SEGER. The other persons from [unintelligible]! Anyway,I think it does state something about how the pendulum has swung.Frankly, as a conservative, I'm delighted to see this because I dobelieve in price stability. I also remember the early 1960s; in fact,I worked in Washington in the early '60s when we got those quite goodresults with the inflation measures. But the interesting thing, as Irecall that period, was that it wasn't really planned. It was like aeureka experience. We got it and said: "Oh gee, isn't this nice!" Wehad this good record thrust upon us, which we then of course lost inthe mid-'60s with the escalation of the Vietnam War.MR. JOHNSON. But the country was on the Bretton Woodsstandard; there was a law in place.MS. SEGER. Yes, but--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, we have an old [unintelligible]on that stuff.MR. JOHNSON. But I'm saying those rules of the Bretton Woodsarrangement were followed and there was a discipline in place.MS. SEGER. Yes, but we had better inflation performance inthe first half of the '60s than we had in the late '50s. Anyhow, mypunch line in all this is that I think it's very good to state as ageneral objective that we want price stability. And by pricestability I mean just be that vague; don't say whether we want to castthe CPI for October in concrete and make that the base or whether wewant to do something else. Set a general target and move with ourpolicies in that direction but without specific numerical targetsbecause, as several people around the table have said, we're going tohave this test every single week or every single month. Even if we'remaking general progress, to the extent that we miss a specific target,the financial markets particularly are going to pick this up and run12/18-19/89with it and conclude that we're complete failures, whereas in fact wemight be batting .800 instead of 1,000, which in most ball games isn'tbad. So, I would be opposed to setting specific targets or selectingspecific indicators of inflation because I think it would be verycounterproductive. As to one of your points, Lee, about saying thatwe're going to impose price level stability even though maybe mostpeople don't care about price level stability, these are valuejudgments. And if we get too far our of line with what the people inthis country want, it's going to be like the government of EastGermany and you're going to be put out of office.MR. HOSKINS. What I said, Martha, was that I think it'sincumbent upon us as central bankers to educate people to the value ofstable prices. On this other point that has come up a number of timesabout our credibility and that we run a big risk of loosing it: if Iread market yield curves correctly, I don't think we have it to thedegree that we might. The markets are not telling us that theybelieve right now that we want price stability. It seems to me thatthey are telling us we're going to have 4 or 5 percent inflation.MS. SEGER. Yes, but America is bigger than financialmarkets. You know, we sometimes forget that. The people who putgovernments in place are not all on Wall Street or in investmentbanking houses, etc. Anyway, it's a very big challenge. And I thinkwe have made progress in going from the '50s when, as I said, it wassort of accepted and even thought desirable to have inflation. So,something that's vague and general, in my judgment, would still make acontribution.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The last question on this subject hasbeen discussed peripherally. Let's start with Roger's formulation asto whether or not we have a legal basis for doing what has beendiscussed here in general, on either side of what has developed as thetwo extremes. That is particularly important, I think, because withfiscal policy fumbling the ball, monetary policy has become the solestabilizer in the system and that's becoming increasingly visible.With the Dorgan-Hamilton Bill I think successfully fended off, we'renow running into what I think is going to be a draft Gonzalez-TobinBill where Jim Tobin's views about how we should restructure thisCommittee are potentially much more dangerous to the institution thanHamilton-Dorgan. I would like just basically to raise the question ofhow we develop political support to do what it is we perceive isnecessary for a stable economy and sound monetary policy. If therewere a [law] out there, which legally required us to do something veryspecific about inflation or the money supply, I suspect we'd allapplaud that--meaning, in effect, that we would be required to dosomething independent of the secondary consequences on the groundsthat some other institution or some other policy instrument would pickthat up. There is no way that's going to happen, as I'm sure we areall aware. We often have to live with the fact that the FederalReserve is going to be in the eye of the political system increasingly[unintelligible]. The thing I think we have to confront, rather thanget up front and promulgate a policy, is to take a step back and askourselves the question: How do we try to develop support for the [typeof] policies that we need? Why don't I put that on the table and seeif we can clean that up before we go home this evening.-43-12/18-19/89MR. JOHNSON. I'll start it off. Off the top of my head,without having thought this through very much, to me the way you buildpolitical support is first--I agree with Lee--that you have toeducate. I think it's very important for us in our hearings and ourspeeches and everything else to take an approach that tries to pointout the benefits of what we're trying to achieve and how we interpretthose. It would be best if we could come to some consensus and allsay the same thing. I'm not sure that's possible. But if we decideon that, we ought to try and coordinate it, because coordinating itwould be very important for the public. Secondly, and substantively,in terms of reality in the economy--and for this reason I am somewhatof a gradualist but I don't think a 5-year time frame is unrealistic--I think that we cannot afford to have the public perceive us aschoosing the tradeoff of accelerating disinflation at the expense ofmuch higher unemployment. I think it's another matter if the publicsees us defending our inflation goals if inflation is accelerating andthe economy is weak and we're not perceived as having any goodchoices. It's one thing to try to fight an acceleration in inflationbecause the economy is weak; I think the public can take a recessionin that environment where, say, external policies have been bad,productivity is very low, prices are accelerating and we're not leftwith any choice except to let inflation accelerate or to stop it andinflict a recession. But I think it's another matter entirely toforce the economy into recessionary conditions to accelerate theimprovement in disinflation. I don't think it's a big factor to argueabout how fast the economy continues to grow or whether employmentgrowth is a little slower or a little faster, because I think thepublic generally is not very sophisticated in understanding what'shappening when the economy is growing more slowly relative to whatotherwise would be the case. But I assure you they're very keen onnoticing when more people are unemployed and when people are beinglaid off. They would be saying: Well, the inflation rate is low andactually coming down, but [the Federal Reserve] is going to acceleratethis [decline in inflation] from 4 percent to 1 percent and the costis going to be higher unemployment. So, my view is that we have to besensitive to the real economy. We have to be patient enough to pursueour goals consistent with avoiding recession unless inflationaccelerates. If inflation starts to accelerate, we don't have anychoice. That's the way I see it. Of course, if dividends come with[greater] credibility, then we can get there faster without thepotential losses in real output and employment. I think we shouldstate our goal of price stability and I think there is a time framethat's realistic. But I certainly don't think that means--even if wewere to say we have a 5-year time frame in which we think we can getto conditions of price stability--that tomorrow the discount rate hasto go up 1/2 point. It certainly does mean, though, that we have toset a steady course in getting there and take advantage of thepositive dividends and resist the negatives.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Jerry.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I think that building thepolitical support for even my softer version of the goal is going tobe very, very difficult. My hunch is that if you put the Neal Bill toa vote this afternoon it would be overwhelmingly defeated in both theSenate and the House.-44-12/18-19/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Did you know that in a survey taken ofthe American Economic Association it barely got supported?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No. I think it would beoverwhelmingly defeated in both the Senate and the House; I don'tthink it would even be close. Again, that's why I'm so sensitive tothis cost thing. And in terms of the work that Mike and hiscolleagues did, you could take other very credible economic[scenarios] and get cost calculations that are much more severe thanthe base case. If you take the DRI model or something like that, why,you're just off the charts. So, you would get this process wherepeople would start doing the arithmetic; they wouldn't do it as wellas these guys [on the Board staff] do it, but you don't have to be agenius--people can do the arithmetic. And if you put it in those coldhard terms, I think it's a very, very--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible] be unemployed.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I could have a field day with it ifI were on the other side of the debate. And that, of course, is oneof the reasons why I think we've got to be very careful about how westate this and we've got to be excruciatingly careful about what weclaim. I don't by any means want to belabor this point, but I doworry a bit that in our collective zeal, and I do mean collective,we've got to be careful not to oversell what can be done and at whatcost. Because if we do leave the impression of a cost that turns outto be a low-ball estimate, we're going to get fried. There's just noquestion about that whatsoever. It's precisely for that reason, Mr.Chairman, that I favor an effort to move us in [the right] direction,in Governor Kelley's terms; and it has to be accompanied by what Leecalls an educational process. The focus there again has to come backto the relevance of other public policy. I obviously agree, Wayne,that the capability is here. But I feel very strongly that the costsare influenced, for example, by fiscal policy. Unfortunately, thereis a growing sentiment in this country now that not only says thatfiscal policy is kind of out to lunch, but even worse, that we havehad all these huge deficits in the '80s and everything is fine.What's the problem? What's the worry? And you don't find that justfrom the extremes of the economic journalistic profession. That isbecoming an acceptable point of view to take in many circles. So, notonly do I think it's a hard sell, but at least insofar as the otherelements of policy are concerned, we're not--to use your phrase--aheadof the curve, we're behind the curve. Wayne, on your point about ourreserve currency, there's nobody that feels more strongly [than I]about the role of United States currency. But can you continue to[unintelligible] reserve currency, even if you do well on inflation,when your external debt is 35 percent of your GNP? Maybe you can, butI think that's really problematical. So, there are a whole lot ofthings here that fit into this equation about political support. Mysense of it is that, to the extent we can make a couple of argumentsthat are compatible with what we're after and that have inherentpolitical attraction to them, it helps. What are those two argumentsthat have inherent political attraction to them? The two that I thinkring the bells are: first, the internal savings/investment issue.Everybody recognizes that our investment rate in this country stinks.The second and related issue is our external competitiveness. Now,those ring the right bells in political circles. And they can bestructured in a way that is quite compatible with a Kelley version or12/18-19/89a Boehne version--whoever's version you want to pick--of movingpersistently, consistently, but decisively, in the direction of acontinued reduction in the rate of inflation within the kind of soft[time] target that I stated before.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Dick.MR. SYRON. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we're in anextraordinarily difficult and tricky situation here when we try and[unintelligible] up public sentiment. I have been struck, when I givetalks and discuss the need for the Federal Reserve to be disciplinedand how we are being disciplined in getting inflation down--and I'mtalking about business groups, not about community activists--that Ihaven't had anyone come up to me and complain. It's akin to John'spoint that inflation is really too high now. What they come up to sayis: Why can't you get rates down because my machine tools aren'tselling or this isn't happening or that isn't happening. So, I thinkthe only way we're going to get anywhere--and it's a long-termprocess--is to demonstrate what the cost of inflation is. I thinkthat a lot of the improvement to personal living standards has beendriven by increases in the participation rate in the labor force andthe norm now being the two-worker family rather than the single-worker family. Because of inflation and other factors, productivityhasn't been rising and real wages haven't been rising. We need to getthe saving rate up. We have to show people how they and theirchildren in the future are going to be better off in a low inflationworld than they are now. Because they don't understand that now, theyare not going to support that. And I think it's very, very importantwhen we try to make this case that we demonstrate as clearly aspossible the constraints that the Federal Reserve has on it: what itcan and can't do. I'm not disagreeing that we can't get rid ofinflation, but at what cost? And it depends upon what other peopledo. And by that I'm talking about things like the minimum wage,protectionist legislation, different steps that are being taken inmedical care costs, all of those things. Someone told me a long timeago that being a shock absorber is not a terribly lasting profession;you get hot and worn out. And I think we need to demonstrate topeople how we are really in the shock absorber role and show them theterrible box that we are in.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ed Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, to be very blunt about this, I don't thinkthere is a public or political mandate to go to zero inflation if itmeans pushing up unemployment and risking a recession. And I think wewould do ourselves and the public a disservice if we somehow pretendedthat achieving this is going to come at a relatively small costbecause I think it would get short circuited fairly quickly. I don'tthink there is any amount of education and persuasion that we can do,barring a hyper-inflation kind of experience like the Germans had,that will ever educate the public to bear even the kinds of costs thatwe're talking about here. I think there is support out there forresisting accelerating inflation. Realistically, our educationalefforts and our statements ought to be aimed at shoring up thatsupport. Now, that means in the process that we have to make, as wehave historically, stronger statements against inflation than otherparts of society and government; I think that's what a central bank isfor. But I think we kid ourselves if we take that rhetoric--every-46-12/18-19/89chairman of the Federal Reserve has had stronger rhetoric againstinflation than, in effect, we have been practically able to deliver.I think that's the way life is in a democracy; to try to go for pureand ideal solutions is just not the way democracy works. Democracyinvolves a lot of compromising and we're compromising here. And Ithink the best compromise we can cut is to resist acceleratinginflation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the fact that weall pretty much agree that the Neal resolution will not pass sends usa message. The message that it sends to me is that there really isnot a political constituency for driving inflation down at any cost.I think that there is a sense, in the Congress and among certainpeople, that some decline of inflation is probably appropriate. But,as Dick said, when business people and bankers and not just thegeneral public come up to you and say, as people have said to me, theFederal Reserve at this level of inflation has got a fetish aboutinflation--or to put it the way the British might, that the FederalReserve is being bloody minded about this whole thing--I think it'sgoing to be very, very difficult to get the general public to supportzero inflation. That ought to be our goal but, no matter how mucheducating we try to do, I don't believe we are ever going to getpeople to understand the real cost of inflation at these levels. As Isaid before, if we have much higher rates, then they understand.Also, Jerry, while those arguments are very good about externalcompetition, investment, cost of capital, and so on, when it comesright down to it the Congressman facing his constituent who isunemployed is not going to support us. So, I think what we reallyhave to do is--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. [Unintelligible] I was grasping forstraws, Bob.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, I think a lot of people would certainlyagree with those arguments theoretically. But when it comes down tosupporting us, a Congressman, say, who has high unemployment in hisDistrict--no matter what the appeal of the theoretical argument--isnot going to support us under those circumstances. We need to dowhatever we can in terms of educating both the Congress and the publicat large through talks and that sort of thing. But I think the realkey is to bring the inflation rate down in accordance with our goal ina gradual way. We have the goal. The question is: What tactic do weuse to get to that goal? If we do it gradually and minimize the cost,I think that will be the most effective way to achieve what we want.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Tom Melzer.MR. MELZER. It's a tough argument, but I think it's one weabsolutely have to try to make. In a sense, if we're talking aboutthis and if we set this goal--and Wayne I think you touched on this--we may be closer to that goal than we realize. One of the great risksis that we trade away in the short run the progress that has been madein the last two to three years. There have been some very good thingssaid about how we make that argument. Another element of it, in mymind--and I don't mean this in a self-serving way--is that I don'tthink we convey how we conduct operations properly. There is this-47-12/18-19/89general perception, and we help to perpetuate it, that we moveinterest rates around. That's very dangerous because it leads peopleto ask us to do something about it to provide short-term fixes.What's so striking about the analysis that has been done, particularlythe earlier versions when we had no mention of interest rates at all,is the realization that inflation is a monetary phenomenon.Obviously, this is not something we're going to get answered at theFebruary meeting. But if we embark on this course, or if we continueon this course, there has to be some gauge of policy that is somehow,I think, aggregates based and gives somewhat heavier weight [to theaggregates] in terms of our public relations. I understand that weset the targets and so forth, but I think the general perception isthat we set them but we're very happy to miss them. [We need toconvey] some concept of our willingness to compromise in the shortrun--that we are willing to provide more liquidity to avoid the riskof a recession and to overcome a shock or whatever, but that there arelimits on that within the framework of achieving the only longer-termgoal that a central bank goal can achieve. I don't have a proposal.I made one in the past and I'm not trying to beat the drum for that.But as we proceed in this direction, I think there has to be somethingalong those lines to put us in a more defensible position. We can'tdefend it on interest rates; we will get buried every time [we try].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Lee Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I think the political issue is a troublesomeone and it's clearly reflected in the views that people put fortharound this table this afternoon. But I look at the problem as one ofchanging the attitudes. This is a democracy, as Ed Boehne indicated.Democracies learn and they do change. I think it requires us to havecharacter, will, and resolve; it requires us to have some leadership.Five years ago I wouldn't have guessed that we would have an amendmentor a joint resolution even proposed for zero inflation. So, things dochange over time when people pursue them aggressively. Five years agothe sage advice was to live with the Iron Curtain the way it was andto accept that compromise. We've been surprised, I think, by therapidity of change that has taken place there. So, I'm not willing tosay we can't change things because we don't currently have popularsupport. It seems to me that it's up to us to make the case for it.I think a lot of good ideas have come out. The Chairman testifiesregularly and has stated that price stability is the objective. I donot see inordinate attacks on him by Congress when he's up there. Iread the testimony and I just don't see the vehemence. In terms ofpractical things that we might do, one thing is to expose our ideasdirectly to Congressional people. I have been called in to meet witha Congressman or two with respect to my views. And while they justdon't jump over to my side of the fence at the end of the half-hourmeeting, at least they see that we have concerns and that we are notuncaring people and that we may have some worthwhile arguments. Ithink we can do more to make our case than we have done and I think weought to do that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Well, I agree with most of the comments,particularly Ed Boehne's comment that we probably don't have a broadconstituency out there that supports an absolutely slavish drivetoward zero inflation at this specific time. And in a practical-48-12/18-19/89sense, it seems to me that politically it would be very, verydifficult to build that. When you talk to people about these kinds ofobjectives there's a running agreement in an academic sense. But asyou begin to think through some of the consequences related toattitudes in the changing political environment it would be difficultto adjust that. That really was why I said earlier that I'd beopposed to a very specific public commitment to zero inflation in avery precise period of time; because if we really meant that, then aspeople began to work their way through what all that would mean, Ithink the political thrust to us would be very awkward. As long as weare continuing to make progress and continuing to bring the rate ofinflation down--and our policy deliberations and decisions take thatpattern--it seems to me that that's the ultimate objective and thatwe're doing what we should do. And the cost of becoming verymechanistic on this could be very difficult.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Well, just to put a little different light onthis, I think we're probably selling the American public a littleshort. I don't want to overplay this. But having been through adepression recently in the Southwest that was more than just the veryminimal, all through the very difficult period that we've been throughI did not have one business person or anybody pick up the phone andcall me and lay the problem at the feet of the Fed. I think there's alittle greater understanding out there of the imbalances and arecognition that fiscal policy--. Now, I don't want to minimize thepolitical aspects of it and what a constituency is. As far as thepoliticians themselves are concerned, I've spent my career runningfrom them and I try not to talk to them; I don't really understandtheir mentality. But in terms of the individuals who suffered throughthis, as devastating as it was, I've had people that have totally goneout of business not lay the blame at the feet of the Fed. The onlythought I'm trying to get across here, without minimizing thedifficulties, is let's not beat up on ourselves too hard. I thinkthere's a little more understanding out there than I'm hearingexpressed around here. There are always risks, but given what we seeas the objective, I'm not too sure that those risks, on a calculatedbasis, aren't worth taking.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. John LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I'm not sure how effective we can be as theprincipal preachers of this gospel. It seems to me that there's somesuspicion of us as being self-serving: that in preaching an anti-inflationary stance and the importance of reducing inflation we soundlike we're justifying our own existence in some way. Yet at the sametime, I think we all ought to be trying to weave this concept into ourpublic pronouncements when we get an opportunity to do it. Ideally,this would be a lot easier for us, even though it does not smack somuch of leadership, if the call were coming from outside--if therewere a public spokesman with a great constituency who could say: "Hey,this is a good thing." Lane Kirkland comes to mind but he's kind ofan unlikely candidate.MS. SEGER. He's on the other side of the---49-12/18-19/89MR. LAWARE. Yes, I understand that. And the Chamber ofCommerce is a little suspicious perhaps, in the other direction.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think Kirkland would be better thanthe Chamber is.MR. LAWARE. In any case, I wonder if we couldn't--along thelines of Lee's concept of meeting with Congressmen--meet with otherpeople and lay the issue out privately as well as publicly that thisis a proactive and very responsible kind of stance. I don't think wecan just expect it to happen because we want it to happen; we're goingto have to work at it. And I think it's a perfectly legitimate thingfor us to try to do if we believe that this is in the best interestsof the country. If that's what you meant by leadership, then I thinkthat's what we ought to be doing.MR. HOSKINS. That's what I meant.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Gary Stern.MR. STERN. Well, I have only a little to add to all of this.I think Tom Melzer is probably right: We're going to need to shift thefocus to some measure or measures of the money supply as we proceedhere if we can, both for substantive reasons and also because that hassome political advantages as well, as we go forward. My experience issimilar to that of some of the others who have commented. Once in awhile I'll have a business person come up to me and say that theysupport the zero inflation objective; but most of the time the sense Iget is that they don't have any trouble with 4 and 5 percent inflationand they're more or less content with that.MR. JOHNSON. Is that what you hear in your board rooms?MR. STERN. It's mixed in the board.MR. SYRON. It is mixed.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Remember that zero inflation meansdeclining profit margins.MR. STERN. Well, that's what I was going to say. I thinkpart of the motivation behind this is the squeeze on profits. I don'tthink there's much question about that. Part of it, as somebodyalready commented, is that we have had 7 years of expansion andimproving prosperity, and people--or some people at least--arereasonably content with all of that. The other aspect, which isreally the other side of the same coin, is that in our Districtunemployment rates in almost every state are below the nationalaverage and yet the number one political issue out there is stilljobs. I've been trying to figure out how you reconcile that. All Ican figure out now is that the 1980-82 recession left such anindelible impression on so many people that that is still a big, bigissue and people just don't want to tangle with something like thatagain.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Wayne.12/18-19/89MR. ANGELL. The Constitution, as you know, does give theCongress the authority to control the money supply and to protect thevalue thereof--I think that is the phrasing of it. And the Congressdecided to delegate that responsibility to us. It seems to me thatit's far, far worse for us to be held to task by the Congress for notdoing the job that they, in a sense, expect us to do in regard toprice level stability. That criticism can take place too. And Iwould far rather be in a position of saying we were a little toocommitted to this responsibility than I would to have them criticizeus for letting inflation run. Economic growth is stated in the FullEmployment Act of '46 and full employment is mentioned in theHumphrey-Hawkins Act. And it just seems to me that if we know thebest way to [foster] economic growth is through price level stability,then it's our job to do the best we can on economic growth--which is,of course, to put price level stability first. If you believe that,then I think it's sellable.Now, I agree with what Manley Johnson said at the beginningwhen he said it's a question of strategy and timing. Certainly,Manley, when you and I joined this Board we were involved, first ofall, in a proposition to grow the money stock more rapidly. For whatreason? Well, I think it was because going from 12 percent to 3percent on the inflation rate unexpectedly produced certain shocksthat were threatening to upset the entire financial community. Ithink third world debt and the commodity producers everywhere--theworld was just about ready not to worry. And I think that it did makesense to level off at 3 percent; and in doing so we really slippedback up to 4-1/2 percent. So, now I think it's very logical for us,having done this in the first step, to take the second step. And Ithink going from 4-1/2 percent to zero is not as tough as going from12 percent to 3 or 3-1/2 percent or wherever it was. It seems to meif we're going to sell this we won't sell it by talking about trade-offs. You don't sell it by saying: "Oh, we're going to go out andproduce a recession and that's exactly what we want to do and we'regoing to put you in enough pain that everybody will become committedto not raising prices." That's not the way to sell it. We reallyneed to focus on what I call price level targeting; and that's why Ilike to use commodity prices as a way of saying that we're not tryingto create slack. We're not trying to create unemployment; we justrecognize that the commodity price level, however measured, has movedup and we have to restrain that move. And I think there's support fordoing that. Now, on the fiscal side, I believe the Federal Reserve ismore at fault on the federal budget deficit than is the Congress. Itwas the Federal Reserve with those double-digit inflation rates thatcaused tax receipts to rise at 16 to 18 percent per year. Whywouldn't the Congress get used to spending at that rate? We're theones that taught the Congress to spend, and bringing the rate ofinflation down, of course, shuts down the receipts and it does imposerather significant burdens. I don't think anyone here would suggestthat the Congress doesn't have significant problems. Rather thansaying we ought to be [content] and we can't get the inflation ratedown, I think we ought to be a little more sympathetic to Congress'problem. Getting the budget deficit down in a period of declininginflation is pretty tough to do. So I think we need to be sympatheticwith their goals and we need to admit that we want to make that painas minimal as possible for the Congress. That's why I don't think weought to do it as fast as the Volcker Fed succeeded in doing itbetween 1981 and 1984 when so much progress was made. The way I think-51-12/18-19/89you sell this program is that you sell low interest rates. You saylow interest rates are desirable: that's desirable for economicgrowth; we get more capital formation with low interest rates; and weget an economy in which people can plan for their future. And savingsought to respond. I believe that we have to be somewhat moreoptimistic than we have been. We can't sit around and tell everybodyit's not going to work. If you don't believe it's going to work, wellthen what are you doing here? What we have to do is to say: "Sureit's going to work, and we're going to make it work." I think it'ssellable and I think it's exciting to be out there selling it.Frankly, this is the way I talk to audiences everywhere, as many ofyou know. And I've yet to find the first person to come up to meafter one of those presentations and say: "Oh no, you're wrong; youshouldn't take the inflation rate down." No one says that.MS. SEGER. Because they know they wouldn't win the debate!MR. ANGELL. Well, I think it's sellable if we want to sellit.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think Governor Angell was rightin going back to the Constitution where it says Congress should havethe power to coin money and regulate the value thereof. And that hasbeen delegated to us through various forms of legislation. Don Kohnmentioned a while ago that among the objectives that have specificallybeen spelled out in the existing Acts is to control inflation. Ithink the best way to make that point is to do precisely what you didbefore the Neal Subcommittee by saying that this is the best way toget all these other things, which I sincerely believe.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it's true.MR. BLACK. I do too, absolutely. And that would be thebrunt of my argument.MR. HOSKINS. Nothing wrong with the truth.MR. KELLEY. When all else fails!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further comments before we close?MR. JOHNSON. I'd like to make just one brief point that Iforgot to mention that was on my mind. In terms of the speed ofadjustment, I've already laid out what I consider to be an appropriatestrategy. But along with that is the notion that in the past when wehave had fairly significant inflation, a lot of debt built up. Ofcourse, a lot of debt was created even in the '80s when inflation waslow, which is kind of interesting. But that was especially trueduring the '70s. I think we cannot force inflation down any fasterthan the safety net can bear the burden. In a sense, our lender-of-last-resort function is exposed from time to time; if you causeinflation to decelerate so fast that you create a debt bomb, we end upwith the whole banking system falling into the safety net or huge debtproblems that dramatically expand our lender-of-last-resort function.In fact, it's hard enough to arrange collateral now. And if there'sno collateral to take, we're going to be limited to some degree. So I-52-12/18-19/89think we ought to keep in mind--at least if we pursue restrainingpolicies--just what we think we might inherit through the discountwindow or, in general, our safety net.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. With those words, I think it's time forus to adjourn what has clearly been one of our most interestingmeetings--certainly the most interesting meeting I've been at.MR. KELLEY. Yes sir.MR. BOEHNE. How would you like to summarize it, Mr.Chairman?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it would be worthwhile in theDecember meetings to come back to this issue just to review where westand because I think it gives each of us a view of the philosophicalbase of our colleagues. I think that's quite useful in these kinds ofdiscussions. So, let's adjourn until tomorrow morning at 9:00 a.m.[Meeting recessed]-53-12/18-19/89December 19, 1989--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Before we resume our regular business, Iwould like to raise again a problem that continues to confront thisorganization with continuous damaging and corrosive effects, and thatis the issue of leaks out of this Committee. We have had twoextraordinary leaks, and perhaps more, in recent days: one in whichJohn Berry at The Washington Post in late November had the time andcontent of a telephone conference; previous to that we had The WallStreet Journal knowing about telephone conferences and knowing anumber of things that could only have come out of this Committee. Ihave discussed this subject a number of times but just let me tell youthat, as best I can judge from feedback I'm getting from friends ofours, the credibility of this organization is beginning to recede andwe're beginning to look like buffoons to some of them. If one readilytranslates what we heard here yesterday about how the credibility ofthis institution has major economic policy effects, one cannot fail torealize how important it is for us to have an organization which isnot perceived to be discussing all sorts of confidential things tonewspapers when we hold up ourselves as being a group that can conferin private. The real problems that conceivably can emerge are notonly the ones that have been discussed here on numerous occasions, butI'm getting a little concerned about the free discussions that go onin this group--and yesterday afternoon is a very good example of this.If [our discussions] start to be subject to selective leaks oncontent, I think we're all going to start to shut down. Frankly, Iwouldn't blame anyone in the least. We wouldn't talk about verysensitive subjects. If we cannot be free and forward with ourcolleagues, then I think the effectiveness of this organization beginsto deteriorate to a point where we will not have the ability to dowhat is required of us to do. I don't know who the leaker is; Isuspect it may well be only one person. I don't know whether theleaks are directly to Alan Murray, who has the clearest access, or toJohn Berry or Paul Blustein. Regardless, it's very destructive to theorganization. I hope the person, who I would suspect can hear myvoice at this moment, will recognize the type of damage that is beingdone to this institution. And if it's not the institution that youcare about, at least recognize how important this institution is toour country. If we cannot function, the sole major economic policyinstrument that this country has will not be able to function. ManleyJohnson wants to insert a few words this morning.MR. JOHNSON. Being one of the members of the FOMC whogenerally has supported more disclosure--I admit I'm in that camp--Iasked Alan to let me say a few words about a certain type of problemabout leaks that I do think is serious. I wanted to make an appealmyself. I realize there is a debate going on within the Committeeabout policy disclosure and I think that's still a [valid] debate.But my big concern about the types of leaks that I've seen is that,along the lines of what Alan mentioned, I think it's very destructiveif the confidential deliberations of the Committee end up in thepress. If we can't sit here and have a dialogue and be honest andactually say things back and forth across the table to each other inan honest way without worrying about those discussions being disclosedat some point, then I think we have problems. I have been andcontinue to be generally supportive of the idea of accurate, timelyannouncements of our policy decisions. But our deliberations and howwe get there have to be confidential. The thing that bothered me the-54-12/18-19/89most was back in February of this year when we were deliberating overwhether to raise the discount rate and there was a Wall Street Journalstory that announced a future FOMC meeting that was coming up in a fewdays. That just literally announces to the world that we'redeliberating over the discount rate and anyone is free to--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You mean a Board meeting.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, a Board meeting; sorry, I said an FOMCmeeting. But I think we had a conference call scheduled to discusshow we were going to approach this and even that was made public. So,I would like to make an appeal myself on the confidential nature ofinternal deliberations. And I separate that issue from the wholeissue of announcements of policy. We have to preserve theconfidentiality of deliberations because otherwise we eventually aregoing to come in here and read a script and not have a dialogue.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any comments gentlemen, ladies?MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I'm very pleased that you made thestatement that you made, particularly after the discussion we hadyesterday, because if any of us were to indicate that we had such ameeting and that we did not come forward with a decision to [seekprice level stability], that in itself could have a very significant[impact] on the market. I think that's a particularly delicatesubject; and I feel quite certain that the price of gold, for example,would react rather immediately if it were leaked that we talked aboutgoing to price level stability and we didn't take action to do it orif it was placed in the worst context.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions?MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, some time ago I think Joe Coynedrafted something that was an agreement among the Committee that noneof us would talk to the press seven days before or seven days after ameeting. I wonder if it's not worth revisiting that issue.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is, I presume, still part of theagreement promulgated by this Committee in its rules.MR. COYNE. That was recirculated to the Committee in May of1988.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further comments? If not, let's getback to our regular agenda. We're now at the point where Mr. Crosscan bring us up to date on foreign Desk operations.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Cross? I think Leewas first.MR. JOHNSON. Okay.MR. HOSKINS. In regard to your dealings with the Treasury,doesn't the current limit give us a little more leverage with respectto arguing that we shouldn't be intervening?12/18-19/89MR. CROSS. I think the Treasury sees our limits as areflection of the view of the FOMC toward the whole subject. But ifwe are seeking to tell the Treasury that we don't want to interveneanymore, I think it has to be done in a direct way.MR. JOHNSON. I'm not opposed to the [proposed] increase of$1 billion [in the limit on System holdings of foreign currencybalances]. I agree with your point about interest [accruals] but, asyou pointed out Sam, this is a particularly sensitive period. And inmy opinion, I can't foresee a situation developing where we would wantto be selling dollars over this intermeeting period. It could occur,but I don't think there's much doubt that the Japanese are about tomove on their discount rate--even though I'm not sure why--for theirown domestic purposes. I think it's more political than anythingelse. But I can't see a situation in which we would want to beselling dollars into this market with the economy moving slowly andthe DM and other European currencies strong and probably the yenshowing some strength against the dollar. There already have beenanticipations--rumors in the market--of a discount rate move, whichweakened the dollar/yen rate some yesterday. Even if they move on thediscount rate, I'm not sure whether that's going to be enough reallyto change things permanently or anything like that. Can you foresee asituation, Sam, where we would want to be selling dollars in theintermeeting period? I think it's okay to approve this.MR. CROSS. As matters now stand, my own view is that therecertainly doesn't seem to be any reason to need to sell dollars. Weare in the last two weeks of the year and the market tends more orless to close down at that point. An awful lot of the banks stopmaking markets. They all either have made their profits for the yearand want to rest on them and pass out their bonuses or they have theirlosses that they can't do anything about. The market tends to closedown. And for a number of years the dollar has tended to be a littleweak toward the very last few weeks of the year. When the marketsreopen in January I have no reason to think that the attitude will beany different from what it has been, which would mean that there iscertainly no need to intervene. But, as we've seen many times before,these moods can change quickly. Although the dollar has declinedreally quite significantly in terms of the mark and most of the otherEuropean currencies, in terms of the yen it has declined very little;it's still at about 144 yen and at the time of the G-7 meeting it wasaround 146. And despite rather substantial amounts of interventionand other changes, there has been an awful lot of demand for thedollar against the yen. So, the short answer would be that I wouldsee no occasion or need to be intervening during this period. Butit's very hard to be certain about it, and we do have this problem ofthe accumulation of interest, which is going to push us up against ourlimit. So it seems to me, as a matter of prudence, that we do have tohave some leeway to be able to operate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I think we ought to note that during 1989 wehave sold over 2-1/2 times more dollars than in any other previousyear of selling dollars. We've sold $22 billion so far this year andthe rest of the world has sold $54 billion. We've had a total of $76billion of sales. By and large I think this has been appropriate; Idon't want to take a position in regard to not supplying the-56-12/18-19/89opportunity to do what needs to be done if there's any confidencewhatsoever that the policy will be properly pursued. But when theweighted exchange value of the dollar has been on a three-monthdecline, which of course still leaves it well above year-ago levels,for us to sell and try and affect the yen/dollar relationship is atbest naive and at worst stupid. It just doesn't make any sensewhatsoever. Now, if there's a way to get that message through to theTreasury without some of us having to vote "no" on these kinds ofmatters, that's the preferable way to go.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me answer that. I would be a littlestronger than you. The sensibleness of this [unintelligible], as Samhas said. I think there have been innumerable occasions since thelast FOMC meeting when the water they are drinking over thereobviously has had something in it. But they have calmed down and Ican't conceive that they would want to push on this side.All I can sayto you is that considering the fact that the ultimate legal authorityis over there [at the Treasury] I would say that the Desk has beenvery successful in fending them off. I have tried to convince some ofour colleagues [at Treasury], with some success I think, and we willcontinue to do so. The authorization of $1 billion doesn't affectthat in the slightest. That is there just in case the water gets toobad or something and we can keep them down to small amounts; but we'rerunning out [of leeway]. All I can say is that I don't see anysentiment either in Sam's operation or any place in the Committee thatwould be supportive of anything other than what you suggested. Itonly comes down to this: we will do our best to keep them down.MR. ANGELL. Well, if they say they're going to jump off thecliff, could we promise not to link hands and jump off with them?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, we could.MR. ANGELL. I would prefer that we maintain our hand in the[unintelligible]; I agree with the sentiment that says that we oughtnot to pull ourselves out. It ought to be seen as an unusual move forus to take action for the Treasury's account without our doing it [forour account]. If that were to be the case, then I can support theincrease in the limit because I do expect that we will receiveinterest on these funds.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't want to say to you that we willbe successful in keeping them in [line]; we may or may not. You knowthem as well as I know them.MR. ANGELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. All I can say is--MR. ANGELL. Yes, I know the same people.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it's unfortunate that we have tomove here prior to the study being completed, [but] I think it'sprudent to do so and we ought to. Lee Hoskins.-57-12/18-19/89MR. HOSKINS. That was essentially what I was going to say.I don't think it's appropriate to tie Sam's hands on this one. If infact we're going to have a full discussion down the road as to [therole of] our agency and the principal function with regard to theTreasury, I wouldn't want to see us stay in a mode of going up a notchhere and there without ever questioning why we're doing it in thebroader perspective--particularly when we're at this magnitude. Iunderstand your argument for coordination but that doesn't seem to meto be an argument for $20 billion of Federal Reserve or $40 billion[total] of U.S. [participation]. I think we ought to visit that issuevery carefully--that's the intent of the study--and [for now] I thinkwe ought to pass on Sam's [recommendation] and get on with it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody have any other questions?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll just add two quick comments.One is that I do think we have had a genuine measure of success interms of the Treasury's attitudes and eagerness. That's not to say,as Alan said, that it guarantees anything for the future. But I thinkthere has been some clear progress there. The second thing is morefundamental and that is that I think one can make a pretty goodargument that even in the past six weeks the risks have shifted in anot inconsequential way in a direction--MR. GUFFEY. Jerry, it would be helpful if you'd speak up alittle.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I was saying that I think one canmake a pretty good analytical case that even in the time frame of thepast six weeks or so the risks have shifted in the direction in whichrather than worrying about a strong dollar we could find ourselvesworrying about a weak dollar. And I think that just reinforces thebasic case that a number of people have stated here. So quite apartfrom the theology of it or the politics of it, I think the substanceof it is clearly on that side.MR. ANGELL. Well, that was my point precisely.MR. BLACK. If we didn't approve it, Sam would end up havingto buy some dollars with some of his earnings on foreign currencies tostay below the limit. So we pretty well have to do it for thatreason. Maybe--MR. ANGELL. It might not be bad to realize some of thoseprofits.MR. BLACK. Well, let's see.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We're better off in the loop thanout of the loop.MR. BLACK. Yes.MR. HOSKINS. Yes, but the question is magnitude isn't it?MR. BLACK. Yes.-58-12/18-19/89MR. HOSKINS. How big do we want it to be? The bigger itgets the more that becomes a policy variable that I think is aninappropriate one. It takes our eye off the domestic economy and ittakes our eye off price level stability.MR. BLACK. The limit has to be enough to keep it from--MR. HOSKINS. I understand Sam's problem now; I don't haveany problem with that. But I think we need to revisit the issue ofwhy we do foreign exchange market intervention and, in particular, thesize of that intervention.MR. BLACK. I'm not disagreeing with that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any further questions of Sam?If not, can I have a motion to ratify the Desk's actions since theNovember meeting?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So move.SPEAKER(?). I'll move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We also have amotion on the foreign currency balance limit--[an increase from $20billion to $21 billion].VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any objections? If not, would you bringus up to date on the domestic Desk operations, Mr. Sternlight?MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Sternlight?MR. FORRESTAL. I would just like to say that I find itextraordinary that the market reacted the way it did on Wednesday.This was, after all, the beginning of a five-day holiday period plus aweekend. They know that the demand for reserves is high in thatperiod; certainly they have seen that in the past. So I must say Iwas very surprised at the reaction. The newspaper story, of course,put a little different light on it on Friday. But this is thequestion I would like to pose, Peter: The market is obviously focusingon a very specific federal funds rate--MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MR. FORRESTAL. --and it was 8-1/2 percent in this case. Ifthere were more fluctuation on a day-to-day basis, as we've had in thepast, do you think the market would have reacted the way it did?MR. STERNLIGHT. I doubt it, President Forrestal. I thinkpart of their reaction [reflected their] sense that we have beenfocusing more closely on funds rates in the last year--or pretty much-59-12/18-19/89since the stock market break of late 1987. And I think that sense ofa closer adherence to the funds rate has gotten around the market.MR. FORRESTAL. So, if we were to change our operatingprocedures to get more fluctuation or more noise in that rate, wouldthat not be helpful in reserve matters?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it could be. We would have welcomedopportunities to do that. An obstacle to doing that is this sense ofthe borrowing/funds rate relationship not being as reliable as in thepast. And I think that's partly what has kept us more closely boundto the funds rate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Peter, off and on for several years Roger Guffeyhas been raising questions about whether the seasonal borrowing levelsmean the same thing as the adjustment borrowing levels. Intuitively,I can't see how they really could because I don't think of banks asfeeling the same degree of pressure when they have a [seasonal] loanthat doesn't have to be paid off until a specific maturity date. Butthe studies that the staff has done always have suggested that, so faras we can tell over the banking system, the reaction to either type ofborrowing has been pretty much identical and we have treated them asidentical. This time we made two technical adjustments because ofmisjudgments about the level of seasonal borrowing. Does thisindicate any change in the attitude of the staff toward seasonalborrowing?MR. STERNLIGHT. Don may want to comment also, but clearly wehave recognized more explicitly in the last year, I would say, thechanges in seasonal borrowing and we have made adjustments to theborrowing level in recognition of that. I think of the seasonalborrowing as in a kind of in-between zone. Banks clearly are notunder the same pressure to repay those as they are with adjustmentcredit borrowing. But there is some sensitivity of seasonal borrowingto the spread of the funds rate over the discount rate. So in thatsense it probably would be a mistake to focus just on adjustmentborrowing; but it probably should be regarded in a somewhat differentlight--as we have been regarding it recently--than the adjustmentborrowing.MR. KOHN. I agree with what Peter just said. Past studieshad shown that seasonal and adjustment borrowing were somewhatdifferent; as Peter said, seasonal borrowing is a little less interestsensitive than adjustment borrowing. But we found that when we addedthe two together we had a function in which seasonal borrowing--thepart that wasn't interest sensitive--got lost in the noise of theoverall function. And I think what's happened here is that withadjustment borrowing being so extraordinarily damped the seasonalborrowing now shows through into the overall function. So we've beenmaking these technical adjustments sometimes between meetings. Wehave pointed this out in the Bluebooks for some time now and aretrying to take account of it. This is something that we've been doingfor at least a year I would say.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.-60-12/18-19/89MR. KOHN. And the swings in seasonal borrowing have beenmuch wider than previously; we're at record levels of seasonalborrowing.MR. BLACK. It makes sense to me that you're doing it. Butthat's what I would have concluded without a study. One of mypredecessors used to say that research consists of proving withuncertainty that which was known for certain beforehand. I'm glad tosee this now and I imagine Roger is glad to see it too.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Peter, you may have said this and I just missedit. Even after we added reserves on that Wednesday with the fundsrate slightly soft, we did that on the basis of an anticipated firminglater in the day because of the reserve need, right?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we certainly had the reserve need forthe period. I wouldn't have been surprised if funds had firmed laterthat day because we were projecting it as a reserve deficit day in areserve deficit period.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I remember funds slipped a little furtherin that period.MR. STERNLIGHT. They slipped further that very day. As Isaid, it may have been that, as participants were beginning to movetoward that misimpression of an easing, the banks that needed fundsbegan to slacken their purchases. What would go through their minds,I suppose, is: Why buy at 8-3/8 percent if it's coming down to somelower level?MR. JOHNSON. So you think there was some anticipationalready growing in the market after our call, even before the newsstories came in?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, even the beginnings of somebodyraising the possibility of an easing started to generate some reactionamong the funds market participants; and the situation kind of fed onitself. The softening that occurred in the funds rate later that dayprobably fed back to more market participants, which strengthenedtheir sense that there was probably an easing underway.MR. JOHNSON. Where did the funds rate end up that day?MR. STERNLIGHT. It got down to 8-1/4 percent, or maybe alittle lower.MR. JOHNSON. So on that Wednesday it got down to 8-1/4percent even before the stories?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. How did the call go? Was there a broadconsensus on what to do on the call?MR. STERNLIGHT. On our daily conference call?-61-12/18-19/89MR. JOHNSON. Yes.MR. STERNLIGHT. As I recall, there was no [Reserve Bank]President on the call that day.MR. BLACK. That's the problem!MR. STERNLIGHT. We had our usual discussion with seniorstaff at the Board; as we were having that discussion funds weretrading at 8-7/16 percent. I think a question was raised as towhether the market might misinterpret that; and my judgment was that,no, they would not misinterpret it. Now, it was during the callitself--we began at 11:30 and the call was already well under way--when we saw the funds trading at a couple of the brokers slip offfurther to 8-3/8 percent. And we decided to leave the program inplace. One can second guess this, but my judgment was still that itwould not be misinterpreted. It was misinterpreted.MR. KOHN. By the way, my notes suggest that funds did firm alittle toward 8-3/8 to 8-1/2 percent at the close. The average on theday was 8-3/8 percent, so there was quite a bit of trading at the[8-1/4 percent rate].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. A meeting or two ago I raised a question aboutthe seasonal borrowing program and it just came up a moment ago. Itseems to me that we've been through a year in which the seasonalborrowings have been very, very heavy--maybe for some reasons thatdon't absolutely relate to seasonal requirements. And at this point,it seems to me it's getting a bit in the way of the operation of theDesk. I wonder if that doesn't raise a question as to whether or notwe ought to look at the seasonal program to see if there's some way wecould price it or handle it differently so it doesn't impact on theoperations of the Desk.MR. KOHN. We have a memo underway on that. We have beenconsulting with the discount officers at the Reserve Banks. I thinkwe have it on the Board's agenda for late January. Is that right?SPEAKER(?). It's not actually scheduled yet, but that's whatwe are planning.MR. KOHN. We are planning to put that on the Board's agendaafter further consultation with the Reserve Banks. So, yes, we arelooking at the seasonal program, even in terms of whether we shouldhave it.MR. KEEHN. But we will be getting to it at a time of theyear when the [Reserve] Banks will be back out offering the programagain. So time is running [out].MR. KOHN. That's one reason why we were pushing to get it onthe Board's agenda.MR. BOEHNE. Well, if we're thinking about changing thatprogram--and there may very well be good reasons to do it--I would notdo it so abruptly that we have banks expecting that they would have-62-12/18-19/89those funds during the spring months and then we pull it. I think wehave to give them some warning when they've had this for severalyears. Even though it gives us some problems at the Desk, we need tobe mindful of what we do to them as well.MR. STERNLIGHT. I'd like to interject, Mr. Chairman, that Idon't see the seasonal borrowing program as giving us significantproblems of implementing policy at the Desk. Now, there may be goodreason to review that program and revise it; but I don't see it as aproblem for implementation of policy.MR. KOHN. In our thinking about this, President Boehne, wewere certainly going to give an option--if there were major changes inthe program--to delay those changes. That would be one of the thingsthe Board would need to consider.MR. JOHNSON. When this issue came up before I think theargument was that perhaps seasonal doesn't present a problem for uswhen it's mixed with adjustment borrowing. But even if it's shownthat it has some noise in it, to separate it out to a point--SPEAKER(?). [Whether to] have it in there--MR. JOHNSON. [Do we] want to have it in the reserves?MR. KOHN. In the current situation, Governor Johnson, if wewere just targeting adjustment borrowing we would be encounteringproblems of equal magnitude. I agree with Peter: I don't think wewould [unintelligible] the level of adjustment borrowing to shifts indemand for adjustment borrowing. I don't think the seasonal borrowingis really the root cause of the problems with the borrowing function.MR. JOHNSON. I agree with that. But it's just another minornoisy item or potentially noisy item.MR. GUFFEY. A question: Have you even thought about, or canyou determine, why adjustment borrowing is so low? Is there simply somuch liquidity out there either domestically or from abroad that theydon't need the window?MR. KOHN. Well, we have thought about it. In fact, we had aspecial session about this at the discount officers' conference inOctober. This is all second hand because I wasn't there, but [theyfelt] the major issue really had to be the concerns of the banks aboutcoming to the window and what that would convey to the rest of themarket in an environment in which there were a lot of questions aboutbank soundness. Although we don't announce discount window borrowings--that's confidential information--often other people in the marketknow it, in part because we do ask the banks to go out and bidvigorously for funds before they come to the [discount] window. Sothere's somewhat of a pattern of purchases in the federal funds marketthat tends to broadcast that fact and often it does get out one way oranother. So I think that's a major issue. There were some otherfactors, such as monitoring their accounts more closely partly becauseof daylight overdrafts and a few other things like that. We put in apenalty discount rate for very large borrowing, which may deter somebig banks. So there were a number of factors; no one of them seems toexplain it.-63-12/18-19/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Don, what would be the case for or againstreleasing our reserve estimates? That would be quite different, itseems to me, than our releasing or announcing what our policy is.MR. KOHN. I've given that some thought, Governor Angell. Itmakes me inherently nervous to release projections. Maybe this is abureaucratic problem because quite frequently we're going to be wrongon those projections. [Unintelligible] and we also have a problemwith the required reserves inherent in that. [Unintelligible.] Sowe've given that some thought. As I say, I don't like the idea ofreleasing projections because of the problems and also because I thinkthe market would tend to say: Well, they're projecting a $2 billion-a-day need so they ought to be doing $2 billion today. It would tie themarket's expectations into our projections very, very closely and Ithink in the end it would reduce our freedom of action. If we sawsignals in the funds market that tended to contradict our projections,for example, I think releasing the projection would give rise to somevery specific expectations about exactly what the Desk would be doinggiven those projections and would tie our hands even more. So, I havesome questions about releasing daily projections of two-week reserveneeds every day.MR. ANGELL. Well, that's an understandable response. Iwould comment, Don, that it's not very bureaucratic to suggest itmight be bureaucratic. Mr. Chairman, the point is that I think we dohave an objective to preserve our policy freedom and freedom fromdisclosure. And that's why I asked the question. Don, would it helpat all if you were to do it with a range?MR. KOHN. It might. I'd have to think about that and sowould Peter. That might loosen things up a bit though I think itwould have some of the same problems, perhaps ameliorated to anextent. One issue that Peter and I have discussed is whether weshould release our previous day's balance sheet every day so at leastthe market would know where we were. I just throw that out; thatwould take care of part of this problem but not all of it and it'ssomething we will be looking into. There are pros and cons on thatalso and a lot of thorny issues that need to be resolved. But it'ssomething that Peter and I were planning on looking at over the nextmonth or so.MR. ANGELL. I'm glad you had the conversation. I do want toexpress confidence in your judgment in regard to what you recommend,but I'm glad you're thinking about it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mr.Sternlight? If not, may I have a motion to ratify the transactionssince the last meeting?MR. MELZER. So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.-64-12/18-19/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We now move on tothe economic report. We can start with Ted Truman.MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. PRELL. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for either gentleman?MR. BLACK. Could I ask, Ted: What would be your figure fornet exports of goods and services for the third quarter?MR. TRUMAN. It's about $6 billion less than what's in theGreenbook.MR. BLACK. You mean it's a $6 billion improvement?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What would the fourth quarter be in theGreenbook on the basis of--MR. PRELL. I think we'd make very minor revisions at thispoint. Basically, we had not received the retail trade inventories.We had heavily discounted the wholesale trade inventories, which wereceived at the very last minute. When we look at those data and atthe trade data, our hunch is that the best guess is still in that 0 to1 percent range--not appreciably different from what we have now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So inventory accumulation is up and netexports are down?MR. TRUMAN. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That brought sales down. PresidentParry?MR. PARRY. Mike, a question or two about Boeing: We had aconversation with them in the last week that suggested that thedelivery of planes in the fourth quarter was a bit stronger than wethought it would be--24 planes in the 48 days during the strike. Andthey actually saw their inventories run down a little. We do not haveinventory data for their supplies. The implication is that in thesubsequent quarter one would not actually see a runoff of inventoriesbut a slight accumulation of inventories and that the impact on[exports] would not be as great. Now, I don't know when you checkedwith them--and perhaps different people give different information--but it's sort of interesting because if these statistics are reliable,it could be that we're not going to see as much fluctuation in exportsand inventories in the fourth quarter versus the first quarter.MR. PRELL. Well, we have been hounding those folks andevidently didn't hit the same person you hit because it sounds likeyou got much more information than we've been able to glean on thedetails of their scheduling.MR. PARRY. We do have a lot [of information]. I don't knowhow good it is; that's the problem.-65-12/18-19/89MR. PRELL. We have been trying and trying to get these factspinned down and I have not heard through my colleagues--MR. TRUMAN. Well, let me make two comments. One is that theOctober numbers did have a big downward adjustment in aircraftshipments relative to the previous month.MR. PARRY. Sure.MR. TRUMAN. The second is that some of the export sales--andthis maybe only speaks to part of the problem--had to do with thetiming of shipments [rather than how] the workers were scheduled. Soin that period there are two questions: To what extent are they beingexported rather than sold domestically relative to the averageexperience? And to what extent do they come out of inventories? Thatis the question you were addressing.MR. PARRY. Well, they did have the data of the 24 producedduring the strike: they exported 15 of them and 7 of them were 747s,which are the big ticket items. So, exports seem to keep up. Now,that would square with what we see in the October numbers.MR. TRUMAN. Well, they have stayed up. The total of largeaircraft was $10.2 billion; that's down $600 million from the previousmonth but it's up in fact from the early part of the year. So it'snot that they weren't continuing--MR. PRELL. What we've tried to communicate, President Parry,is that all of these are short-run factors, including the earthquakeand so on. Basically what we see is growth in the range of about 1 to1-1/2 percent from the fourth quarter through the second quarter.MR. PARRY. There was one other point they made regardingproduction effects that was sort of interesting. They estimated thatnormal production would be about $20 billion at an annual rate; andthey were estimating about a $9 billion rate for the fourth quarter,which would mean an $11 billion change as opposed to the $14 billion.So, perhaps there's not quite as much GNP effect as you have there.But, I'm sure all of this will get sorted out in the next month or so.MR. TRUMAN. Assuming the report [made it] to the BEA?MR. PARRY. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Mike, I wonder if you might comment a littlemore about what's going on in terms of the trade-offs in your forecastin inflation and growth. Essentially, for the next two years you havesubpar growth of under 2 percent and the unemployment rate rising toover 6 percent. You have a somewhat heroic assumption that there willbe no further easing in monetary policy over that period. Yet theinflation trend line is not very good. We get some relief ininflation next year but then in 1991 we get inflation going back up.Now, I'm not one to push the precision of these numbers, butessentially we don't have much progress over this time horizon, giventhe subpar growth. It's less than encouraging and I would appreciateyour commenting on it.12/18-19/89MR. PRELL. There are a number of items involved here. Oneis that the unemployment rate, while moving up faster in thisprojection than in the last one, doesn't really get to a level wherewe think it would have a significant effect in damping wage and priceincreases until we get well into 1990. In the near term, though, wethink the smaller consumer price increases we have had in the secondhalf of this year and that we anticipate in the first part of nextyear will be helping to damp wage increases. So, as we look at wagetrends--setting aside the self inflicted wounds of social security taxincreases and minimum wage hikes--the underlying trend is beginning toturn down very gradually around the middle of 1990 and it continues ondown. A couple of other factors affecting the contour are the oilprice assumption and the dollar assumption. Oil prices in the nearterm are a helpful element in the picture, but as time progresses andwe get into 1991 our assumption of no real change in the oil pricebegins to become a neutral factor as opposed to a helpful factor inthe inflation trend. Finally--and this is sort of what wedemonstrated in the exhibits yesterday--the autonomous depreciation ofthe dollar, so to speak, does have some effect on that short-runtrade-off. If you took out the dollar depreciation that we have, thepicture would be much more favorable in terms of the apparent trend.Basically, next year's CPI probably would not be materially above 4percent and might even be a shade below. Looking out into 1991 itprobably would be at 4 percent or a shade below. So that might giveyou a little sense of movement toward a lower inflation projection.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Sounds like a heck of a sacrifice ratio to me.MR. PRELL. But in a sense we don't have any real sacrificeoccurring until we get out into 1991.MR. TRUMAN. As we measured it yesterday.MR. PRELL. As we measured it.MR. JOHNSON. I'm not sure. It seems like a lot lost on thereal side and nothing [gained.] on the inflation side. Although theremay be a tenth or two, it's hard to see.MR. PRELL. Governor Johnson, let me remind you that if youplay this game of abstracting from the dollar's movements,particularly the ones that we don't see as tightly connected tomonetary policy and other fundamental factors, you would have toelevate the recent inflation rates in gauging the trend. So in asense, you're working against these continuing price level shocks thataffect how the year-to-year inflation movements look. But if you wantto do that--and particularly if you felt others would do that and becharitable in their assessments of the trends and in shaping theirexpectations--then the picture isn't quite as unfavorable as it looks.MR. JOHNSON. It might be useful to try to separate that out.MR. PRELL. Well, we have. And we can present thatarithmetic again. There is that question of how people, in shapingtheir expectations, are going to read those data and whether they aregoing to take the same sort of view.-67-12/18-19/89MR. JOHNSON. Well, I agree with that. A couple of points:You mentioned the Blue Chip forecast. I agree they are not predictinga recession, which I think is interesting, but they do expectsignificantly lower trends in the funds rate.MR. PRELL. It looks to me like a cut of about a half pointby next spring is the consensus forecast.MR. JOHNSON. Right. I think most of the forecasts that arenot predicting a recession have the funds rate path coming down.MR. PRELL. Yes, I think there is a prevailing expectation ofa decline in the funds rate. But I think that most people's concernsabout recession really are near term enough that they see the interestrate decline as being coincident with the period of greater softness.What they're getting is a bigger boost to growth in the latter half of1990 and on into 1991. And this goes to the point I made yesterday: Ithink they perceive the Federal Reserve as being very loath to see lowgrowth and willing to accept a 4 percent plus CPI rate of increase.That is the projection for next year--something over 4 percent with nosign of any deceleration going into 1991.MR. JOHNSON. I agree with that. Another point was madeabout the dollar when you were talking about the dollar depreciationforecast having a positive effect on the real side. Doesn't it matterhow the dollar depreciates? It's one thing if it results from lowerrates here; but isn't it another thing if it results from higher ratesabroad as to the relative impact on the real side here?MR. TRUMAN. You mean higher interest rates?MR. JOHNSON. No, a lower dollar. If the dollar is lowerbecause of higher rates abroad, let's say.MR. TRUMAN. Higher interest rates?MR. JOHNSON. Don't higher interest rates abroad mean thatforeign demands are going to be weaker?MR. TRUMAN. Well, yes, but it depends on whether you had[forecast] foreign demand right to begin with. And as far as thisyear was concerned, it's fair to say that we didn't. We have growthin the G-10 countries on average in 1989 at 3.4 percent, a percentagepoint higher now than we did in February at the time of the chartshow. And we have the same growth rate, essentially, for next year sothat the average level of economic activity is substantially higherthan we had it before. So to some extent, the interest rate responseto that in trying to [damp] down the recovery, [unintelligible] whichis certainly that it had an effect on income and demand. Andtherefore, in some sense [economic activity] would be less thanotherwise. But I think if you put the two things together, onbalance, you have continuing strong growth on the income side plusthis exchange rate--MR. JOHNSON. So you're suggesting to me--MR. TRUMAN. Yes, and I'm not sure to what extent. In fact,I guess you could even argue the other way around. If you looked at-68-12/18-19/89models and you looked at the kind of interest rate differentialchanges that we've seen so far this year you could argue that thedollar should be much lower than it is--that the change in the dollarshould be much greater than we've had since June or something likethat. So in some sense we undershot those kinds of weak relationshipsthat we shouldn't rely on.MR. JOHNSON. Well, let me just get it straight after allthat. I asked the question: If the dollar is weaker in the forecastbecause of higher rates abroad, since we're not projecting--MR. TRUMAN. The point I was making is that it is really onlya question of timing. Over the last three forecasts going from Julyof this year to the end of the forecast period the net change in thedollar that we've assumed or projected has been the same. And in thatperiod to some extent we've raised growth abroad and at the same timewe've also raised interest rates a bit. However, it seems that wehave had some of it sooner than this [straight] line projection thatwe've assumed. Therefore, as Mike and I have said, you move some ofit exogenously. We didn't fine tune the forecast [to that extent] sosome of the real side and price effects, which under the originalforecast would have come in 1992, will have moved into the forecast[for 1991]. I'm not sure I'm answering your question but--MR. JOHNSON. Yes, but [unintelligible]. The last question Ihave is the one I keep repeating--I know you're sick of hearing thisbut I'm still looking for an answer too. And that is: A year ago oreven less than that you had a slightly stronger forecast. I realizeif you go back to last April's FOMC or so that most of the weakness inthe values projected [were showing up] in early 1990 rather than thisyear. The economy has softened a bit more toward the tail end of thisyear than you had forecast in those earlier projections and youactually were forecasting about a 10-1/2 percent funds rate and abouta 10 percent long bond as of now. Yet rates are fully 200 basispoints lower than they were when the forecast was for a real economythat was expected to be a little stronger than it is today. I'm stilltrying to find some way of reconciling that--how that has occurredwhen the interest rate scenario has been totally different and we'vehad much lower interest rates. If the economy has been slightlyweaker than the forecast, I don't think it could be the dollar.Exports have held up pretty well in this whole forecast. In fact, Ithought the lags were longer on that; at least that's what we've beensaying. So it's not on the export side. Where has the weaknessoccurred? Or why has the forecast borne itself out generally, with astructure of interest rates that is 200 basis points lower?MR. PRELL. Well, as I've indicated before, this is a verycomplicated thing to try to sort out. We did an MPS model run to tryto address this, and at this point the 1989 fourth-quarter to fourth-quarter growth in real GNP is the same as what we had in February.What has happened in this accounting is that the lower interest ratesoccurred only after a period of rise, so we haven't had that playingout entirely. We've had a higher dollar and the combination of thesetwo forces end up being neutralized. So essentially we have a [GNPgrowth rate of] 2-1/2 percent, as we had anticipated. Because of thepattern we have had, though, if you went back and took the dollar andinterest rate paths that we had in place as of February and comparedthat to what we now have, the picture for 1990 should be stronger than-69-12/18-19/89what we have. I think we have perceived some areas of weaknesscompared to what we had been anticipating. In housing, for example,we haven't gotten the kind of response we had anticipated. And thereare some other sectors that probably are a touch weaker fundamentallyat this point than we had anticipated. But basically in 1989 it's astory of lower [than anticipated] interest rates offsetting anunanticipated strong dollar.MR. JOHNSON. Since when?MR. PRELL. In the year 1989, Q4 to Q4.MR. JOHNSON. Well, what about my point on exports? Am Iwrong that exports have not held up according to the forecast?MR. ANGELL. You mean the February forecast.MR. PRELL. We had [forecast] a 12 percent increase in realexports of goods and services in the February Greenbook. We have anincrease of 7-1/2 percent now.MR. JOHNSON. Is that right?MR. ANGELL. 7-1/2 percent from when to when?MR. PRELL. Q4 to Q4.MR. TRUMAN. A little of that is lower interest rates, Imight add.MR. PRELL. On the services.MR. TRUMAN. Yes. In goods we may be off by a percentagepoint; the rest of it I think is--MR. JOHNSON. Is that enough to account for the difference ininterest rates?MR. TRUMAN. Sure. Do you mean the services side?MR. JOHNSON. No, I mean is that difference in the exportprojection enough to--MR. TRUMAN. But, as Mike said, the real projection isapproximately the same.MR. JOHNSON. Right.MR. TRUMAN. And the question is whether--. Well, it isslightly differently distributed.MR. JOHNSON. Okay. I think that's all.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I have a question. Even though Mike can tell menever to ask about the quarterly distributions of economic activity,I'm sorry but I'm so confused that I'm going to have to ask anyway.-70-12/18-19/89In looking at the quarters for 1990, you have the strongest growth inthe first quarter and--MR. PRELL. That's Boeing and reconstruction.MS. SEGER. Well, I think that's giving a lot [of weight] toboth of those! As for the tremendous pickup in final sales from thepresent quarter to the first quarter, I hope that's accurate, but whatif it isn't?MR. PRELL. There are a number of things that could go wrong,or even right, in the outlook. If consumer demand, for example, isfundamentally weaker than we perceive it to be, [unintelligible] willbe longer lasting and have worse effects. If export demand isn't asstrong or business investment isn't as strong, these elements of finaldemand could be a drag on output.MR. SEGER. You have a big pickup in consumption expenditureson durables.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a passing--MR. PRELL. We have a rebound in car sales in the firstquarter as they try to get these inventories down.MS. SEGER. Well, maybe that's where I should really partcompany with your forecast.MR. BLACK. But if you take those two factors off, Martha,they total 9/10ths of a percent--if I'm not wrong--so this comes downto 1.2 percent. So, really, your first quarter is as weak as anyquarter in 1990 after you take account of the earthquake and theBoeing strike.MR. PRELL. Basically, auto production in the first quarteris deducting something like 3/10ths of a percent from output growth.So it's a decided negative, as it is in the current quarter. But ourassumption is that through a combination of very low production levelsand expanded incentives they will be able to get the inventories inreasonable alignment by the spring. As best I can tell from reports Ihave had from automobile companies they have budgeted very largeamounts for incentives [next] year. They have incentives in placealready but they are well below what they have budgeted for the yearas a whole. So I would expect them to pull out all the stops in thenext few months, unless there is a surprising pickup in sales withoutthat.MS. SEGER. I'm sure they're going to try the incentives. Wemay talk to different people--we probably do--but I can tell youthere's disappointment about the effectiveness of the incentives. Thebang for the buck seems to be less and less each year. Theseincentives have been around for three or almost four years now. Andto show you how desperate things are, the incentives have been put onminivans by two of the Big Three, and minivans have been the stars ofthe universe in that they were selling quite well even when a lot ofother models weren't. As I said, I hope you're right; but I have afeeling that the first quarter is going to be weaker than what we'reshowing here.-71-12/18-19/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, of course, the automobile datadon't really have an effect on GNP. You're pushing them out ofinventory into sales and if the sales fail to materialize the onlything you're missing is the retail market. So, that's not going toaffect the total of GNP.MR. PRELL. No, it's not.MS. SEGER. No. What I'm worried about is--MR. PRELL. I'd emphasize that we still have production down.But if the sales with the added incentives don't come up to ourexpectations that means there's a more prolonged adjustment necessary.I think automobile companies have been trying to wrestle with theexperience of the last few years in assessing what the priceelasticity is and what the longer-run stock trends are. They haveseen strong sales of cars and light trucks over the past several yearsand they have been trying, as we have, to get a handle on the extentto which people simply have accumulated a relatively large stock ofcars at this point. On top of that there is concern about these verylong car loans and how long people are in negative equity positions;they may be less inclined to buy a new car after the same intervalthat they previously did. So there are a lot of things going on thatare hard to sort through.MS. SEGER. The stories I hear are that the productionschedules for the first quarter are written in pencil and are writtenvery lightly.MR. PRELL. We have January well below what they currentlyhave announced. We don't have [the production schedules for] all ofthe Big Three for the subsequent months but we have just a shade over6 million cars at an annual rate in the first quarter, which is a lowrate.MS. SEGER. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. On this last discussion, I think Mike was rightto say one should not focus on the quarterly numbers. He has to focuson them because we want to see them. I don't know what the bands oferror are around this, but I think somebody ran off a staff forecastyesterday that indicated the errors are really quite large one quarterout. So I think that was an appropriate comment. Also, having beenin the business of forecasting quarterly numbers publicly, that's avery uncomfortable [position]. People ask you for those numbers butin fact you don't have great confidence in them. If your error--MS. SEGER. We still have to live through these quarters--quarter by quarter by quarter. And those, in fact, produce theaverage for the model for the whole year.MR. HOSKINS. The second point on the issue we're strugglingwith on the autos: In a policy sense, is this a structural problem asopposed to an aggregate demand problem? I think that's really whereyou're heading with it and my comment is that it is pretty hard tosort that out right now. Let me go on to my question, which like-72-12/18-19/89Manley I think I know the answer to, but I'll ask it anyway. As Waynepointed out yesterday, we've had over 30 months of fairly reducedmonetary growth--4-1/2 to 5 percent using the projection that thisyear will come out at about 5 percent. Many of my monetarist friendsargue that the inflation rate is going to come in next year at lessthan the consensus forecast. They are not using structural models.The question to you is this: Is the probability equal in terms of theerrors on either side of your inflation forecast or do you believe theprobability is higher one way or the other?MR. PRELL. We never assert that, if we could formalize it,the probability distribution is perfectly even on both sides. But wethink it's reasonably balanced. We noted yesterday that if you lookat the P* model, for example, with a sort of money approach, we're inbalance essentially between the equilibrium level and the actual pricelevel. And our monetary forecast wouldn't yield through the P* modela distinctly different outcome for inflation than we have in theGreenbook.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I must say the P* model on prices isbetter than any monetarist model on prices that I've seen.MR. KOHN. P* has almost precisely the Greenbook deflator; ithas 3.9 percent and the Greenbook has 4 percent. For 1991 it shows alittle tilt down that the Greenbook doesn't; it has 3.6 percent andthe Greenbook stays at 4 percent. My guess is that that's the dollareffect going through.MR. HOSKINS. Is that running it with that 5 percent or 6percent?MR. KOHN. That's running it with 6 percent in 1990 and 5percent in 1991.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. The discussion that I wanted to have has alreadytaken place, so I withdraw.MR. PRELL. We might do better the second time around!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions? If not, shall westart our round table? Who would like to begin?MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, with respect to the nationalpicture, we concur with the Greenbook projection for weaker economicgrowth combined with stubborn and [unintelligible] inflationarypressures.Looking at our District, the Eleventh District economy seemsto have weakened in recent months, both in relation to its rate ofgrowth earlier this year and in relation to the declining rate of thenational economy. Overall District growth is positive but [barely]perceptible. Within the Dallas District, New Mexico has been growingfaster than the nation; Texas has been growing at about half thenational rate; and Louisiana has been declining absolutely. What isinteresting about the economic performance in the District is thealmost complete reversal in the areas of strength and weakness in the-73-12/18-19/89economy at the present time versus, say, a year or two ago. Durablegoods manufacturing is declining and that is the sector of our economythat led us into the modest recovery two years ago. Nondurablemanufacturing has been holding up quite well. The chemicals andrubber products, plastics, and apparel all are showing employmentgains between 2 and 3 percent. The energy sector has been astabilizing influence on the District economy. The rig count andenergy employment are both expected to contribute slightly to growthin the near future. Construction, which has been declining absolutelyfor the past several years, has stabilized and even has shown a littlegrowth over the past several months. The strength in the constructionfigures has been dominated by the construction of new chemical plants,but there also has been some pickup in multifamily residentialconstruction in a few markets where occupancy rates and rents arefirm. Overall, District agriculture is not doing very well; we'reanticipating that farmers' net cash receipts will be about 20 percentbelow last year's level. Growth in the services sector has slowedconsiderably outside of government jobs. In short, the DallasDistrict economy has shown spreading signs of weakness recently andbusiness confidence outside of the Houston area has reverted to thevery low levels of two or three years ago.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, conditions in the District seem tobe mixed, but I think clearly [our economy] is moderating.Manufacturing, in particular the auto and auto-related parts of themanufacturing sector, is showing signs of weakness. But there areother parts, particularly construction for example, that seem to bedoing at least a little better than the national numbers. There islittle I can add to what we've already heard on the auto side, butgiven the importance of that industry to our District, I certainlyfeel constrained to say at least a word or two. Contacts with thatindustry [indicate that the situation] is really pretty grim. Saleslevels have been down. As a consequence, the expectation is that bythe end of the year the inventory levels are going to be at least at a100 days' supply, or maybe more, which is awfully high. Consequently,as we said, the production schedules of the first quarter are going tobe down very significantly--in the case of one manufacturer down by 23percent as compared to the first quarter of last year. At this pointthey caution that the production risk is clearly on the down side, noton the up side. And the reason for that relates to this incentivebusiness. I hear what everybody is saying about the opportunity formore incentive programs, but they already have been fairly heavy andhave had a terribly important and very negative effect on earnings.I'm told, therefore, that there isn't quite as much room on theincentive side as people might believe and that the response to biggerincentives will be further cuts in production. At the dealer levelthe attitudes are pretty sour. Many of the dealers are claiming to befacing very serious financial problems and there is some risk that theautomakers may lose some dealers. Having said that, I do think it'simportant to keep all of this in perspective: what we're talking aboutis a sales volume for 1989, including cars and light trucks, of 14.7or 14.8 million, and that would be even with a very bad fourthquarter. That is down from previous years but still not a disaster.For 1990 the expectation is that the first quarter will be low, say,14.1 million in sales, but that there will be a pickup in the secondhalf. Therefore, for the year as a whole we could be looking at a-74-12/18-19/89sales level of, say, 14-1/2 million, which though down would be not anunreasonable year. The effect of all of this, though, is prettypervasive in the District because there are so many people who relateto autos one way or another.Other parts of the manufacturing side are doing surprisinglywell, I think. Agricultural equipment obviously is doing well, giventhe improvement in the farm sector. As for the [steel] business, 1989shipments are expected to be about 83 million tons, which is less thanin 1988 but not significantly so. And the outlook for 1990 suggestsabout 81 million tons--again down, but still not a disaster. On theretail side, I think it's too early to see how Christmas is going towork out. My understanding is that buying patterns have shifted andpeople are increasingly buying later in the Christmas season. But theretailers I talk to are reasonably optimistic as to how it's going togo. On the inflation front, I think the outlook has become somewhatbetter. We see a lot of capacity coming on in some of the majorindustries--autos speak for themselves--but in steel we've had someadditions to capacity over the last couple of years and the same istrue of paper and chemicals. And I'm hearing from people that thereare a whole host of prices that seem to be moving down, not up.Therefore, from that perspective, the inflation outlook has improved.On the labor side, costs are up; most of it continues to be on thebenefits side as opposed to basic wages and, therefore, the outlookdoesn't seem negative. Net, it seems to me that the outlook for nextyear continues to be positive but certainly moderate. But I do thinkat this point that the risks are very much on the down side; at thesame time, I believe the outlook for inflation perhaps has improved abit.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the economy in the West remainshealthy with only a few signs of slowing growth. Employment gainshave been less than earlier in the year but the rate of expansion hasnot diminished further in recent months. Even manufacturingemployment has risen in the past year, up 1.2 percent. That certainlyis a slower growth but it remains strong when compared to the rest ofthe country where manufacturing obviously has been either flat ordown. All nine states in the District had employment growth duringthe past year that exceeded or matched the average growth in the restof the nation. Even Arizona, a state that has been plagued by a lotof weakness in the construction area, has had employment growth of 2.9percent, largely in services and trade employment. Also, I had theopportunity very recently to have a discussion with one of the largestretailers in the District who has some stores in this local area aswell. He indicated to me that at least through the end of last weekthe Christmas season was equal to last year, which was a very goodyear. I don't know how recent weather patterns have been affectingsales in the last couple of days, but he seems comfortable that theywill be able to match what was a very good year last year. Concernabout the effects of defense cuts in California are a bit overblown,we're beginning to conclude. California has the largest share ofdefense procurement expenditures but on a per capita basis it reallyonly ranks 10th in the country, which suggests that there is morediversification than in nine other states with regard to defenseexpenditures. Also, we observe that there are growing backlogs oforders for commercial aircraft in the state of California--either as a-75-12/18-19/89result of McDonnell Douglas or secondary contractors to Boeing--andthat is taking up most of the employment slack in the defense-relatedarea. So in total the employment gains there are fairly respectable.With regard to Boeing, the Boeing settlement is quite complex andwe've been trying to price it out. The best we can conclude is thatit will increase labor costs on average about 8 percent per year overthe next 3 years with two-thirds of that occurring in the first year.So it is a very complex and relatively expensive contract. But giventhe demand for their product I guess that's not all that surprising.Turning to the national economy, I must admit that we have asomewhat stronger economy projected for the nation in 1990, primarilydue to greater strength in PCE. As a result of that, our inflationforecast is slightly higher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would describeeconomic activity in the Sixth District on average as being moderateat this point. The sources of strength are coming from natural gasexploration and production and that's basically in the Mobile Bayarea. We're also getting increased oil exploration and the rig counthas gone up in Louisiana, as Bob Boykin has mentioned. The petro-chemical industry continues to do quite well and that's basedbasically on strong demand for exports in that industry together withdomestic demand for agricultural products. Industrial constructioncontinues to be good and the vacancy rates in that area are the lowestin the nation. It's a little hard to get a good fix on the retailsales situation. The people that I've talked to indicated that thepost-Thanksgiving sales were relatively good. But the picture ismixed in terms of the latter part of the season. I would say thatnobody is reporting or anticipating very robust or buoyant retailsales; but some of them are saying that sales will be fairly decent ornot too bad. The most pessimism comes from Florida generally and fromthe city of Atlanta. The weaknesses in the economy are in areas thatone would expect; they pretty well mirror the rest of the country.There is weakness in housing and housing-related sectors and we'realso seeing spillover from the auto sector in both steel and aluminum.Paper industry people are now reporting less demand in that industryand also softer prices. Manufacturing is the same as in the rest ofthe country in that there is less demand for consumer durables. As Isaid yesterday, the people that I talk to in the District are reallyquite concerned about the fragility, as they perceive it, of theeconomy. They are less concerned about inflation. We also don't seevery much pressure on wages or prices.On the national scene, our forecast too is a bit strongerthan the Greenbook and that goes back again to consumer spending.We've had a different forecast and a stronger one generally. As we'vebeen saying, Mike, we think consumer spending on services particularlywill be stronger than your forecast, and with that stronger growth wesee less unemployment and slightly higher inflation. On balance, Ithink the risks are on the down side. In the present environment,with layoffs and the general attitudes of people, I think confidencecould erode and that would be detrimental to the economy. There's alot of apprehension in our District too, Bob, about the anticipation[of less] defense spending: that's particularly strong in Florida andAlabama. I think it's overblown too, but there is that fear. On the-76-12/18-19/89inflation side, I think inflation is clearly still too high. Laborcosts are still up. But having said that, given my view that the riskis on the down side, I think that we do have some flexibility inpolicy to gain ourselves a bit of insurance to protect against thatdownside risk.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The District economycontinues to improve modestly but the pace of improvement seems to beslowing somewhat. The farm sector remains a source of strength andthe energy industry continues to improve. But growth in themanufacturing sector has slowed somewhat. In the agricultural sectora pattern has emerged with respect to the winter wheat and the verydry soil conditions that prevail. Because the weather has been socold the snow has been very dry, which hasn't provided much strengthto winter wheat. [Unintelligible] virtually no winter wheat being atpasture simply because it didn't get [unintelligible]. So far as therecent slump in cattle prices, a short supply of [unintelligible]could boost direct levels of prices in the first quarter of 1990. Inthe meantime, most District farm [incomes] were strong in 1989 and theprospects remain bright for 1990. Stable oil prices and increases indrilling for natural gas continue to buoy the District's energyindustry. For example, the average number of active drilling rigs inthe nation increased from 984 to 1,042 in November and in the Districtfrom 312 to 326. Both the U.S. and the District rig counts weresignificantly above year-ago levels. Most of that is in the naturalgas exploration area. Manufacturing, particularly in the auto plants,is a downside element as has been noted before. I would say that wehave no evidence of layoffs in that area; however, the temporaryshutdowns that are planned for the auto assembly plants are in[train]. For example, a GM plant in Kansas City that would normallyhave a one-week temporary shutdown will take that one week and thentwo additional weeks in January, which supports the idea that theJanuary production schedule is being cut back and that autos will be asource of weakness in the first quarter. On the other hand, themanufacturers of general aviation aircraft expect in 1989 to exceedthe 1988 production level. Construction is up in our District andcontinues to improve. The October value of nonresidentialconstruction contracts in the District stood 26 percent above thevalue in October of 1988 and residential contracts were about 20percent above the year-ago levels. I would note that unemploymentlevels in all major areas of the District are below the nationalaverage. With respect to Christmas retail sales, the information thatwe have gathered suggests that the retailers are looking for salesthat are modestly above last year's levels, which were consideredfairly good.As to the national economy, we would be very close to theGreenbook forecast. And we have the feeling that the risk is prettywell balanced yet with respect to the upside or downside movement ofthe economy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we came here with the idea ofsaying that we thought the general outline of the Board's forecast waspretty accurate. But we intended to express the feeling that if we-77-12/18-19/89had any doubts, the doubts were whether the economy would be quite asstrong as the projection. And I think Mike essentially has done thatin his revised statement. We've been influenced not only by theincoming statistics but by the anecdotal information that we pickedup, particularly at our last Board meeting. It's always hard tointerpret what business people are saying about things because theydon't seem to have any concept of seasonally adjusted rates oranything of that sort; they are always looking at the previous year.They can say it's the worst ever and it really might be a seasonallyadjusted improvement. Anyway, they said the things one would haveexpected them to say. They were universally pessimistic; and therehasn't been a meeting since the last recession when our directors havebeen as uniformly pessimistic as they were at this one. Otheranecdotal information has been pretty much along those same lines.We're a bit more optimistic than the staff is, though, toward the endof 1990 and the first part of 1991; [we're expecting] GNP to pick upprimarily because of export improvement. And I think it's quitepossible, and probably likely, that domestic demand will be strongerthan the staff is suggesting in its forecast. I think too that lowerinterest rates may well be compatible with our efforts to controlinflation, and the staff is projecting essentially flat interestrates. Finally, I'm a bit more optimistic on prices than they are.It's a great comfort to me that the P* model, which I think is a verygreat piece of work, is projecting [unintelligible] for next year.But just looking at the way I see the market working, profits arebeing squeezed and they're being squeezed because businessmen can'tpass on price increases. There's a lot more resistance to priceincreases now than at any time in my lifetime that I can remember.And I think that's why they can't pass these things on. I [refuse] topay list on anything. Somebody accused me the other day of shoppingthree places before I'd buy an ice cream cone. I haven't gotten quitethat bad! But I do think the American consumer is in that kind of--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you buy the ice cream at a differentplace than you buy the cone?MR. BLACK. In essence what we do is buy in quantity and putit in the freezer and make our own ice cream cones at home! Anyway, Ido think that is a bigger factor now than it has been. And I thinksome of these price indexes recently have been reflecting moreinflation than perhaps we have had; for example, the last one showsautomobile prices and apparel prices as being the two main offenders.The indexes are supposed to measure the price at which the items aregenerally available and I don't think they pick up the extent to whichdiscounts occur. Automobiles, for example, you can buy at belowdealer cost; there's no question about that in many cases. I thinkthe System's practice of bidding for automobiles when we buy, which Ithink we have to do, really results in our paying higher prices thanif we could go around and dicker with the dealers. I believe I canbuy an automobile more cheaply than the Reserve Bank bank can buy one.I think the surveys are not picking up a lot of that discountingbecause the discounted prices don't appear to be generally available.So, I feel a little better about the price situation. I think [theoutlook] looks very much like a soft landing with a slow pickup afterthat. That's probably too good to be true but that's my best guess.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.-78-12/18-19/89MR. BOEHNE. My area of the country is essentially flat witha lot of variation across industries and geographical areas. If youwant to get depressed, I can take you to places in New Jersey to talkto builders, real estate people, and automobile dealers; it's fairlydepressing. If you want to feel good I can take you to places inPennsylvania where the general business climate seems to be quitegood. There are a few straws in the wind that perhaps things inmanufacturing are flattening out. We too have been going through aperiod in recent months where manufacturing clearly has been trendingdown. One picks up some evidence that orders may be picking up,although the backlogs still seem to be going down fairly quickly. Iwouldn't read too much into that, but I think it is a straw in thewind.On the national economy, I think the Greenbook forecast is areasonable one. I think there is still some downside risk; thedownside risk is greater than the upside risk. The inflation outlookfor 1990 [in the Greenbook] strikes me as being about right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. In the First District, the latest indicators showour economy as slow to mixed, which is an improvement. Expectationsare almost universally gloomy but I think that's not just because ofthe national economy. It's an interaction of the budget problem inMassachusetts--which is sort of a fiscal Beirut--the softer [realestate market], the problems we have in the high-tech industry, andexpectations of potential problems in defense. There's a lot ofconcern about that, obviously, as a result of recent developments; andthat greatly increases concern about the banks and what that meanspotentially. This really has been carried widely in the newspapersand is having an effect. I don't know how good the sample is but ifyou look at the Conference Board consumer confidence survey by regionover the last year, the expectations in New England are 29 percentbelow where they were last year. Despite that, employment in the lastmonth actually grew slightly in New England and the rate of[un]employment was flat. This is a significant improvement from thedownturn we've been seeing for some period of time. Retailers arequite bearish and very concerned about sales. And the anecdotalinformation isn't encouraging in that regard. Some of that isattributable to the very cold weather we, as many people, have had,which is keeping people out of the stores. On the other hand, thecold weather obviously is going to stimulate measured sales of naturalgas, utilities, and other things. Almost all of our manufacturingcontacts report sales as flat, [unintelligible] down. For example, aheavy manufacturing who is headquartered in New England but whoactually has a lot of his facilities in Lee's District and Roger'sDistrict is very, very pessimistic. He produces a lot of stampingequipment for the auto industry and that sort of thing.Interestingly, he has found his sales now to be getting into foreignnameplate domestic producers; he has cracked that market somewhat.Someone raised the point of a structural shift in the auto industryand I wonder if that isn't something that is happening. If you lookat the sales of foreign nameplate cars produced domestically, they areholding up a fair bit better than sales of the Big Three. Both inputprices and prices for products remain fairly well behaved. Althoughmost firms improved--I guess this is universal--from past behavior,they hope to improve their margins [further] next year. At this point-79-12/18-19/89most manufacturers we've contacted have not changed their plans forcapital spending; their plans were not terribly ambitious in the firstplace, but they have not changed them a great deal. As I mentioned,the real estate market remains quite soft, particularly in theresidential area.Nationally, we're inclined to pretty much agree with theGreenbook forecast. If we have any area [of doubt] it might be thatwe don't know that we will get quite the reduction in the out years inspending on consumer services that the Greenbook has. In terms of myown perspective, as far as the national economy goes, I have comearound to the view that things may be somewhat softer than I hadthought originally. And I think this is borne out by the latestfigures we've seen. There are two factors I'd like to mention toexpand on that. One is that in going through the consumer confidencesurvey by region that I mentioned--and as I said I don't know how goodthe sample is--the two regions where consumer confidence actuallylooks pretty good with regard to expectations next year are the westNorthcentral and the east Northcentral. The west Northcentral lookspretty good but in the east Northcentral I think it depends an awfullot on what does happen to manufacturing there. I also wonder, giventhe problems the banks have in real estate and elsewhere, whether morefirms are going to have difficulty getting credit as they reach thepoint in the cycle when they turn to banks to get credit. I know thisis happening; we're hearing a lot of complaints about this in ourConsumer Advisory Council. I wonder whether banks are going to bemore inclined to pull their horns in, which could lead to accumulating[unintelligible]. All this leads me to believe the risks are more onthe down side than I had thought before. A difficult question formonetary policy, it seems to me, is exactly what the effect of ratesis going to be on much of this: on the [unintelligible], I'm not quitesure; also on housing, given the demographics. [Unintelligible] maywell be through the export sector, but they obviously will have anadverse effect on prices, which comes back to the issue of where we gonext and how we relate that to yesterday's discussion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. With regard first to the District economy, Ithink the economy is actually better than the mood. What is weighingon the mood are a couple of things that we talked about yesterday.One is that profit margins are getting squeezed and that clearly isaffecting business peoples' view of the situation. The other is thestruggling manufacturing sector in our area, particularly high-tech.But if you go beyond that, major retailers seem at least satisfied andmaybe more with holiday sales thus far. There are scattered reportsof smaller specialty operations not doing very well, but the majorstores seem happy. The reports on virtually all the metropolitanareas in the District are generally positive in terms of businessconditions. And because of some recovery in agriculture and otherfactors that I've mentioned before--including tourism, strength in thepaper products and lumber industry, and expansion in mining--most ofthe rural areas are doing pretty well. One exception, which issizable geographically but not so sizable in terms of population, isNorth Dakota where there are a series of problems; otherwise, theDistrict economy continues in my view to be in pretty good shape.-80-12/18-19/89With regard to the national economic situation, I don't thinkthere's any doubt that we're in for two or three slow quarters. Ijust don't see a way around that. But beyond that, my guess is thatthe Greenbook forecast is perhaps a bit on the cautious orconservative side. Looking at income and consumer balance sheets, Ithink consumer spending on nondurables and services will do better asnext year progresses and as 1991 unfolds than the Greenbook suggestsat the moment. On the inflation situation I've been more optimisticfor some time that we would start to see some disinflation ordeceleration in the rate of price increases. I must admit, given thestatistics over the last quarter or so in consumer prices and incompensation and so forth, that I'm beginning to wonder whether thathas been an accurate assessment. I just don't have the sense, lookingat that data, that such optimism is quite as justified as it mighthave been. I do pick up comments occasionally in the District: Whenyou ask business people about inflation, they say it's not a problem;but if you get them to elaborate, what they mean by "not a problem" isthat it's continuing at 4 or 5 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I have just a couple of comments. First of all,I agree with the Greenbook statement that signs of substantialslackening in the pace of economic expansion have accumulated inrecent weeks. I think we're going to get more. I'm particularlyconcerned about autos; the inventory situation is excessively heavy.I think the days' supply is the highest level for the end of Novemberin more than 10 years, which is quite a significant point I believe.Given that we're going into the next quarter with this tremendousinventory and given the fact that the effectiveness of incentivesprobably is wearing off, I think we will get much more of theadjustment on the production side than on the side of higher sales.We had the head ofand what he and I discussed quite a bit was the impact of theliberalizing of debt terms on car sales some time ago. That is comingback and biting the dealers because individuals who took advantage ofthose attractive terms earlier now find that they have no equity inthe car. They would like to get rid of the clunker--it's 3-1/2 yearsold--but they can't turn it in because they don't have the [equity] orthe downpayment. This apparently is a growing problem. Also, he wastalking about the financial health of the dealers. That is one placewhere interest rates do enter in because the dealers have to pay thefloor plan financing on all these cars; that isn't a gratuity from theauto manufacturers. And that's a big part of their cost besideshaving to rent fields to park the cars in. So I really believe thatover the next couple of quarters we're going to see quite a bit ofadditional bad news from the auto industry; and I don't think it'sgoing to impact just the Seventh District. In fact, some of theannouncements of plant closings have involved plants in places likeKansas and Georgia.MR. BOEHNE. And Delaware.MS. SEGER. And Delaware. I figured I'd get at least acouple of the Districts!MR. SYRON. And Massachusetts.-81-12/18-19/89MS. SEGER. I don't want to emphasize this too much. In thearea of housing, again, I'm very concerned. As real estate marketshave weakened around the country, my realtor friends tell me it's moredifficult to move existing homes. And for most people who are buyingnew homes, the purchase of the new home is contingent upon selling anexisting home. Therefore, that is a very major factor in the weaknessof new home sales. Again, the signals I get suggest that the realestate markets aren't about to improve dramatically soon, even in theNortheast. Also, I pick up more and more comments about the fragilityof the financial system, particularly from business people--people whoare not in a commercial bank or an S&L, but who just seem generallynervous about what's going on. And as Dick Syron said, there are moreand more suggestions that this ultimately is going to impact theavailability of credit, particularly for people who don't have a bluechip credit rating. I was at a real estate conference out in balmyCalifornia a couple of weeks ago and there was substantial discussionthere of the problems coming from the FIRREA legislation and what it'sdoing in the way of imposing lending limits on S&Ls. The banks forsome time have had limits on the size of loans that can be made to oneborrower. But with FIRREA extending that to S&Ls, it has become a bigproblem for contractors to get financing--at least the same way theyused to get it. So, there are a lot of things going on out there thatin my judgment indicate that the risks--for sure for the next twoquarters--are on the low side, the down side. I hope I'm wrong, butthose are my concerns. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. For the first three quarters of the year theDistrict really did quite well, as I have reported to you all along.Since that time it has slowed but it's not shrinking at all with theexception, of course, of auto-related activities and someconstruction-related activities. There hasn't been a major downturnin any of the industries to the extent that it has caused people tosay: "We have a major problem on our hands." Services continue togrow in our District. By cities, Cincinnati has relatively stronggrowth; Columbus is probably next in line; Cleveland is close to beingflat; and Pittsburg is flat. Now, just so that you don't think I havereported this District as being extra strong in order to influence[others toward] my policy position, I had a witness at our last boardmeeting to hear all the branch directors speak. That witness was theChairman. I think one might categorize their statements as rathersanguine about the outlook. So, the District may be somewhat peculiarin the sense that to the business community things may seem to besoftening a little but not sufficiently to generate major concerns forthem.In terms of the national outlook, I think Mike's guess is asgood as anyone else's with respect to the course of the economy and Idon't really have any major disagreements with it. My only concern isthat we may focus overly on a particular quarterly change. I thinkthat the economy needs room to make those kinds of changes before wedo something with respect to policy. I expect variations quarter-by-quarter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.-82-12/18-19/89VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. My sense of the situation continuesto be pretty much in line with Mike's forecast. Looking forwardthat's probably as respectable a judgment as one can have. It isinteresting, though, to think a bit about the situation in the contextof a question that Governor Johnson raised earlier, and that is: Ifyou go back to the beginning of the year, the growth of the economyfor the year 1989 as a whole will in fact have been very, very closeto what we were thinking back in February. I think it's true that thedifferences in interest rates and exchange rates relative to theoutlook then pretty much do cancel each other out. But the questionis: If that is true retrospectively, what about prospectively? And Ithink the signs of greater weakness in the economy right here and noware of more concern than what happened in 1989 as a whole. In lookingat the sources of weaknesses in the economy now, we have to try todisentangle the reasons they are there. When you're talking about adifference in growth between 2-1/2 percent and 1-1/2 percent, at leastat the margin 1 percent means a lot. But at the margin some of thesethings have to be kept in context. For example, in both residentialand nonresidential construction, we are now paying the price for a lotof overbuilding that took place in the past; and indeed a lot of itwas at interest rates a heck of a lot higher than the interest rateswe're looking at today or prospectively. There are serious creditproblems in this area, both with developers and suppliers. I have adown-home example: the contractor that we've used at the Bank foryears. We were about to let a contract when his insurance companywouldn't post bond for him for credit reasons. And this is a companywe've done business with for 50 years!MS. SEGER. Maybe you didn't pay them on time!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We paid them on time. Theseproblems are quite real. What people are saying about a profitsqueeze in the corporate sector is true and it has implications forfixed investment. Why is that? Well, there are a lot of reasons butone is that inflation in wage and compensation costs is still prettystrong; and a second reason is this interest cost. If you look at thecorporate sector as a whole and break it down into 3 or 4 digit SICindustry groups, the interest cost running out of all this leveragingclearly is contributing to that problem. Again, in the [auto] sectora lot of things have worked. But I think it's hard to dismiss totallythis kind of saturation or structural argument even in a context, asSi Keehn says, in which sales of cars and trucks this year still aregoing to be over 14-1/2 million units. Now, those are very, very bignumbers. Having said that, I do think that in the very short run,which I'll define as the next couple of quarters, the risks areasymmetric on the down side. But on the other hand, if we manage towiggle through the next couple of quarters, I think the danger is thatthe risks could then shift in the opposite direction at least toneutral and maybe even to the up side. And that's why I think thisperiod is so tough.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I continue to be dismayed by the less thansanguine prospects for any progress against inflation in spite of thevery low level of economic expansion that we're looking at in theforecast. And I'm increasingly of the feeling that we are on prettythin ice--that the ice is thin between us and the cold water of some-83-12/18-19/89sort of a recession. I don't think it's a recession that isnecessarily going to be triggered or aborted by financial externalfactors. I'm increasingly concerned that we may get a contraction inthe economy here that is driven solely by a collapse of confidence.There are some signs out there that are very worrisome: this wholereal estate fungus that is spreading across the country, which is a[unintelligible] of price resistance; the slowness of the markets; andincreasing pressures on prices. It's not going to be helped at all bythe cranking up of the activities of the RTC. And I think that's nowbeing reflected in the serious concern that the markets are showingfor the whole banking sector. It's not just New England banks as aresult of the Bank of New England problem; they all took a terriblebeating yesterday. It is indicative of this fragility that severalhave commented on around the table. And when you look at how aslowdown would affect the debt burden that we have in the economy interms of the flow of revenues and the direct effect on cash flow andthe coverage of debt service, it seems to me that you see a snowballbeginning to roll downhill that I don't like the looks of. I'm notsure that further ease can do anything to correct this situation, ifin fact this confidence factor is as serious as I think it is. ButI'm certainly convinced that the risks are on the down side in theenvironment that we're looking at now. And I'm worried.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. In our District we went through a sluggishperiod in terms of employment, which I reported, in the secondquarter. The third quarter picked up; it was still slow relative towhat was happening nationally, but we had employment growth.Interestingly enough, October was particularly strong: 4.3 percentgrowth in a month, with most of the strength in manufacturingconstruction and miscellaneous services. I don't think one can readtoo much into one month but our economy still seems to be[unintelligible]. It's not [unintelligible]. In Missouri, we havethe second largest auto concentration behind Michigan. Interestinglyenough, autos represent only 1.9 percent of our output in the Districtversus 1.2 percent nationally. I realize that the business extendsmore broadly than that, but that is in terms of autos directly.Chrysler has announced a shutdown of its number one plant in Fenton,which produces Daytonas and LaBarons, for a five-week or one-monthperiod rather than the normal one-week shutdown. That's not news;what is interesting to me, anyway, is that people who are idled inthis fashion will earn at the lowest levels 65 to 70 percent of theirnormal wage and the higher seniority people will earn up to 95percent. So in terms of the impact on income currently, it tends tobe minimal. I've also talked from time-to-time about the consumerdurables business. We have a fairly heavy concentration of that. Andthe pattern there was that through midyear billings were up about 5percent and then in July they fell off quite [sharply]; they were downabout 17 percent compared to the prior year. But then for the monthsof August, September, October and now most recently November, theyhave been down about 5 percent in each of the months compared to theprior year. So there hasn't been a cumulative deterioration there.One of those manufacturers that I'm aware of is laying people off overthe holidays for a longer-than-normal idling period--three to fourweeks instead of one. On the retail side, in St. Louis I think theretailers are quite optimistic about the Christmas season. They wererunning higher inventories intentionally going into the season and-84-12/18-19/89they feel pretty good about the prospects. They don't expect it to bea great year in terms of profits but in terms of buying it should be.On the national front, I just want to make one comment. Idon't think the general outlines of our forecast would be muchdifferent from what Mike and his people have developed. I'm certainlystruck by the comments I hear around the table in terms of incipientweakness. The only thing I would say is that, in a sense, weanticipated that around this table six or eight months ago. Policywas eased beginning in May; it was eased quite a bit. And in myjudgment, whether or not we sweep through this period--or however youput it, Jerry--is going to depend an awful lot on that bet we placedthen and not on bets we make right now. I just think we have to keepthat in mind. We all see the weakness; but don't forget that it wasanticipated and steps were taken; and we do have that other goal thatwe discussed yesterday that gets jeopardized to the extent that we tryto overcompensate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Well, Tom, it's interesting that you mentionedthat. I would make one 30-day correction though; I think several ofus wanted to ease in May, but I believe we didn't ease until June.Isn't that correct? Certainly, I was foremost among those wanting toease at that time because I was looking at what I think are thefactors that we have to keep our eyes on: that is, the factors thatlook ahead, not those that look behind. One of those that looksahead, of course, is money growth; and at that time we had moneygrowth that was pretty well in the tank after it had been through arather restrained period. But I do agree with Tom that we have made acorrection and that the time for worrying about the fourth quarter andthe first quarter was in May and June and July and August. What we'reworking on now, of course, is the economy in the third quarter of1990. I must admit that I don't see anything to quibble with in thestaff's forecast for the real economy for 1990. I wouldn't know whichway to try to [unintelligible] in terms of which way there are errors.Any time we are talking about an outlook for growth as low as the 1.2percent projected for the first quarter--we all know that any onequarter can go in a surprising direction. But it's important for usto look ahead. As I look ahead, I would note that money growth seemsto be falling along an 8 percent path for M2, which is rathersignificant compared to what we've seen previously. Besides that, itis reflected in auction markets and the auction markets show that wenow have more liquidity out there than we had before. It's quiteclear in the commodities. Commodities in May clearly were showingthat we were in a period of suffering from quite a bit of monetaryrestraint. And for commodity prices on a year-over-year basis therate of change was starting downward. But now we are in a period ofvery, very mixed--and I can say somewhat confusing--commodity pricesignals. In the industrial sector, clearly in aluminum and steel andcopper, we have a significant change from what we have seenpreviously. But these industrial commodity prices are coming offhistorically high levels. And it doesn't seem to me that they haveweakened so far as to take profit margins into the red for most ofthose basic metals. Of course, producers don't like it when that hashappened. In the food and fiber areas we've had significant runupsand with those runups producers of food and fibers continue to haveprofit margins that are rather ample. That shows up in the price of-85-12/18-19/89land that we get in the Tenth and the Eleventh and the SeventhDistrict surveys. So that sort of offsets some of the others. Theprice of gold, of course, is somewhat erratic; it's somewhat like theexchange rates and tends to be given to overshooting andundershooting. Nevertheless, that is a rather significant indicatorregarding the way people feel about dollars in the future; those whowish to make other kinds of bets would indicate, I think, that ourexchange rate messing around in the last three months has contributedto some unease there and I think it's showing. And I think that haseven [unintelligible] that active if it nevertheless has been quiteaccurate in terms of showing some change in sentiment. The foreignexchange market in the last three months certainly has shown that ourmoney growth path changes are reflecting that. No longer do theforeign exchange auction markets show that dollars are somewhatoverscarce in the minds of holders of international capital flows.Now, when I think about the dangers of what might happen--andit's always our job to try to guess and to worry about what might behappening--if the fourth and the first quarters or one of them turnout to be negative, there isn't anything we can do about it. That'salready locked in. But if I'm going to worry about what might happenthat could really put our economy in a tailspin, I would worry aboutthe occurrence of circumstances in which the foreign exchange value ofthe dollar could erode rather seriously. I think Jerry was referringto that problem; he referred to it as from time-to-time. Sometimes Iworry about it, sometimes I don't. When we have slow money growthcompared to the Bundesbank and Japan and other countries then I'm notquite so worried. In circumstances when our monetary growth is nolonger slower than the Bundesbank, then it seems to me there's a greatdeal of vulnerability. If we were to get some significant moves inforeign exchange rates that adversely affected bond prices--unlike sofar, when foreign exchange weakness has not spilled over, exceptsporadically, in the bond market--and we were to have higher rates bylowering rates, it is in the higher rates where it counts. So, Ithink the vulnerabilities that we have are pretty well locked in. Butit seems to me that there's nothing out there that says the thirdquarter is going to be all that weak. I must admit, Governor Seger,that I think some of the problems that you look at in automobiles mayvery well slip into the second quarter after a low first quarter. Butother than that, I don't see things in the second and third quartersthat are showing a need for a great deal of attention. And I do thinkback to 1980. Of all total benefit/cost analysis of all the policiesthat [unintelligible] wasted, nothing is so wasted as this short-term[unintelligible]. Two quarters of slow growth followed by aresumption [of rapid growth] are totally wasted as far as price leveleffects [are concerned]. So we want to be sure not to get too lockedup in guiding monetary policy by what's happening in the economy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I guess I've learned to think likean economist in one respect: by thinking on the one hand and then onthe other hand. On the one hand, it's very clear that we have aweakening economy and it's very clear that a recession is highlyundesirable for a whole host of reasons--the fragility that has beenmentioned and many other things. That would argue, I think, for anaccommodation to buy ourselves a little insurance for next spring,summer and fall. On the other hand, I do have great concern that we12/18-19/89should to the best of our ability ensure that we keep the inflationtrend moving in the correct direction. And I think that argues forbeing a little cautious. Also, in the area of reducing fluctuationsaround the trend line, that argues for being a little cautiousparticularly since the aggregates--M2 particularly--show a fairly highlevel of strength. I definitely share your concern, Governor Angell,about the possible bind we could find ourselves in if the dollarshould suddenly go south in a serious way. So, on the one hand and onthe other hand, Mr. Chairman, I come out [balanced], which leads me tothink that perhaps we ought to keep our cards pretty close to thechest for a while.MR. JOHNSON. Just about everything has been said. I agreewith a lot of it. And some of the recent comments were along thelines of what I was thinking. The economy is currently weak; I don'tthink there's any doubt about that. And I agree with Tom that it'snot totally unanticipated. Some of what we're seeing now is what weknew would be coming down the pike from our tightening actions monthsago. So it certainly is not a time for us to panic over what we seenow; it shouldn't be a surprise to anyone and there's nothing we cando about it now for these couple of quarters. There is nothing incurrent policy that is going to alter what we're going to see developin the next few months. However, financial markets are much moreforward looking and much more sensitive to current policy and cancertainly turn on a dime on the basis of what they think our currentpolicy means for the future. On that front, I'm somewhat withGovernor Angell--my views are not quite as strong as his--in that thecurrent financial market data don't seem to be showing any certainpattern of [striking] concern about the degree of tightness in currentpolicy down the road. The bond market is relatively stable; commodityprices are gradually weakening, I think, although oil keeps bumpingthose prices around from time-to-time. But I think the trend isclearly down, though not dramatically, in overall commodity prices.It is true that the dollar is weaker on a trade-weighted basis, but Ipersonally tend to dismiss most of that as a result of what's going onin Germany and the fact that they have tightened their policy quitedramatically. The dollar is not really weak against the yen and it'snot really weak against the Canadian dollar or pound sterling. But itis weak against the EMS countries and Germany because they have runreal interest rates up quite substantially and [unintelligible] alsoover the east European problem.But I do agree with some of John LaWare's comments. I sensea sort of snowballing effect in the real estate market that'sbothering me. I don't know how negative an effect that's going tohave on expectations as home equity values come under pressure andhousing prices or other real estate prices decline. But it is on theorder of [unintelligible] systemic, I think. I wouldn't go so far asto bet the ranch on that now, but it worries me. And I certainlyworry about having a deteriorating situation down the road with aworsening economy and finding ourselves in a mild recession. I'd bewilling to face the threat of that if I didn't think inflation wasimproving some and if we had some flexibility. But I would disagreewith those who don't think that there's any improvement on theinflation front or that we haven't made some progress. Certainly theactual inflation data that I've seen over the last six months show animprovement. It's not just food and energy [prices]; the centraltendency of this Committee back in July when we made our estimates-87-12/18-19/89[for the Humphrey-Hawkins report] was 5 to 5-1/2 percent on the CPI.Now, with one month left, it looks like it's going to come in around4-1/2 percent or something like that. It's running 4.7 percent rightnow. Some of that is an improvement in food and energy prices; butex-food and energy, there has been progress over the last six monthsas well--both in producer prices and consumer prices relative toexpectations. So actually, I think we do have some flexibility here.I don't think that the market is expecting a whole lot out of the Fedin terms of a further easing. I think we have gained some credibilityand the last thing I want to do is to lose that. But the market isexpecting some modest easing of policy in a way that fits into ourscrooge-like approach to monetary policy in terms of protecting theinflation environment. We're worrying about where the economy isgoing to be six months down the road and we don't think there's anelement of danger of a pickup in inflation or, in fact, inflation hascontinued to improve. So we're in a position to have some choices; Idon't think we're faced with no choices.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I just checked the fragilities. The[unintelligible] is down 22 so it's [unintelligible]. We don't havevery much time for coffee, but let's take a very short break and--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Have some very cold coffee.[Coffee break]MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don?MR. HOSKINS. Relative to your projections in September whatare the aggregates running? What were you forecasting in Septemberfor money growth for this three-month period?MR. KOHN. I don't know. I can tell you what we wereforecasting last time and it's running about 1/2 to 3/4 of a pointabove that.MR. HOSKINS. Do you have any feeling as to why it's runningabove?MR. KOHN. Well, I think we've had a more vigorous responseto the drop in [rates]. I'm sure it's running above what we hadforecast in September because we have lower interest rates now than wewere forecasting in September.MR. HOSKINS. Yes.MR. KOHN. But we don't have lower rates than we wereforecasting at the last meeting since we just had that easing. I justthink that we didn't factor in quite enough response to that ease--quite enough of a drop in velocity, really, in the current or the nextquarter. We got a faster response and a bit stronger response.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Would you repeat that?-88-12/18-19/89MR. KOHN. I think we're having a somewhat stronger responseto the drop in interest rates in October and November than we had[anticipated].MR. JOHNSON. Okay. Just looking at the charts that youhanded out on real interest rates--it depends on which survey onelooks at, but--in the short-term end they really show very modestdeclines in real interest rates since the peak of our tighteningperiod. And in some of them there is even a recent uptick in realinterest rates because of the improvement in inflationary expectationsin the short run. If that's the case, one of the worries is that eventhough the funds rate is lower in [nominal] terms we really haven'teased policy recently. We are down from the peaks, I think, but notby very much.MR. KOHN. Well, that's the way I would read it, GovernorJohnson--that is, I think we are off the peaks. And that is sort ofconfirmed in the long-term real interest rate. I think real rateshave come down a little but not a whole lot. I would ignore thoselittle dips there in what looks like the spring of 1989 because Ithink that was a surge in inflation expectations associated with foodand energy rather than some underlying factor. I think the Committeehas eased policy since February; real rates have come down but [not]as much as nominal rates. The more difficult question is: Where arethey relative to some equilibrium level? I never thought that rateswere that high relative to the equilibrium level, so my guess would bethat we've come down a bit but probably not that far from where weought to be. Looking at the long-term rates, including themeasurement we did for the Committee a year or so ago on the corporatebond rate and how that lines up with our estimated equilibrium realrate, we're very close--about 20 basis points below.MR. JOHNSON. Okay, thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Don?MR. HOSKINS. Just one more. It's my usual fragilityquestion, Don. Aren't all the rates you've shown in all thealternatives, carried out, consistent with perhaps some accelerationin inflation over time rather than--?MR. KOHN. Well, no. Do you mean money growth rates?MR. HOSKINS. Yes.MR. KOHN. No, I wouldn't say that. Yes, if you carried the8 percent rate out--I'm not sure I understand the question.MR. HOSKINS. No, you understand the question. The questionis if we were to continue at these current rates--MR. KOHN. I agree. If you were to carry 8 percent moneygrowth through '90 and into '91--MR. HOSKINS. Into '90 we'll have a problem.MR. KOHN. Yes, I agree.-89-12/18-19/89MR. HOSKINS. But without raising interest rates you expect[growth] to slow to 6 percent?MR. KOHN. That's correct. At current levels of interestrates, I expect growth on the order of 6 percent for the year as theeffects of the previous [rate] declines wear off.MR. ANGELL. At this stage how much does every 50 basispoints do to the [expectation of] 6 percent in 1990?MR. KOHN. It gets you about 1/2 point. For Q4 over Q4 we'reat a stage where 50 basis points will get you about 1/2 point; 50basis points now would get you--MR. ANGELL. So a decline of 50 basis points would take it upto 6-1/2 percent?MR. KOHN. Approximately 6-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions? If not, let mestart off. The meeting yesterday very clearly indicated that if we'regoing to get down to a low enough inflation rate to satisfy thisCommittee at some point in the next two or three years we are going tohave to engage in some tightening. By that I mean we are going tohave to bring the growth rate of M2 down, focused at--I don't knowwhere the number is. The question also in the context of thepolitical discussion we had is: When is that feasible? Well, if youfocus from here on, it strikes me that the best path of getting that[M2 growth] rate down is some time--in fact, it already would havebeen embodied in the Greenbook at the stage in 1991 where we reallybegin to put some tightening on. A necessary condition, politically,for people arguing to do that is that we skim through this particularperiod without going into the ditch. Because if we could come throughthis period even with a mild recession, or preferably none whatever, Ithink the credibility of the institution would be such by the fall of1990 that we could probably write our own policy ticket in thatrespect. As a consequence, though, I would very much focus on whatour short-term actions are and whether in fact we will be able to workour way through this period without cracking up somewhere along theline. The evidence as of now is that in the manufacturing area orderscontinue to drift lower; unfilled orders are declining; there areactually very few production cutbacks with the exception of autos anddirect auto-related areas and some elements in the capital goodsmarkets. But there is no cumulative activity going on around these.The structure of the economy has not been cracked. It is undergoingincreasing downward pressure as profit margins weaken. And autos havebecome a fairly [unintelligible] force. The failure of newresidential construction to move with the decline in mortgage ratessuggests to me that housing is essentially flat out there. Alsopressing, but not unduly pressing, are the issues that Mike Prellcalled the sort of non-GNP inventory levels: the stock of autos, thestock of housing, and the stock of commercial buildings, all of whichare one step back in feeding into the GNP.If it were true that short-term interest rates or interestrates generally at this particular stage have very little effect onthe next three to six months I would say there's very little we can doabout it. The truth of the matter is that I don't believe that for a-90-12/18-19/89minute. I do think that there is a significant longer-term impactfrom interest rates; but I don't see that monetary policy has noeffect in the short run. The reason I say that is--well, there reallyare two questions. One is: How secure are we as far as activity isconcerned in, say, the [spring and] forward? And I would say that wedo have a forward indicator and that's largely unfilled orders. Tothe extent that unfilled orders continue to decline, that suggests tome that we do need something of a prop--more than we are going to begetting under existing monetary policy for say May, June, July,September. But I also believe that there is a distributed lag effectin monetary policy in which you do get, largely through the financialsystem, short-term effects. There is a very clear relationshipbetween interest rates, Fed policy, the stock market, and real estatevalues. And to the extent that one shares some of Governor LaWare'sconcerns about confidence, there is a confidence element in here inwhich the lead times are not six months; they are often weeks to amonth or two. In that time one can see new orders falling veryquickly under financial stress; and the feedback is very dramatic. Iremember sitting through 1974. Now, if somebody's going to tell methere was a long lead time between the period there in the fall andthe period of February 1975, I will tell you that it went by so fastthat you couldn't see it. I think it's a mistake to presume thatmonetary policy has no short-term effect. I don't deny that most ofthe effect works its way out in various different forms of distributedlags. But in this type of environment I'm not sure that is correct.In any event, where I come out is that at a minimum I thinkwe should be significantly asymmetrical toward ease. I would muchprefer, however, to go to $125 million on borrowings, which issomewhere between "A" and "B," and the equivalent of about 25 basispoints at this meeting. Vice Chairman, do you want to pick up?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes. Let me--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd like to say one more thing. Afterthat I would stay symmetrical if there is an agreement on that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me just say a quick word on thisfinancial fragility issue. I say with some confidence that I'mprobably as sensitive to that as anybody in the room, but I thinkwe've got to keep that in some perspective. First, where does it comefrom? I think there are two basic sources: one is the macroeconomicimbalances that we've been living with for a long time thatfundamentally reflect the policy mix problem; and the second source ofit is what we have to regard as excesses, or maybe even outrightspeculation, in large segments of the financial markets and inimportant segments in the real economy, including the nonfinancialcorporate sector and the real estate sector. Obviously, we have to besensitive to that fragility even though we may not like its causes.But I think we've got to be extremely careful not to sanction itbecause of its causes. So sensitive, yes; but sanction, no.In terms of policy, I see three options and they're not "A,""B," and "C" in Bluebook terms. Basically they are: first, to keep anasymmetric--perhaps a strongly asymmetric--directive and do nothingright now; second, to do something like what the Chairman just said,which essentially would mean moving 1/4 point on the funds rate or$125 million on borrowing while keeping an asymmetric directive; and-91-12/18-19/89third, to do the quarter point on the funds rate and the correspondingborrowing adjustment now but go back to a symmetric directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Jerry, I was going [toward the third]--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Okay. Well, I myself would come outin my own camp three. In other words, I'd take the borrowings down anotch right now, take the funds rate down a notch right now, and havea symmetric directive going forward. The fundamental reason why Iwould do that I would translate in terms of what I earlier called thewiggle factor--trying to kind of wiggle through this period. But indoing that, I would not in any way want to associate myself with someother statements that have been made that might suggest coming out thesame place but for different reasons. I am not terribly uncomfortablewith where we are and I do think that looking further out the riskscould change. So, I'd say get this move behind us; do it right heretoday at the Committee meeting and accompany it with a symmetricdirective going forward. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think it is a close call today. There are thedownside risks and the financial fragility risks that argue for someadditional insurance. However, I come down on the side of continuingthe existing directive with no change now and asymmetrical in adownward direction. I come out that way essentially because we havewhat we set out to achieve--a slower economy--and we ought to try nowto realize some of the anti-inflationary benefits that come from thatand set the stage for further anti-inflationary benefits down theroad. I think the wisest statement that's been made this morning isthe one by Governor Angell when he said that it's a very wastefulexperience to have a couple of slow quarters and then accelerate outof it. And I think we're in danger of doing that. We have a fairlyrapid growth in M2; it's rapid as far out as we're projecting it into1990. I think the risks are that we're going to come out in thespring faster than we would like and be in a position then of havingto clamp down at the worst time, politically and economically. And wewill have wasted what we've done. So, I think we ought to take someof the risks that go with this downside risk. If we have to ease,let's ease; but let's wait until there's a strong case to do it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I do agree with you thatthere is some short-run impact of monetary policy. That is, I dobelieve that the second-quarter numbers can be impacted ratherslightly because those actually are the months that really fit inthere--and really [also] the month of March even though it's in thefirst quarter because it still affects how that first quarter ends.So, in the months of March, April, and May--sure, there will be someimpact. But my view is that what we ought to look at here is not asacrifice ratio or sacrifice index; we ought to look at a benefitsindex. And the benefit index is just too, too small. That is, webenefit so slightly compared to what it costs in terms of inflation.I remember the 1986 experience in which it actually ended up that onequarter was negative and the next quarter was positive; the thirdquarter was positive just the same amount the second was negative andwe ended up getting zero. But the rate of inflation was down low-92-12/18-19/89enough that coming out of that was not letting the [unintelligible]in, and going by that I think was the proper thing to have done. Butwe came out of that with an inflation rate that had some room. It wasdown 1 percent. Now, 1986 was an unusual year; that was an aberrationin terms of the oil price factor. Nevertheless, there were somepossibilities of it not being so high. If we go through a two-quarterslowdown and there's not a recession and we come out of it with therate of inflation where the staff have it forecast and then we have toturn around in the fall of 1990 or a year from now and tighten or ifwe have to turn around and tighten in the summer, that's when it'stough. When you think about the yield curve and the bond rates, whathappens is that all of a sudden you get expectations that are changed.The long bond doesn't just represent inflation expectations; it alsorepresents expectations as to Fed policy. And when we shift fromeasing to tightening we have a real tough deal to play. If this isnot a political window, then I don't see how that's a politicalwindow, because it really is going to be tough to make thatturnaround.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I just comment? We're talking aboutvery small changes. To go back to 1980: I have forgotten the fundsrate; I don't know how many points of that drop in the--MR. ANGELL. Well, the funds rate came down from 9 percent to5 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh, I don't know; it was more than that.MR. PARRY. It got as high as 13 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. 13 percent in what--?MR. PRELL. In 1980.MR. ANGELL. Oh yes, 1980.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's about 1986--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, he was originally talking about1980. What I'm trying to say is that if you look at the funds ratepattern and the borrowing pattern that we've been through here, theydon't show in the chart. We used to get the sort of thing that you'retalking about; what we've been doing is this--MR. ANGELL. Yes, I recognize that M2 growth isn't going togo to 32 percent like it did in 1980. But I'm not suggesting that.What I am suggesting is that the benefit for the second quarter is sosmall and the benefit for the third quarter is not all that large.What I see is that the financial markets and commodity markets andforeign exchange markets are rather fragile right now. And I think wesend an attitudinally wrong signal by this small step at this point intime. I point out to you that the long bond really has been stuck inthis 7.85 to 7.95 percent region and the last [unintelligible] basispoints in the fed funds rate has not been accompanied by a[unintelligible] bond yield. I'm saying that by being patient now andby waiting, we may very well get a climate in which these marketexpectations will be more favorable. I'm not suggesting that I wouldnot at any point in time next year be in favor of further adjustment.-93-12/18-19/89But I would rather the bond markets lead us rather than take thechance now that if we make this move and the bond market, like thelast two times, signals something else. That means it doesn't help.Housing starts are the key to any soft landing scenario. And we mustlet the long bond yield lead us. That's why I think this little bittymove is worth my resistance.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, we all certainly agree that westarted off on this path some time ago to bring economic activity downto a lower level so that we could get some gains in inflation. If Ithought that we could remain at this point with the inflation gains--and as Governor Johnson just indicated we have made some gains oninflation--and keep on this path and slowly whittle away at theinflation rate, I'd be in favor of staying where we are. But myconcern is that the economy is going to deteriorate. Everything thatI see out there and everything I hear suggests to me that the risk isthat we will fall into a recession. I think even a mild recession isgoing to make our lives very, very difficult. I would make theargument, contrary to the one that we just heard, that if we go intothis period over the next few months and we have a downturn in theeconomy, then we're going to have to ease further. And I think thatis going to make our lives difficult in terms of inflation. It isgoing to produce an acceleration of inflation and the timetable forachieving price stability is going to be put off by some period oftime. So, I'm concerned about the risks. I continue to be concernedabout inflation and I certainly don't want to give up on that fight.But I think we'd be making a mistake now if we did not have a milddecrease in the funds rate. I agree with you, Mr. Chairman, for allthe other reasons you gave that confidence and the position of thefinancial markets are very important. I think we've got a politicalwindow here to do it. I'm afraid if we don't do it and the economydeteriorates, we're going to be in serious trouble not onlyeconomically but politically as well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I basically would like to associatemy views with those of President Boehne. Clearly, the economy hasslowed substantially this quarter but there are temporary factorsinvolved such as Boeing. And it seems to me quite conceivable thatover the next few quarters economic growth could turn out to besomewhat [higher] than that incorporated in the Greenbook, althoughclearly it would be moderate. It seems to me, though, that a moderatepace of output growth is essential to lower the risk of anacceleration in underlying inflation and to begin to make someprogress toward price stability. Thus, I would support an unchangedpolicy stance at this point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Asymmetric toward ease? What do youwant?MR. PARRY. I can accept asymmetric; it isn't my firstchoice, but I can accept it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.-94-12/18-19/89MR. SYRON. As many people have said here, it's very hard tojudge the risks on one side or the other. Mike Kelley's comment abouthis becoming a two-handed economist is appropriate here. But eventhough the risks are fairly well balanced, we can't avoid the factthat this is a very high stakes game that we're in, particularly atthis point. The point that you made in terms of when we get a windowis well taken as is the point that these changes that we're talkingabout are minute enough--minute may not be the right word, but they'renot so gigantic that they're likely to have dramatically differentcosts in the longer run. So in that circumstance, I prefer taking outa little insurance in the sense of protection on the financialfragilities side and the economy going down. I would be comfortablewith the 25 basis points but--and I think this is an importantdistinction--with symmetrical language. I have one last point:Another factor that weighs into this is that I strongly prefer takingthe action, as Jerry said, at today's meeting. Now is the time to doit.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think you have made thecase for taking some action now. What troubles me about it is that Ithink if we do take that action, it's going to make our job moredifficult as 1990 rolls along in terms of bringing in M2 growth aboutwhere we'd like it to be--at a rate of growth consistent with ourattainment of our longer-run objective. Weighing those factors andacknowledging that it's a difficult choice, I come out on the side ofnot taking any action now and going with an asymmetric directive evenmore strongly; a symmetric directive I can certainly live with. Butknowing what I can see about 1990 and the trajectory that M2 has beenon and so forth, I just don't think that this is a circumstance whereI'd want to push further.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I completely agree with yourrecommendation to make the move now. It seems to me that we have beenmoving in a pattern for the last several months and that it has beenan appropriate way of dealing with the economy as it has beenchanging. Therefore, to make another move now would be important andI think that we should do so. It seems to me that the risks areclearly on the down side. I'm not quite sure what kind of animmediate impact we will get, but certainly at the margin it has to bea plus rather than a minus. I would move the rate down and then wouldreturn the directive to symmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I came into thismeeting with the thought of retaining policy about where we are nowwith an asymmetric directive. But I could accept your proposal--thatis, coming down a 1/4 point now with a symmetric directive in theperiod ahead. I'm not too opposed to giving the nation a littleChristmas present, which is not necessarily--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. To you.SPEAKER(?). The reputation of your Bank.-95-12/18-19/89MR. BLACK. You don't think you're sending a false impressionfor later years do you?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I appreciate that because if not, Iprobably would be out on a limb.MR. ANGELL. It is a Christmas present but it's a Trojanhorse.MR. SYRON. [Not] unless the door opens.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We better continue. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I would support your suggestion of an immediatecut in the fed funds rate; in fact, I could even go for 50 basispoints, but I won't be a hog and I'll settle for 25. As I saidearlier, I think the risks are on the down side. I don't see wherethe strength of the economy is coming from in the next two quarters,and beyond that I'm not sure what's going to provide the impetus foran uptick. I'm very concerned about the financial fragility; I'm veryconcerned that so many people in the business world are sensitive toit. It's one thing for me to be and it's another for them to factorthat into their decisions. And I do believe that lower interest rateswould have an impact on the economy before six or nine months go by,even though it probably takes that long to get the full impact. Ithink you would get some impact, particularly on the psychologicalside. So that's my vote.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I come out essentially where Ed Boehne did. Letme add another thought or two here. One is that I don't think we havea lot of opportunities left to ease. Now, that could be proven wrong.What I would tend to look at in that regard is if the demand for moneyis falling out of bed and we're pegging the funds rate, we better payattention to that. So even though I don't favor easing now, I don'trule out the possibility that that may become necessary down the road.But the way I see things now, we don't have many opportunities; Ithink perhaps you're implying that by moving to symmetric language.But as things have progressed, I think it was quite appropriateearlier on to try to stay ahead of the situation, to anticipate andthen move in advance. I think in a sense we're probably beyond thatnow. I don't have the impression that markets are expecting us to doanything and I think pressures will develop. I know there areexpectations over time that the funds rate will come down, but I don'thave the sense that people looking at it right now in general wouldconclude that the Fed really ought to do something right now. Andgiven the view that we have very few opportunities left in thisdirection, I would tend to conserve them and not use an opportunitynow. Beyond that, my view is based on some comments I've made before.I think we have made a significant adjustment in policy; I think theaggregates are growing now at rates consistent with continuedexpansion; and I'm concerned that a move in this direction at thistime would make our [unintelligible] in terms of price stability.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.-96-12/18-19/89MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I could be comfortable going ineither of the two directions that have been suggested in thisconversation. As I look at the sack of apples and the sack oforanges, they weigh about the same on the scale. My head tells me tohold fire and not change now, but my tummy tells me that the economyneeds, and can get, a confidence boost if we do a small move now. So,I come down on the side of concurring with your suggestion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I would concur with your formulation, Mr.Chairman. One thing strikes me. I don't know whether it will hangtogether or not but I almost have the sense, tactically speaking, thatthe modest move that is being recommended right now probably puts usin a better position to resist a stronger move later on, because atleast we could show that we had been responsive. If, in our judgmentdown the road, it really isn't the time to move, I think we're betterpositioned to resist that at that point.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Bob, that was part of what I meantby my wiggle factor.MR. BOYKIN. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Listening to the comments, it seems to me thatin some cases we have forgotten yesterday's meeting. It's like microand macroeconomics: they don't seem to be linked up, at least in thetext books. So, I'd like to start where I think we left off yesterdaywith regard to the comments around the table when we talked aboutprice stability. There are some who want zero inflation and there areothers who want one or two percent inflation. And I don't see usmoving in that direction with the current recommendation on the table.Our goal is a long-run goal to provide price stability. I thinkpolicy is a long-term instrument to achieve that. We know theeconomists and policymakers can consistently predict business cycles.We look at the forecast; we have no recession now in the forecast andI don't see any reason to second guess that. What disturbs me alittle is that to some extent we're following the same mechanisms thatwe followed [unintelligible] absolutely have to react on the otherside. Now, maybe we're a better body than those people who madepolicy then, or maybe we've learned some more and we can continue touse that mechanism but do it better. I think that's what people aretrying to argue around here. I'm not so confident that we can dothat. With respect to the political issue, I look back five years andwe've had five years of what I would call stabilizing the inflationrate. Certainly during that period there must have been some windowsof political opportunity to move down and yet we have not done that interms of the inflation rate. I think it's important to recognize thegrowth rates in money. Somebody like Ed Boehne recognizes[unintelligible] hasn't been out hammering out money continuously. Itake note of that. I just don't see the political argument aspersuasive; I think it has as many traps and pitfalls for us as it hasat any other time. I find all the growth rates a little too high inany of the alternatives. But if I were to [choose], my recommendationwould be for alternative "C."-97-12/18-19/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. My initial inclination, Mr. Chairman, had beento go for "B" with a revision in that arcane language that would tiltit even more heavily toward ease. My thought was that there may notbe a compelling argument for an immediate signal but that we ought tohave plenty of room to move if in fact some of the things that I wasworried about [materialize]--if the ice begins to crack. I guess I amwilling to go along with the immediate move, with the idea that thesignal may be important. But I'm concerned that symmetrical languagemay in fact tie our hands too much if the ice is caving away under us.I think we may need room to move even further over a period of time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The only hands that are tied, frankly,are mine and Peter's. We have a telephone out there that hopefullyworks.MR. LAWARE. Yes, I accept the technology correction. I willsupport, then, the recommendation of 1/4 point and symmetric language.See, I cave in so easily!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think it's a close call today. Ihave a marginal preference for staying right where we are because ofvery strong growth in M2. I have enough faith in the past to believethat the secular velocity of M2 is likely to remain pretty stable, andalong the lines that Lee and Don were discussing awhile ago, thatmeans somewhere along the way that growth is going to have to beslowed down. At the same time, I see less inflation out there thanmost people do right now. And I think interest rates are likely to belower as we go along than most people seem to feel. So, I could livewith your recommendation. If I were voting I would go with you onthat, although I have a slight marginal preference for not making achange.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Listening to the tone of the conversation, myview is close to what I hear others saying. It's a close call. Idon't think there's an overwhelming case to ease; and I think thepeople who have made a case for staying asymmetric are makingreasonable points as well. But I certainly tilt toward the Chairman'sview and I can support his recommendation for a couple of reasons,which I want to emphasize again. First, I guess I'm a little moreoptimistic about what we've achieved and where we're heading on theinflation environment. I don't see us making a trade-off here at all.As I've said, I think we have the flexibility and I referred back tothe charts from yesterday that showed long-term inflationaryexpectations almost consistently trending down over the 1980s andcontinuing to trend down to the point where they actually have beenlower than the near-term inflation expectations. I don't see thiskind of move endangering that trend in long-term inflationaryexpectations at all. In fact, I refer back to the charts on short-term real interest rates that were just handed out today a few minutesago and I'm a little concerned that real interest rates aren't reallylower. We really haven't eased much in any relative sense for severalmonths. So, I think it's riskless; as a matter of fact, I think it's-98-12/18-19/89prudent to offset what I fear is a growing concern in the financialmarkets. I agree with the Chairman that policy can be transmitted inthe very short-run sense in terms of financial markets and theexpectations for orders and things like that. But of course I wasreferring to GNP performance, which has a long lag. But obviously wecan set the gears in motion very quickly, which I think is importantto do. I think the economy and the financial system need something tobe a little more optimistic about and this could be useful. I don'tthink it threatens any long-term inflationary trend or expectations.If I did, I really wouldn't be for it although I can understand thosepeople who are concerned that it might. It's one of those closecalls.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I must say you could actually throw ablanket over this whole group and the differences really are quitemarginal. The discussions are within a remarkably narrow range, butforceful nonetheless.MR. BLACK. And deeply felt.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. What I would propose for anofficial vote is somewhere between "A" and "B"--that is, the $125million borrowing and a 25 basis point drop in the funds rate withsymmetrical language. While it would not be in the directive, I thinkit would be desirable if we had a telephone conference somewhere inthe middle of this period, which is inordinately long. It's sevenweeks before the next meeting and I think it would not beinappropriate for us to check in with each other to see whether we'reseeing any different--MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I have one suggestion that I'draise for the Committee's consideration in the language in theoperational paragraph. It says "taking account of progress towardprice stability" and I think it's nice to leave that number one. ButI would move "the behavior of the monetary aggregates" into secondplace, which would be an indication as to why we've gone symmetric.It would be an indication that we will be concerned about M2 beingabove the 3 to 7 percent range that we adopted tentatively. And weknow that right now we're guaranteed that we're going to be above it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's not exactly correct. Ourmodels say that.MR. ANGELL. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But the guarantee is something else.MR. ANGELL. All right, I'm sorry. You're correct. But Iwould suggest that moving that up would be a good reason as to why wewent to symmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're recommending that we switch thephrases "the behavior of the monetary aggregates" and "the strength ofthe business expansion"?MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. BLACK. I agree with that, Mr. Chairman.-99-12/18-19/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I hear general views of members outthere?MR. BLACK. The last time you suggested that we submit ideason rewording the directive that was the one we submitted and it wasrejected.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, that turned out inconclusive.MR. BLACK. I strongly support Governor Angell on that point.MR. KELLEY. May I make an alternative suggestion, Mr.Chairman? I've heard a lot of discussion that I think was importanttoday and yesterday in the area of foreign exchange and domesticfinancial markets as well. I'm hard pressed to know what the order ofthese ought to be. And it strikes me that if there's merit in that,one thing we might do is insert the word "equal" in line 63 before"taking account"--that is, "taking equal account of the progresstoward price stability" and so forth.MR. PARRY. Well, that's likely to cause problems.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a really fundamental change.MR. PARRY. I would not do that.MR. HOSKINS. I would support Governor Angell's.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If we look at the multiple choices wehave here, you recognize that we could be here 'til 4:00 p.m. thisafternoon!MR. BLACK. At least!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I suggest that we have a formal vote onthe specific proposal if you can get a second.MR. SYRON. I second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, there's a second. Let's poll.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Can I just make one other comment,which is consistent with parliamentary procedure here? Harking backto your comment about throwing blankets, I'm not quite sure that Iwould go as far as you did. The way I heard the discussion here interms of people's first preferences--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We're not voting on the directive yet;we're just voting on the language.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Oh, okay.MR. JOHNSON. Can I mention one thing?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. This is relevant, though.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Go ahead.-100-12/18-19/89VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In terms of people's firstpreferences, the way I counted it you had a 10 to 8 vote among thegroup as a whole.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're talking about the voting members?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, the 18 participants.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. And in terms of whether we easepolicy now or don't, there were several people whose first preferencewas not to ease but who said they could agree with easing now. So I'mnot sure that the blanket is as all encompassing as your early commentwould suggest.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I think the blanket is that all ofus are within the position of unchanged to slight ease, not on theslight ease.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, that's the point I wanted toemphasize. Leaving aside the specific language here, I think thestaff should make sure that the policy record is consistent with thatview because I would not want to associate myself with anything thathad any connotation of a rush to a further easing of monetary policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh no, on the contrary. I would saythat--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I just wanted to make sure thatthat's [clear].MR. ANGELL. Jerry, do you support moving the monetaryaggregates [phrase]?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, I have no problem with whatGovernor Angell suggested. I do caution you, however, that if youwant to make this an official vote, that official vote is going to bein the record. I just wonder if this is the sort of thing that wewant to have a record of dissents.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that is correct.MR. BOEHNE. I wonder if you might just want to have a strawvote.MR. JOHNSON. What you're proposing is to move the monetaryaggregates to number two?MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. After price stability?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Returning to Ed Boehne's point], I'mnot certain that that has to be. Remember, this is basically anamendment to the directive and the directive is what is being voted-101-12/18-19/89on. I would like to ask Don Kohn whether, in his judgment, a vote onthe amendment is required to be recorded in this regard?MR. KOHN. I'm afraid I don't know, Mr. Chairman.SPEAKER(?). Virgil [our General Counsel] is back there.MR. ANGELL. Why don't we just have a show of hands of thevoting members?SPEAKER(?). Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How does he know it's not legal? Whatis your opinion?MR. MATTINGLY. I think if you follow Robert's Rules ofOrder, it would be something that has to be recorded.MR. MELZER. Could I make one other comment?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But we've done these things many,many, times.MR. KOHN. We've had two [unintelligible] without recordingthem.MR. BLACK. We have not followed Robert's Rules in the past.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. He doesn't work here!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson wants to comment--Robert's Rules to the contrary notwithstanding.MR. JOHNSON. I don't mean to muddy the waters further onthis language but there's one thing that bothers me about moving themonetary aggregates to second. I can support it but--and this maysound too complicated but it's important to me--I'm a little worriedabout emphasizing the monetary aggregates in the very short run ifwe're basically picking up the opportunity cost effects of changes ininterest rates. In other words, I could live with emphasizing themonetary aggregates if it's in the context of something like long-termmonetary aggregate trends relative to our price stability goal. But Idon't want someone to get the impression out there that M2 for onequarter growing above target because of the interest sensitivityeffects is going to be something that the markets should panic over.So, to me there's a big difference between the short-run and thelonger-term trend in the monetary aggregates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me suggest what we are really votingfor. On the one hand, we're voting to move the monetary aggregates upone slot. The alternative, which would be there in any event, is theawareness and the concern of the Committee about the growth in themonetary aggregates. Unless I'm mistaken that's what I've beenhearing for two days. And I would say [unintelligible] represents theconcern of the Committee. Is that a fair statement?MR. ANGELL. That's it.-102-12/18-19/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So we can do it either way. Roger.MR. GUFFEY. I would not support moving it up, particularlyat this time. I agree with what Manley Johnson said about moving itup for visibility purposes at a time when we have a [unintelligible]and it will be known that the aggregates are growing above ourprojected target for them. It seems to me it's an inappropriate time.I don't mind putting a bit more emphasis on the aggregates, but Idon't think now is the time to do it.MR. SYRON. But Roger, to get back to Jerry's point, it doestend to make this show how close a call this was and the concern--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But that could be handled in thelanguage in the policy record. Either way I think it's fairly clearwhere the conversation of the last two days has been; that issue canbe captured in either place because it is factually the case. It's aquestion of how one wishes to capture it best.MR. JOHNSON. Just as long as that issue is there so peoplecould see that and not overreact to--SPEAKER(?). Sure.MR. MELZER. I would prefer to capture it in the descriptionof the discussion myself. To the extent that we can wean ourselvesfrom moving these things around and having people draw up chartsshowing which one we put first, second, third, and fourth the betteroff we're going to be, I think.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would agree with that.MR. MELZER. If we just leave them alone people will ignorethem over time and I think they should. I think the rest of thepolicy record captures the sense of the discussion.MR. HOSKINS. I would agree with that if we get the orderright.MR. MELZER. The second point is we--MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I really think I'm going torequest that we do have a recorded vote because I think it will be aprecedent in history for--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That just eliminated it.MR. STERN. [This] might help Manley a little. I think M2ran for almost two quarters earlier this year at the bottom end of, ifnot outside, the range; I can't remember exactly. And I don't thinkthe market overreacted to that in the sense that we were going toforce the aggregates back in at the same time we were raising interestrates. It was clear we weren't intending to do it. I think they hadthe aggregates back a little further even than we did.MR. JOHNSON. But did we have the monetary aggregates numbertwo [in the directive language] during that weakness? I'm sayingmoving it makes it--. These people focus on every little twist in the-103-12/18-19/89directive and if they see we've changed the order of the phrase on theaggregates they're going to say we're focusing short term on wherethose aggregates are. And they're going to say we've moved theeconomy back in the order so we're going to put our concern in theshort run on stabilizing the monetary aggregates over our concernabout the economy. If we get that message across that it's the long-run trend in monetary aggregates that we're concerned about that'sjust fine with me.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's the right way to do it.MR. ANGELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It strikes me--MR. HOSKINS. Put the word "long-term" in there, then.MR. ANGELL. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You guys are going to get mechanging my vote the way you're going here!MR. JOHNSON. We can capture it in the policy record, Ithink. It's fine as long as it's spelled out clearly. But I'm justworried about people saying: "Hey, the Fed decided to chase themonetary aggregates over the economy in the near term."VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You're the one who is alwaysadvocating the financial variables. Which way do you want it?MR. JOHNSON. Not the aggregates. I've never said anythingabout the aggregates.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I seem to remember a relevantcomment the other day in that speech of yours.MR. JOHNSON. If you can find it show it to me.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I will.MR. ANGELL. Well, why don't we just have a show of hands?Clearly, if the majority wishes to go one way--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I prefer to put it in the record ofthe discussion. What's at issue here to me is a heck of a lot moreimportant than the aggregates per se. We have a razor thin situationthat we're looking at and I think that has to be duly and adequatelyand accurately reflected in the proceedings of this meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's correct.[Unintelligible] than how it appears here.MR. ANGELL. We need both.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, this is not a big deal one way orthe other.MR. ANGELL. Sure.-104-12/18-19/89MR. JOHNSON. Let me say that I'm confident we can capture myconcerns in the policy record, so that's okay with me.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm not worried about your concernsbeing captured, I'm worried about mine.MR. JOHNSON. What's standing is a vote on the aggregatesright now as number two. And I--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No. I think it's basically that ifthere's a general view, it's crucially important that the policyrecord captures this general discussion.MR. ANGELL. Yes, right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The secondary question is whether inaddition we put this in the directive. Can I have the voting membersjust indicate whether they are in favor of reversing the pattern byraising their hands?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I really don't care as long as theother matter is taken care of.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm afraid that that fails. So, whydon't we make certain that the language is acceptable to everyonehere? In fact, if you want, we can have a poll again and maybe we cansatisfy you. If the three of you would like to have a resurvey ofthis, we can do that.MR. ANGELL. No.MR. BLACK. There are some other things we would like toresurvey too that we didn't vote--SPEAKER(?). We'll have different voting members next year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The time is approaching on this. Wouldyou read--MR. BERNARD. It reads: "In the implementation of policy forthe immediate future the Committee seeks to decrease slightly theexisting degree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking account ofprogress toward price stability, the strength of the businessexpansion, the behavior of the monetary aggregates, and developmentsin foreign exchange and domestic financial markets, slightly greaterreserve restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint would beacceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserveconditions are expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 overthe period from November through March at annual rates of about--"MR. KOHN. 8-1/2 and 5-1/2 percent.MR. BERNARD. "--8-1/2 and 5-1/2 percent, respectively. TheChairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to theManager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during theperiod before the next meeting are likely to be associated with afederal funds rate persistently outside a range of--"-105-12/18-19/89MR. KOHN. We could use 6 to 10 percent, which is moreclosely centered on 8-1/4 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. 6 to 10 percent.MR. BERNARD. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Prell had an amendment topropose in what was distributed. It relates to housing.MR. PRELL. It's just a correction of the language there. Iwould recommend that it read "Housing starts fell in November but forthe October-November period were up somewhat on average from theirthird-quarter level." It captures--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any objections? [Let's vote on thedirective].MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell NoPresident Guffey YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesPresident Melzer NoGovernor Seger YesPresident Syron YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next meeting is scheduled forFebruary 6th and 7th. For those of you who can stay, we'll havelunch.END OF MEETING-106-