Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 28, 1989A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systemin Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, March 28, 1989 at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellGuffeyHellerJohnsonKeehnKelleyLaWareMelzerSegerSyronMessrs. Boykin, Hoskins, and Stern, Alternate Membersof the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Kohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPatrikis, Deputy General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey,Ms. Munnell, Messrs. Promisel, Scheld,Siegman, and Simpson, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, SystemOpen Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account3/28/89Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Stockton, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Wajid, Assistant to Governor Heller, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMr. Stone, First Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of PhiladelphiaMessrs. Beebe, J. Davis, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum, andMs. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of San Francisco, Cleveland, Philadelphia,Minneapolis, Dallas, and Atlanta, respectivelyMr. Cook, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank ofRichmondMr. Guentner, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of New York-2 -Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMarch 28, 1989MR. JOHNSON. This is the meeting when officer nominationsare usually made. So, I'd like to open the meeting by asking fornominations for the Chairman of the FOMC and then the Vice Chairman.We're open for nominations.MR. ANGELL. I nominate Alan Greenspan--unless it is alreadyset. Do you have someone set to make the motion?MR. JOHNSON. Let's get on with this.MR. ANGELL. Okay. Alan Greenspan and Gerald Corrigan.MR. JOHNSON. All right. We have nominations for ChairmanAlan Greenspan and Vice Chairman Gerald Corrigan. All those in favor?SPEAKER(?). Enthusiastically.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible.]MR. JOHNSON. I think it goes without saying that we havesome outstanding nominations. We're ready to proceed, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I thank you. I think what we need nextis the election of staff officers. Norm, would you read the list?MR. BERNARD.Secretary and Economist, Donald KohnAssistant Secretary, Normand BernardDeputy Assistant Secretary, Gary GillumGeneral Counsel, Virgil MattinglyDeputy General Counsel, Ernest PatrikisEconomist, Michael PrellEconomist, Edwin TrumanAssociate Economists from the Board:David Lindsey;Larry Promisel;Charles Siegman;Thomas Simpson; andLawrence Slifman.Associate Economists from the Federal Reserve Banks:Anatol Balbach, proposed by President Melzer;Richard Davis, proposed by President Corrigan;Thomas Davis, proposed by President Guffey;Alicia Munnell, proposed by President Syron; andKarl Scheld, proposed by President Keehn.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move that?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I will.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MR. JOHNSON. Second.3/28/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, it's so ordered. Thenext item on the agenda is the selection of a Federal Reserve Bank toexecute transactions for the System Open Market Account. Is there anomination?MS. SEGER. How about Cleveland?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call again.MS. SEGER. Is New York okay for a second choice?MR. JOHNSON. I'll second that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. I don't like the waythis is going!SPEAKER(?). It sounds all right!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Our Managers for Domestic Open MarketOperations and for Foreign Operations are at the moment, as you know,Peter Sternlight and Sam Cross. Would somebody like to move theirreappointments?MR. JOHNSON. So move.MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We have the reviewof--and I assume that they have been mailed out to all of you--theAuthorization for Domestic Open Market Operations, the ForeignCurrency Authorization, the Foreign Currency Directive, and theProcedural Instructions with Respect to Foreign Currency Operations.Would somebody like to move them individually? Let's do them one at atime. Are there any objections to the Authorization for Domestic OpenMarket Operations? If not, let us assume that it's so ordered. Sam,would you like to discuss the second issue?MR. CROSS. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would. I would like toraise one point with respect to the Authorization for Foreign CurrencyOperations. We are currently authorized to maintain [foreigncurrency] balances up to a total of $12 billion equivalent. Ourpresent holdings, at about $9.4 billion, are well within that limit.But in addition to this formal authorization there are three informallimits which are not contained either in the Authorization, theDirective, or the Procedural Instructions. These [informalunderstandings] call for us to limit our holdings of German marks to$8 billion equivalent, Japanese yen to $3 billion equivalent, andother currencies as a group to $1 billion equivalent. All of ourintervention in recent months has been in marks and we are now about$150 million or a little more above that informal limit for marks. Wenotified the Committee of that situation by a telex that was sent outon March 15th. But, Mr. Chairman, I would like to propose that theCommittee consider eliminating these informal sublimits for theparticular currencies so that the $12 billion authorization forforeign currency balances could be used more flexibly. I questionwhether the informal sublimits currently are a very useful managementtool. The particular currencies that we operate in are determined, ofcourse, by market conditions and other factors. And in any event, we3/28/89would continue to be under a number of limitations--qualitative aswell as quantitative limitations--both with the [Foreign Currency]Subcommittee and the Committee. These limits relate to the changes ineach currency for a single day and for the intermeeting period as wellas changes in the overall balances for a single day in theintermeeting period and so forth. I believe these various limitsprovide for adequate monitoring and control by the Committee and theSubcommittee without the informal sublimits. Accordingly, I wouldrecommend that the Committee consider eliminating the three informalsublimits. If the Committee did wish to retain those sublimits Iwould need to request a change in the overall Authorization in orderto provide more headroom in the event we need to acquire more marksand yen. So, I recommend the elimination of the three informalsublimits.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move that?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think I would move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MR. JOHNSON. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I've just been informed that we don'twant a formal vote on this.MR. BERNARD. On the informal limits.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. On the informal limits. Let me put itthis way: Are there any questions on this issue for Mr. Cross? Ifnot, we'll assume [agreement].MR. ANGELL. Would there be some notion as to where we mightbe going in regard to any one currency? That is, would there be anyrestraint or any notion that there might be some point at which wewould acquire more of a particular currency than might be the mostadvantageous position for our asset holdings?MR. CROSS. Obviously, we will want over time to acquirevarious amounts in particular currencies. But I don't think that thisparticular arrangement is the way in which we are best able to dothat. For example, our holdings of yen have been low and we've beenundertaking such measures as we could to raise those holdings both forthe System and the Treasury. Indeed, we did acquire some yen duringthis recent period by buying them from a customer. But I don't thinkthat the informal sublimit is a very useful mechanism for doing this.We have to make decisions and acquire those currencies more or less asconditions permit and as our policies aim us to do. I don't thinkthese limits help very much operationally.MR. ANGELL. So from time to time you would expect to reportto the Committee on [individual] currency holdings as compared to whatyou might think of as some optimum range?MR. CROSS. Well, if I went too far in saying what was theoptimum that might raise a lot of questions. But we certainly reportregularly on the amounts of the individual currencies.3/28/89MR. ANGELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.MR. LAWARE. I have a question. Sam, is the $12 billion abig enough kitty for you or do you--?MR. CROSS. Well, at the present time we have $9.4 billionand the limit is $12 billion. Looking ahead, say, for the next yearit's certainly conceivable that we would need to go above that. Iwould assume that the Committee would not find it difficult to changethe limit at the time, if the conditions arose. Or, it could bechanged right now when we are reviewing this at our annual review.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But to change the $12 billion wouldtake specific action of the Committee?MR. CROSS. [Yes.] That is a formal authorization and thatis public. The present authorization is for $12 billion and has beenat that level for a couple of years, I guess.MR. LAWARE. You don't see any immediate circumstances thatwould likely put you in a position where you'd have to ask for aspecial meeting in order to enlarge that limit?MR. CROSS. Well, we have a $2-1/2 billion [leeway]. And, ofcourse, when we intervene we have typically done half of it and theTreasury has done half. So that means a potential [increase in U. S.holdings] of $5 billion worth before we run into a problem. I wouldassume that if conditions were such that we needed a change in theAuthorization, it would not be difficult to propose that and to changeit at the time.MR. LAWARE. Okay. I wasn't trying to sell you anything.MR. CROSS. No. I'd be happy to have any further headroomthe Committee wishes to offer. But I can't really make a strong casethat it's likely to happen and would require a meeting.MR. LAWARE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.MR. GUFFEY. Sam, can you remind us: what is the intermeetinglimit?MR. CROSS. Above $600 million requires the Subcommittee'sapproval and above $1-1/2 billion requires the Committee's approval.MR. GUFFEY. In all currencies?MR. CROSS. That's in all currencies.MR. GREENSPAN. Any further discussion on this subject? Iwill assume a general consensus in favor of Sam's recommendation.However, we do need a vote on the Procedural Instructions with Respectto Foreign Currency Operations. I'll entertain a motion.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So moved.MS. SEGER. Second.3/28/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do all three?MR. BERNARD. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's combine all three: the ForeignCurrency Authorization and the Foreign Currency Directive as well asthe Procedural Instructions.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So moved.MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Next we have toapprove the minutes of the Committee meeting of February 7th and 8th.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So moved.MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Cross, would younow report on foreign currency operations for us?MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there questions for Mr. Cross?MR. HOSKINS. Sam, I'm just curious as to why we don't buyyen in the open market. I notice a couple of other central banks havedone so. Do we have an agreement with them or--?MR. CROSS. Well, the Ministry of Finance in Japan thus faroften has intervened itself to resist the decline in the yen. And theU.S. Treasury has not been prepared up to this point to [interveneunless] we have the agreement of the Japanese before anything is done.And the Japanese have not felt that this situation yet warrantedintervention. Now, in the past day or two the pressures on the yenhave become more substantial. The Finance Minister did make astatement last night--at which point the yen had weakened to above the133 level--saying something to the effect that they were watching[developments] very carefully at the 133 level, which was taken by themarket as a signal that that might be a key point. The rate thenmoved down a bit below 133 and that's where it is now. I imaginethere will be discussions of this--certainly this weekend when the G-7gets together. But up to this point the Minister of Finance has notwanted to see intervention or to be involved in intervention to resistthe decline.MR. FORRESTAL. On the general subject of intervention, Sam,do you detect any change in philosophy of the present Administrationwith respect to intervention? Or are they continuing pretty much inthe same vein as the previous Administration?MR. CROSS. I don't think there has been any very notablechange. The G-7, of course, met in February and they are going tomeet again. The general premises within which these activities havebeen taking place remain more or less the same.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mr. Cross?3/28/89MS. SEGER. I just want to make sure I understood yourcomment about intervening and the Ministry of Finance. Do we have adeal with the Japanese that we will not intervene unless they [agree]?What if we reached the point that it was in our interest to do so andthe Ministry of Finance was still balking?MR. CROSS. Well, I would hope that it wouldn't come to apoint where we were operating at cross purposes with the Japanese. Itwould be very difficult if we reached the stage where it was as overtas that. These intervention operations obviously work much, muchbetter if all parties are marching together. We have seen many times,both with the Germans and the Japanese, that the market pays a lotmore attention when they see that we are uniformly aiming in a certaindirection, trying to bring about a certain purpose. It's difficult tobe operating in one direction if the central bank or the government onthe other side doesn't agree or indeed is opposed to it. So, it'smuch better to work it out.MR. TRUMAN. Governor Seger, this is one of the[unintelligible] to President Hoskin's comment. This is one of theasymmetries in the international financial system today. Othercountries--MS. SEGER. It was too subtle for me.MR. TRUMAN. Small countries can buy yen or sell yen. Butfor big countries like the United States and Germany and Japan theiractions in this area are guided by different understandings, if youwant to put it that way, about when one does it for the reasons thatSam mentioned. If Canada buys yen, or even if the UK buys yen, that'snot the same thing as our buying yen or the Bank of Japan buying yen.Now, the other point--MR. CROSS. But even those [transactions] have not beeneasily arranged.MR. TRUMAN. That's right.MR. CROSS. With the Canadians or the others it requiredworking it out with the Japanese. But they are a little more amenableto that than if it's going to impact directly on their exchange rate.MR. TRUMAN. The other point is that there are certainunderstandings about the point at which intervention becomes morefavorably regarded. But as far as the yen is concerned we're far awayfrom that point.MS. SEGER. Just looking at their gigantic trade surplus vis-a-vis our own situation, it seems that at some point we'd have to askourselves what is in our interest rather than having the Ministry ofFinance decide.MR. CROSS. That's becoming increasingly apparent. It istrue that up until recently most of the pressures were not in the yenbut were in the European currencies. But it is moving more and morein that direction and it is becoming clear that we are getting to thepoint where there is a need to do something about the movement in theyen as well. That is part of my own concern. And as I say, the3/28/89pressures of the past few days have been led by the movements of theyen. That's the first time during this recent period of activitywhere that has been the case; but it is now the case. On the otherhand, if you look back to the low points--which were at the beginningof last year--the 1988 low point for the mark was 1.56 and we're nowat 1.88 and the low point for the yen was just over 120. So, it'sgetting closer but not quite as much.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I heard what you said, Sam, about Germany butthat explanation still doesn't strike me as justifying completely whythey have been so reluctant to move. A lot of people seem to bescratching their heads about Germany's behavior relative toinflationary pressures and the fact that they have been sitting backand letting the mark depreciate. I know it has been pretty stableover the intermeeting period in general. But I think the feeling hasbeen: What's going on in Germany compared to their previous behavior?MR. CROSS. Well, I think there are various factors. Theyare divided. There are some in Germany who will say that they couldbe tightening domestically and not necessarily going through theexchange rate. They are divided. The mark has moved up against somecurrencies as well as having softened against the dollar. If you lookat the mark on a trade-weighted basis you don't get the same picturethat you do if you look just at the dollar-mark relationship. TheGermans, I think, have a genuine problem with respect to the EMS.Their concern at the moment is that the EMS is fully stretched--inother words, they are at the top of the band and, as it turns out,Denmark is now at the bottom of the band. At those levels they haveto intervene fully in order to keep the rates from moving beyond that.There were very, very large amounts of intervention in the Danishcurrency last week, in fact. They did on one day,which is a lot for a small country. And they did almostthe next day. The Germans are concerned that--the mark being weakagainst the dollar and strong against the EMS--if they intervene onthe dollar side it's just going to cause a lot more trouble and leadto serious pressures in flows and political problems and all the restwith the EMS.MR. JOHNSON. But isn't it, though, just the Danish that aredown there? The lira--MR. CROSS. The Danish are down there but the pressures couldmove to the others, particularly if the question of whether to reformthe EMS currency alignments and so forth arose. It could lead topressures. The French not too long ago had been under some pressure;they are not at the moment. But--MR. JOHNSON. It just still seems strange, given that nobodypaid too much attention when the Italians were way below the band andjust hovered there for heaven knows [how long].MR. TRUMAN. Well, but they weren't down at the 6 percentlevel. They have a wider band.MR. JOHNSON. Well, it was a special arrangement.3/28/89MR. CROSS. Since Italy is not really in the arrangement,they don't have the same obligation to intervene. So they don't havethe same problem on the intervention side.MR. TRUMAN. Italy has a much broader band.MR. CROSS. We talk to the Germans and we make these points,too. But I think you do have to recognize that there are pressuresfrom the EMS angle of it.MR. TRUMAN. One of the problems is that even if they want tomove the D-mark [vis-a-vis] the Danish kroner that would raisequestions about what else they would do within the EMS. It seems hardto do since there is this strong desire, especially between theGermans and the French, not to do anything for who knows how long. By[their suppressing] all this, it may be like the U.S. attitude towardsterling in the late 1960s.MR. JOHNSON. Not to prolong this, but what's rotten inDenmark?MR. CROSS. Well, they have a stagnant economy and they don'twant to raise their interest rates. So they are having a lot ofcapital outflows.MR. HOSKINS. I'd like just one follow-up. I raised theissue about the Japanese but I haven't heard what their argument is.What did they tell us? Why don't they want us in?MR. CROSS. They are still concerned or have a fear that thedollar-yen relationship is going to move back in the other directionand that it's going to cause problems there. At least that's whatthey say. Now, I assume that there is an interest from the point ofview of their whole economy and their exports and so forth for them totry not to get back into intervention if they can avoid it. But itgets harder and harder to make that case as the rates move. We arestill at 133. And the last time we were intervening I think it wasclose to 137. So the yen is not within any new ranges in that sense.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mr. Cross?MR. KEEHN. Sam, separate and apart from the central bankattitudes, what's the attitude of the participants in the markets?[Do they see] long-term trends there or is everybody kind of movingday-by-day? What are the basic attitudes?MR. CROSS. In terms of the dollar outlook? I think they arewaiting and I think they are moving--MR. KEEHN. Day-by-day?MR. CROSS. --with a short-term focus to see what's going tohappen on this. As I said, at the present time these markets are veryfickle. They watch one thing for a while and then they watchsomething else. But right now they are watching very closely theinflation and monetary policy actions in all these countries becausethere has been so much attention on and concern about whetherinflation is growing worldwide. So, that's the main focus of3/28/89attention right now: what's going to be done about it and what thevarious players are going to do.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anything else? If not, would somebodylike to move to ratify the transactions of Mr. Cross since theFebruary meeting?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So move.MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Sternlight?MR. HELLER. Peter, I heard you use a term a little earlierthat I think I have never heard used before: the indexed level ofborrowings.MR. STERNLIGHT. [That's] borrowing used in the constructionof reserve paths, about which we had a good deal of uncertainty. Isay uncertainty, but I had a fairly strong suspicion that we wereoverstating or were using a higher level than was consistent with whatbanks would actually come to the window for, given the range of thefunds rate that we were expecting. During those first few weeks ofthis intermeeting period we would make adjustments, particularly if itwent well into a reserve maintenance period, for what was turning outto be a lower level of borrowing by $200 or $300 million as thisperiod went along. And as that persisted week-after-week the decisionwas made--we consulted with the staff and the Chairman on it--to makethis downward technical adjustment in the level of borrowing used inthe path, but we were not expecting that to be accompanied by anychange in the range of expected funds rates.MR. HELLER. No, I understand that. But it is not formallyindexed or linked to any other variables.MR. STERNLIGHT. No, no.MR. HELLER. Okay. I thought you had some construct there.MR. STERNLIGHT. I said indexed because it was indexed to adegree of pressure that we expected to be associated with [a certain]range of federal funds trading. It's indexed in that sense.MR. HELLER. Thanks.MR. STERN. Peter, you may already have answered thisindirectly, but in view of the widely recognized problems in therelationship between borrowings and interest rates I wonder if somemarket participants believe now that we're targeting the funds rate?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think they certainly realized that we havehad problems with it. Periodically I see things suggesting that theythink we are getting back more to the use of borrowings but probably3/28/89not all the way back to where it was, let's say, prior to the stockmarket crash--which was the time of the major departure.MR. STERN. I said rates; you said borrowings.MR. STERNLIGHT. Sorry. Maybe I twisted that around. Butthey think that we are--MR. STERN. Getting back to a rate.MR. STERNLIGHT. Getting back toward use of borrowings.MR. STERN. Okay.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think we're getting back toward theborrowings but [not] all the way to what we were pre-October '87.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Mr. Sternlight?MS. SEGER. There was an article in the paper about SalomonBrothers taking big hits in their government trading.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MS. SEGER. Given their level of expertise, etc., and whatyou said about the people in the markets expecting us to tightenfurther how could they possibly have taken such gigantic loses?MR. STERNLIGHT. As I understand it, Governor, it was not somuch a bad bet on what was going to happen to the general level ofrates but rather some sophisticated rate spread movements that theyanticipated that just did not pan out as they expected. That's not tosay I agree--MR. JOHNSON. They probably believed the long-term rates weregoing to rise.MR. STERNLIGHT. It's surprising to see as sophisticated aparticipant as they are coming up on the wrong side on that. I willsay that in the past couple of years when, in general, the governmentsecurities dealers have had a pretty rough time that firm drew onperhaps a more sophisticated view and a better knowledge [of themarket] and has fared better than the pack by a fair margin. I'mreally more concerned about a great number of other dealers who seemreally unable to hack it with the current degree of competition in thegovernment securities market.MS. SEGER. The only reason I mentioned Salomon Brothers isthat that was the firm that happened to be featured in the news item.But I imagine--MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, they did have that big hit from a badbet on what was going to happen to the shape of the yield curve.MS. SEGER. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.-10-3/28/89MR. SYRON. Peter, how widespread are these exotic--if I canuse that term--hedging strategies that Salomon had in place? Arethere many other firms that have things that are [that complex]?Obviously, there are varying degrees of complexity, though. Wouldthey have the edge in terms of the complexity of their strategies orare there others that are operating--MR. STERNLIGHT. No, I think there were many firms thatengaged in those strategies, though probably in lesser dollarmagnitudes than Salomon Brothers. But I don't think it's at all thatunusual to the degree--MR. ANGELL. Well, it really isn't an exotic hedgingstrategy; it's an exotic speculative strategy, I think. You reallyhave to distinguish between an exotic speculative strategy and anexotic hedging strategy. There's quite a difference.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In a total [unintelligible] it turnedout--MR. SYRON. It may be a [unintelligible] distinction.MR. JOHNSON. I don't know that you look [unintelligible].VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. [Unintelligible] on a hedge.MR. JOHNSON. Well, by definition a hedge is a hedge. Itjust depends [on whether it was] something they thought was a hedge.MR. SYRON. They may have thought it was a hedge in priority.MR. ANGELL. But anyone who finds the hedge [unintelligible].They just have to have more expertise than that. So, I think theywere taking a position.MR. STERNLIGHT. Further questions for Mr. Sternlight? Wouldsomebody like to move to ratify the actions of the Desk?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So move.MS. SEGER. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Peter, would youlike to raise your [leeway question]?MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the upcomingintermeeting period, current projections suggest a maximum reserveneed on the order of about $7 or $8 billion. The main factors wethink will be increased currency in circulation, higher requiredreserves and, by early May, some rise in Treasury balances at the Fed.While some of this can be met with repurchase agreements, which do notcount against leeway, I believe it would be prudent to enlarge thestandard $6 billion intermeeting leeway temporarily by $2 billion to$8 billion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move the leeway?MR. HELLER. So move.-11-3/28/89VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We now turn to theeconomic reports. Messrs. Prell and Truman.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for either gentleman?MR. JOHNSON. A couple. One: Just looking at the forecast,which has been revised since last time although it's not dramaticallydifferent, you have real GNP slowing significantly by the thirdquarter of 1989. It averages about 1.2 percent from the third quarterof 1989 through 1990. We have gotten into these arguments beforeabout what potential is but I think everybody agrees that that's wellbelow whatever anybody is thinking of as potential. And that's for afairly significant period of time. Yet we don't see any improvementon the inflation side. The lags are longer I guess than would show upon here. But exactly what do we expect, ultimately, on the inflationrate from a forecast that has that kind of slack built into it over aprolonged period? Clearly, it's not showing up in the numbers here.When does it show up?MR. PRELL. Let me say first that it takes a period of belowpotential growth in order for some slack to open up in the labormarket in particular. But also, we'd expect to have some slack--MR. JOHNSON. I know, but there's a year of that kind ofslack. And I just wondered--MR. PRELL. But, as you know, in our forecast that onlybrings the unemployment rate up to about 6 percent. The maybe "worstcase" interpretation of the events of the last two years is thatthat's only getting us back to the natural rate--if you want to usethat framework for looking at this. We have been implicitly a bitmore optimistic in the sense that, as we move up to the 6 percentneighborhood and edge above it by the end of 1990, we are anticipatingthat we will begin to see some tendency toward moderation in theunderlying inflation trend. And thus in 1991, if the unemploymentrate remained in the low 6 percent neighborhood, by bringing growth upto, say, the 2 percent range we would anticipate that we would beginto discern a very gradual deceleration of inflation. But it would bemeasured in fractions of a percent for a year at that level.MR. JOHNSON. But if you're just saying that we're moving tothe natural rate why would you get below potential growth on that?MR. PRELL. Well, to raise the unemployment rate you have tomove below potential growth. In recent years it has been very clearthat on average the economy had to grow less than 2-1/2 percent inorder to produce an upward movement in the unemployment rate.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I know I'm---12-3/28/89MR. PRELL. Our judgment is based on what we've seen in wageand price behavior. All the anecdotal evidence over the past year orso suggests that in essence we have overshot a level of resourceutilization that's consistent with stable inflation.MR. JOHNSON. Again, what happens ultimately? What is theultimate inflation path that we get out of this scenario?MR. PRELL. Well, in 1991 we'd expect to see a fractionaldecline in the inflation rate barring any exogenous shocks that weobviously can't anticipate at this point.MR. JOHNSON. There is one other point I wanted to ask. Iasked this last time but I'll ask it again. I was looking at ourforecast compared to the Bluechip consensus. I know what wascirculated showed some other forecasts besides the Bluechip one, butthose are all contained in the Bluechip so I'm comparing that one withours. We have very similar forecasts on real GNP and inflation. Butonce again they expect a decline in short-term interest rates by thesecond quarter whereas we're saying they need to go a percentage pointhigher. Any comment on that?MR. PRELL. I don't think we're totally outside the spectrumof outside forecasters, but there continues to be some difference ofopinion between the staff and that average in terms of how muchweakness is likely to occur in aggregate demand as a consequence ofthe tightening that has occurred already. I noticed in the article inThe Wall Street Journal the other day on the difficulties in economicforecasting that one person commented that it appears that thebusiness forecasters keep predicting recession about a year out andthen moving it back as it doesn't materialize. In essence, there's alarge element of that: a sense that we have had a long expansion;things have gotten tight; and it's more likely than not that we mayhave a downturn. And they perceive it occurring by the end of thisyear, in many cases with interest rates moving down along with it.They also tend to have a seemingly relatively rapid disinflationresponse to that softening--greater than we would anticipate. Andthat's part of the difference in our views.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Ted, considering the strength of the dollar inthe past year and your comment that you think the dollar will remainrelatively firm in the near term, why wouldn't it be reasonable toexpect that any significant improvement in net exports would bedelayed to the second half of the year at the earliest and most likelyto 1990?MR. TRUMAN. I don't think we have much improvement in thesecond half.MR. PARRY. Well, you have improvement over the year goingfrom $103 billion, which of course has been revised. But the changeis from $103 to $85 billion; that's not [unintelligible] $18 billion.MR. TRUMAN. Yes, but some of the changes have to do withspecial factors in the last quarter of 1988 when there was adeterioration, some of which was caused by a surge in oil imports and-13-3/28/89probably a surge in nonoil imports associated with the buildup in[inventories]. So, you take that out and that's where much of theimprovement comes on the trade side in the first half of the year.MR. PARRY. It's still $13 billion.MR. TRUMAN. What?MR. PARRY. $98 billion to $85 billion is still $13 billion.MR. TRUMAN. What I mean is that while there is a smallimprovement in there most of it is a bounceback from the fourthquarter on the trade side.MR. PARRY. But when--MR. TRUMAN. And there is a small adjustment in the--MR. PARRY. Wouldn't typical statistical studies lead you toexpect an actual deterioration?MR. TRUMAN. No, because we think that there still is someeffect in the pipeline from the delayed effects of the dollar declineand we have built some of that in there. So that's consistent withthe models and the equations that we use in terms of those effects.And then we add on the special factors like oil and agriculture--tothe extent that there's a rebound this year in agricultural exports inreal terms, in comparison to the flat performance last year--andthat's what gives you some of the improvement.MR. PARRY. Would you say there's perhaps a greateruncertainty in this area than in some of the other areas of GNPperformance?MR. TRUMAN. I've always felt there's a lot of uncertainty.That may be because I've been closer to it. But I think that Mikesends me his gospel truth and he's always right.MR. PRELL. And vice-versa.SPEAKER(?). One of you is making a mistake.MR. PRELL. Well, there's a lot of uncertainty on all aspectsof the forecast.MR. PARRY. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Doesn't it bother you that implicit inthis scenario is an increasing willingness to [acquire] direct claimson the United States? If you extrapolate to what seems to be goingon, what turns it? In other words, I assume the long-term ratedifferential is what basically is driving the models. Are weexpecting that the long-term rate differentials will narrow in thenext recession or the next month?MR. TRUMAN. That is what it is basically. As you know andothers who have looked at it know, the equations for exchange ratesjust barely qualify as equations in the statistical relationships---14-3/28/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They're better than anything else I'veseen.MR. TRUMAN. Well, as we get over this peak and the economysoftens a bit--this is basically what Governor Johnson was commentingon in terms of the Bluechip forecast--we have U.S. rates coming downin 1990 and coming down relative to rates abroad. No matter whatmodel you put that through, that gives you essentially a differentialeffect. It could differ with regard to how much you get in the shortrun on the one side. But the changing effect comes from the change inthe influence of the interest rate differential on the exchange rate.In a sense we pushed aside the fact that you get very littleimprovement in nominal terms over this period. And we are assuming,maybe based in some sense on recent experience, that the market willcontinue to finance us about--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mike, I just had a question, which I think I knowthe answer to. Regarding the rate increase that is implicit in theGreenbook forecast: Is that essentially a straight line linearforecast throughout the year?MR. PRELL. Well, we wouldn't want to be any fancier thanthat. We just have a gradual further rise.MR. SYRON. I guess the second part of the question I'll putoff until later. But I'd be interested in speculating if it wasn't astraight line increase whether the potential impact of that was ofimportance.MR. PRELL. I think what we have built into the remainder ofthis year is not very large. In fact, I will venture to say that itmight not be large enough, given the range of possibilities one cansee here. But to make distinctions on whether you've gained thisincrease of roughly a percentage point through a 3/4 point rise overthe next three months and a 1/4 point rise thereafter versus 1/4 pointand then 3/4 point I think is going well beyond anything that economicscience can discriminate between.MR. SYRON. The second part of my question relates to thequestions Governor Johnson asked. In your model, is it fair to say--and this leads to the risks--that you don't see us getting below thenatural rate until somewhere around the second quarter of 1990?MR. PRELL. Well, I don't want to speak of models per sehere. The models we have been looking at have a longer history ofprice/wage behavior and would suggest that the natural rate is above 6percent. However, our interpretation of the errors those models havemade recently and of recent evidence leads us to put together aforecast that, if you forced it into that kind of model, would imply aconsiderably lower natural rate. So, we are in the vicinity of thatimplicit natural rate by the middle of next year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. If you look at many models in their unadjustedstate--just running the pure models whether they're monetarist or-15-3/28/89[unintelligible]--over a fairly broad spectrum they tend to come upwith a negative growth rate in the first half of next year. And thenyou judgmentally massage the models. The main difference that I cansee is whether the conditions that are implied tend to have norecession. How confident are you that the no recession scenario isjudgmentally right--that it will prevail over the simple unfetteredmodels?MR. PRELL. Well, there's hardly anyone who runs anunfettered model forecast. You're always confronted with the factthat models have imprecisely predicted the recent past and you need tomake some corrections in order to move forward in the forecast period.Our models, for example--the quarterly model and the P* model--havetended to underpredict the strength of aggregate demand in the economyover the past year or so. If you immediately eliminated that and hada pure model forecast moving forward it would suggest a sharperweakening than we have in the forecast. But whether that's the mostplausible assumption to make is a question. Certainly, we [would] beinclined to make that kind of adjustment. The basic question, though,is whether the outlook contains a significant risk of recession. Inthis Greenbook we deviated from what we had done the last coupletimes--just to avoid needless repetition perhaps--but maybe it isuseful to state again: we are skirting zero growth here by a smallmargin in what we've written down. And certainly a small hiccup inthe economy in an adverse way could tip this into negative territory.So I would say that with this kind of outlook there is a non-negligible risk of at least a mild downturn in the economy.MR. KOHN. Governor Heller, I could add that we do run somewhat we call St. Louis-style reduced form equations on monetaryaggregates and they do show slower nominal income growth than thestaff projection for 1989 and 1990. But they showed substantiallyslower growth, particularly in the M2 equation, in 1988 than we got.And they made huge errors earlier in the decade, in '85 and '86. Onthe other side, they had much faster GNP growth, say, in--MR. HELLER. How low do they get there?MR. KOHN. What?MR. HELLER. How would you describe the path at thebeginning?MR. GUFFEY. In '89, how weak?MR. KOHN. How weak is it? Let's see. For nominal incomegrowth in 1989 it has about 4 percent.MR. HELLER. And real?MR. KOHN. I don't have it broken down; this runs off thenominal model. But running it using the base I have 9 percent or so[nominal]. But they have all been making such huge errors that Iwould have skepticism about--MR. HELLER. Well, the skepticism is whether the errors willaverage out over the---16-3/28/89MR. KOHN. At the end of a certain number of decades, right.MR. PRELL. It sounds like we're somewhere in between thosetwo in our '90 forecast in nominal GNP.MR. HELLER. Thanks, Don.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mike, I was curious about the real disposableincome number that you have in the Greenbook. The second quartershows considerable weakness. I know the nominal personal incomenumber doesn't change very much. Is there a special factor there?MR. PRELL. I'm sorry I didn't catch the change that you werereferring to.MR. FORRESTAL. The real personal disposable income in thesecond quarter of '89 would be quite weak.MR. PRELL. Well, there are some special factors boosting thefirst quarter and some of those, like drought relief payments, won'trecur in the second quarter. The growth in the first quarter is alsoboosted by things like Social Security but that's a level adjustment,so to speak. We are expecting a considerable slowing in employmentgrowth and in hours in the months ahead. And that plays a significantrole in the outlook for income growth.MR. HOSKINS. Mike, let me ask you Governor Heller'squestions perhaps in a different way. And that is: How would youassess the risks of forecast error with respect to inflation? Do youhave a symmetrical risk on either side or are we more likely in yourview to exceed it on the up side or the down side?MR. PRELL. I think it's fair to say that the recent data--and as I indicated we've raised our forecast of the price indexes forthe current quarter--leave us with the impression that the inflationpressures at these levels of resource utilization may be a littlegreater than we had anticipated. But we haven't made a dramaticchange here. We have tried to read through some of the noise in thesenumbers. And we've only passed through a modest bit of this surpriseinto the forecast for the next two years. I characterized thesituation last time as being one where we think this inflationforecast represents our best point estimate. But if I were to drawthe probability distribution, my sense is that the distribution has alonger tail on the up side than on the down side. I could envision apercentage point more inflation more readily than I could envision apercentage point less inflation over the next year or so. Thatdoesn't mean that there's a strong likelihood of that happening; butin that sense I think the risks may be a bit on the up side.MR. HOSKINS. I'd like to just follow up. Since Don raisedit, I want to know what base growth you had to get 9 percent nominal.MR. KOHN. Actually, I think we have projected about 4-3/4percent base growth. That model, the base model in particular, hasdone so poorly that I really shouldn't even have cited it. The errorshave been in percentage points.-17-3/28/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [There are questions about] theappropriate numerator, I think, on velocity with the base--if you pickup a good chunk of economic activity outside the United States, someof it illegal.MR. KOHN. Right.MR. HELLER. A lot of that activity is in the District ofColumbia as well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but they do use American currencylast I heard. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Mike, I wanted to ask if you had any insightinto what's going on with short-term business credit--that there'ssome strength apart from the LBO situation.MR. PRELL. I can't slice this too finely; it's very hard totrace that. In the Greenbook we referred to numbers where we've takenaway the large corporate merger transactions that we can identify andgotten some additional information there. There are so many corporaterestructuring transactions going on that there may be a lot of otherthings going on in the numbers besides basic financing and capitalexpenditures and so on. Our reading is that there has been somestrength in short-term business credit apart from the RJR/Nabisco andother major merger transactions. And that probably is reflective ofthe underlying need for funds and the deferral of long-term financing.Some of the long bond issuance that Peter talked about earlier reallyisn't very long term; much of it has been swapped into floating rateobligations. It just appears that businesses are not anxious to lockin these current long-term borrowing costs which, again, is consistentwith the term structure picture and these forecasts of weakening inthe economy and lower interest rates down the road.MR. MELZER. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Maybe you can get rid of some confusion I have.I always thought that the housing industry was very sensitive tocredit conditions and interest rate movements, and so forth. I seewhat has happened to interest rates in the last year and I hear theforecast of another percentage point to be tacked on, yet I seehousing starts for the calendar year 1989 actually estimated at atouch above calendar 1988--if I'm on the right line, it's 1-1/2million versus 1.49 million. And then the following year it's 1.44million, with the weakest quarter not being any worse than 1.43million. I guess I just need to have that put together for me. How,with these interest rates, would you think that the home constructionwill not be any weaker than that?MR. PRELL. Well, to date, the effects on housing starts havebeen negligible. I think housing starts were confounded a bit by theweather that boosted the January figure to such a high level.February is in the area of more than 1-1/2 million. Interest rateshave already risen a good bit. We don't have a gigantic furtherincrease in mortgage rates in this forecast, so this kind of decline--given the underlying demographic influences and so on--looks to us to-18-3/28/89be fairly reasonable. I don't think we are all that far off. Givenwhat other forecasters have been anticipating in terms of interestrate movements, I don't think we're that far off the beaten track onthe housing starts outlook. Perhaps we're being a little optimistic.If we had a much larger mortgage rate increase it would obviously makea difference. But it's not very large at this point.MR. PARRY. Governor Seger, one other perspective thatperhaps I can provide on that: If you take the California market,which represents a fairly significant share--MS. SEGER. Assume everyone's moving to California--is thatit?MR. PARRY. No, I said it's a fairly significant share of thetotal housing market. We have had increases in the prices of single-family homes that have averaged 25 to 30 percent in the Los Angelesand San Francisco markets. I think there are some consumers that lookat that on a total return basis and figure out that 11 percent is notsuch a bad deal if you can count on increases in prices of thatmagnitude. I think that's had an impact in our state. I don't knowif--MS. SEGER. Yes, but the others--MR. HELLER. Mike Kelley wants to speak.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's an interesting issue because thereal interest rate there is to be adjusted not by general price levelsbut by the price of the asset to which it is applied.MR. PARRY. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And there as you're saying--you don'tmean in California that it is literally negative at this stage but--MR. PARRY. Well, all I know is that the average price in thetwo markets that constitute most of the area has gone up about 25 to30 percent in the past year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's not the projection.MR. PARRY. No. And one has to figure out what people areprojecting.MR. PRELL. I think we've seen in some parts of the Northeastthat this doesn't go on forever--that you get an affordability problemafter a while because the mortgage payment just is unmanageable. Butit is a mixed picture regionally, and that's one of the problems inforecasting housing activity. It clearly has been a problem in thelast year. We've had very divergent and changing market conditions.We try to sort through all of that as well.MR. SYRON. Consistent with what Bob [Parry] said, you getthis responding sort of with a lag. In New England now we're seeinglower housing activity than you might expect, considering othervariables, because with the rate of appreciation having declinedsubstantially--it has actually gone negative in real terms--people are-19-3/28/89buying housing only for shelter. They are not buying it any longerfiguring that it is an investment as well. So, at some point it sortof falls off a cliff in a sense, and you get a strong negativereaction to the whole thing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's what will tilt the housingmarket down. If all of a sudden there is a perception thatresidential property values are easing then all of a sudden, whateverthe nominal mortgage rate is, it will grab--MR. PARRY. That's right.MR. PRELL. I might just note one of the surprises recently:we haven't gotten too excited about this yet, but we have beensurprised by the firmness in the multifamily sector. And we noticethat there has been some downturn in vacancy rates in some locales.We have a sense that there is a very old stock of apartment buildingsout there and some demographic pressure. It may be that there is someconsiderable resilience in the apartment part of the market.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob, I assume that the 25 percentincrease is a nominal increase in price and that it has the sameproblem that the national figure has in picking up a significantincrease in the average size of homes and improved quality. So, theadjusted price level is not going up anywhere near that level.MR. PARRY. We do not'collect good data on that. I don'tknow how much that has changed and how much of a factor that is.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We do know in the national figures thatit's very significant. And since California is such a big part,clearly, it's got to be an issue there. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mike, how much of thedecline that you're showing in your forecast for 1989 and 1990 fromlast time is attributed to your assumption of an additional onepercentage point increase in interest rates?MR. PRELL. We haven't really made much of a change from ourlast projection. Using the model--which I've already indicated is animperfect predictor of these responses--if you took out the interestrate increase and just held the funds rate stable the model would takeoff maybe 1/3 of a percent in real growth this year and something over1/2 a percent next year. That means that we still would have aperceptible weakening in growth and likely some slight edging up inthe unemployment rate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ted, can I ask a question on the effectof the rise in the oil price in the last couple of weeks on the SaudiArabian fiscal situation? A couple of weeks ago, as I recall, itlooked as though the rapidly deteriorating fiscal situation in SaudiArabia and the pressures on the oil price would likely come, with theSaudis having to increase their liftings to meet their revenuerequirements, which would accelerate the price level decline. Isthere any way of making a judgment as to whether the recent runup inspot crude prices has altered the situation in a way in which theyneed not move the liftings at this point?-20-3/28/89MR. TRUMAN. Well, it clearly works in that direction, thoughit all depends a bit on what one thinks the current meeting willproduce for the balance of 1989. I have not seen any reports thatsuggest that the Saudis will step up production because of theirfiscal situation or that they do not need to step up their productionbecause prices have moved up. Posted prices have not moved to thesame degree as spot prices, although--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but they are still really sellingat spot.MR. TRUMAN. But they have some long-term contracts. Itdepends on how those contracts are written; that's right. It works inthat direction. One of the favorable factors has been the supplydisruptions in Qatar; that has tightened the supply side. And in somesense there has been a spillover to the price the Saudis are getting.We have a small step-up in production in the second half of the yearbuilt into this. Our guess is that they decided to accept the pricescoming down on the assumption that there will be a modest increase--acouple hundred thousand barrels a day--in OPEC production in generalin the second half of the year. That's not a big deal. A smallincrease, on that order of magnitude, is built into what we have andif you parse that out among all the producers--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no further questions forMessrs. Prell or Truman, shall we open our tour de table? Who wouldlike to start? President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I really don't have anyquestions or any real disagreement with the staff forecast.Looking at the District, our recent performance and the near-term prospects for our economy continue to improve. Over the lastyear and a half the gains in the Dallas District have beenconcentrated primarily in manufacturing services. More recently,we've seen some gain from the energy sector. The contraction inconstruction seems to be nearing the bottom. Agriculture remains abit of a concern, primarily because of the uncertainty of the droughtsituation. As I've reiterated over the last six months, most of mycontacts outside the banking and real estate industries have beensounding increasingly optimistic. I had a group of investmentmerchant bankers in for a breakfast meeting last week and most of themagreed that the Texas economy and even that of Louisiana, which hasbeen one of the weakest states, are beginning to demonstrateincreasing strength. In fact, a few who represent very largecompanies with considerable capital from both national andinternational sources are beginning to look upon the region as a ripeopportunity because of the reduced competition coming from the bankingsector. On the whole the regional economy is improving but growingslower than the nation. Banking, real estate, and now agriculture arethe exceptions to this pattern. Within the District no one is notingprice or wage pressures but there have been a few signs over the lasttwo or three months of some shortages of engineers, first in Houstonand now in Dallas. Overall, I think we're feeling a little moreoptimistic down our way than we have for quite some time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.-21-3/28/89MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, the Greenbook projections lookquite reasonable to us. Until very recently we had thought that theywere underestimating the amount of economic growth we would have inthe economy. But at this point I guess we think the risk of error isabout equal on both sides of that. This change in our view is not theresult of what we see in the Greenbook or the Beigebook or what wepick up in the way of anecdotal information. To us those sourcessuggest--if you allow for some downtick in some of the monthlystatistics in February because of that temporary weather-induced burstin January and also allow for the sluggishness recently in automobilesales, which may prove to be temporary--that the economy looks prettystrong. What makes us think that the risks really have shifted isthat we have taken, we think, some pretty significant policy moves inrecent weeks and months. The federal funds rate is up about 3-1/2percentage points over a pretty short period of time, and we thinkthese policy actions--particularly the most recent ones--haveincreased the odds that economic activity will moderate later thisyear just as the Greenbook projects. And these actions significantlyreduce the risk that the economy is going to overheat further.Now, the recent sharp increases in prices at the wholesalelevel and certainly at the consumer level worry us a great deal as dothe indications of upward pressures on wages. And we're deeplyconcerned about broad increases in prices outside the food and energyarea. That suggests that the underlying rate of inflation has risenat least a notch or two in the last several months. On the otherhand, the trend rate of growth in M2 has dropped pretty markedly overthe last two years and I think that provides us with at least someinsurance against a really sharp further acceleration in theunderlying rate of inflation for the remainder of 1989. But I wouldadd, perhaps gratuitously, that if we're really going to get inflationdown to a zero level I think somewhere down the road we've certainlygot to get the aggregates growing at a slower rate than they havegrown over most of this two-year period--maybe no slower in 1989, butcertainly in a trend sense they have to come down still further ifwe're going to get to our ultimate goal.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Twelfth Districteconomy continues to experience healthy growth with only a few signsof slowing. Agricultural producers are enjoying high product pricesand recent rains have lessened the chances of drought in the arearather substantially. We also hear reports from Western departmentstore executives that sales of soft goods have improved in recentweeks. But I must admit that that may be a reflection of improvedweather conditions and also the early Easter season. In the fewsectors that we do see slowing it appears as though supply constraintsexplain much of the change. In Section II of the Greenbook there wasa reference to the types of problems that the commercial aircraftindustry is experiencing and I was thinking that it's rather amazingthat Boeing has signed an agreement with Lockheed to borrow up to 670Atlanta-based workers for as long as six months.Turning to the national economy, the level of activity asindicated in the discussion in the Greenbook remains above itsnoninflationary potential. Strong growth in employment and tighteninglabor markets suggest that upward pressures on wages are likely to-22-3/28/89persist. At the same time, higher short-term interest rates mayresult in some slowing in the next few quarters. But I must admitthat, to me, signs of current slowing are too few to be convincing atthis point. Our overall outlook for the economy is really not verydifferent from that of the Greenbook. We also expect the economy toremain above full employment with continuing upward wage pressures forat least the remainder of 1989 and perhaps into 1990. However, wehave less strength in our forecast originating in the net exportsector, largely as a result of the strength of the dollar that we'veexperienced during the past year. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. With regard first to the District economy, ingeneral things remain in good shape and there haven't been any majorsurprises or new developments that are worth reporting, with a coupleof exceptions. On the side of real activity the one surprise thatI've noticed is that nonresidential construction activity is certainlystronger than I would have expected at this point. Major projectscontinue to be announced and initiated in the Twin Cities and the waythings are shaping up it looks like that's going to keep that sectorreasonably strong early into the next decade. Labor markets generallyremain tight and sectors that had been expanding are continuing toexpand. Having said that, I do have the sense from talking to avariety of business people that the rate of expansion has eased a bit.And it's very clear to me that in the last several months, at least,business people are once again noticing interest rates. Interestrates have become a topic of conversation whereas as recently asperhaps four or five months ago that subject hardly, if ever, came up.But that's now back on the agenda. Another subject where the tone ofthe anecdotal information seems to have changed is cost increases. Inthe past a lot of business people would tell you about the costincreases that they were experiencing and the difficulties they werehaving in passing those cost increases through. They will admit nowthat they're having less difficulty moving those cost increasesthrough. They hardly, if ever, complain any longer about thedifficulty in doing so.As far as the national outlook is concerned, I have little toadd. I think there are some signs that we may be approaching a softlanding, at least as far as real growth is concerned. I wouldn't wantto exaggerate those signs, given that January was probably boosted byvery favorable weather and some backing off in February was almostinevitable. We do run an unfettered model forecast; it's a whollyunfettered [vector] auto-regressive model. And for what that's worth,that does not have a recession in it. It has continued real growth in'89 and '90, and it has that at modest rates. And, at least as far asconsumer prices are concerned, it has somewhat more rapid inflationthan the Greenbook.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, looking first at the District,I'm glad Boeing is borrowing some of the Lockheed workers; that willbe helpful. There are several thousand Eastern [Airlines] people whoare available as well. We haven't seen very much of a change in theSixth District since the last meeting of the Committee. We arecontinuing to see moderately good growth, although it's somewhat-23-3/28/89slower paced than the national average. Capital spending plans arequite robust in those industries where capacity pressures are evidentand that is certainly the case for industries like paper, chemicals,rubber, and all aspects of the transportation sector. Textilemanufacturers are also moving ahead with plans to increase purchasesof equipment although in that case it's mostly to modernize theirolder facilities. We do continue to have reports of shortages ofskilled labor and upward [wage] pressures for skilled workers. Themarkets are not quite as tight for unskilled people but even there wehear sporadic reports of difficulty, particularly in fast-food placesand in supermarkets. There is considerable concern among people Italk to about the rising cost of benefits, particularly healthbenefits, and the impact on total labor costs. In addition to thatthere's a fear or concern about enactment of a higher minimum wagewhich would push up wages for higher paid labor as well, given therelative tightness of the labor market. As for prices, on the basisof sporadic reports, the information we're getting is mixed.Increases are mixed for industrial inputs, with a greater upward biasthan seen a year ago. And it's rather interesting to me that, inconnection with prices as well as some other areas, people talk abouta lower level of prices over the last month or so but when theycompare their prices to a year ago they are still considerably higher.With regard to the national economy, we don't have verysignificant differences with the Greenbook forecast. We would have aslightly higher inflation number and a lower unemployment number butthose are minor differences; basically we're in agreement. Judgingfrom the Sixth District and from what I see around the nation there issome near-term deceleration in economic expansion, especially if youtake into account the fact that we're at full employment and a lot ofindustries are going full blast and at high capacity. There are twothings that continue to disturb me. One is that any slowing that'sevident seems to be taken as a sign of real weakness in the economy.I think we've gotten so used to high numbers over the past severalyears that when the numbers come off even a little people get panicky.On the inflation side the same thing is true. As I've said before,among a lot of people that I've talked to there is kind of anacceptance of inflation at the 5 percent level or even a bit higher.I think that was confirmed when the CPI number the other day came inat .4 percent--which I'm not all that sanguine about--they wererelieved that it wasn't at the higher end of the expected range. Soin general, I think we have an expectational problem in the economyand in the markets that we really have got to move against. Now, Ihope that the economy really is slowing. But as someone said earlierwe've been burned on this before. Over the summer I remember a coupleof times when we thought there was a slowing and it turned out not tobe. So, I'm skeptical that we are really seeing a sufficient slowingto stem the inflationary pressures that are there. And that obviouslyleads me to a certain conclusion about monetary policy that I'llreserve for the later discussion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I do find this a particularlydifficult period in which to assess the outlook. In his presentationI think Mike made the case, which we would agree with, that there areat least some tentative signs of moderation out there. In a nationalcontext we reviewed a number of things in the Greenbook. We think-24-3/28/89consumer spending, particularly for durables, will be showing somesign of leveling. Growth of exports is certainly short of ourexpectations, and that would be particularly true for industrialsupplies, materials, and capital equipment. The housing numbers areshowing some signs of softness; interest rates have had an impact onthat. The railroads no longer carry the GNP but nonetheless the year-to-date numbers for rail shipments are certainly lower, particularlyfor February, than was the case for last year. How much of this isweather-related I think is very tough to tell. January wasextraordinarily warm, of course, and February was at least normallycold and the seasonal adjustments may have had an impact on some ofthese national numbers.In a District context, we're really not seeing very much ofthis moderation. The employment numbers throughout the Districtcontinue to be strong; we don't see any weaknesses emerging there.The manufacturing outlook continues at a pretty high level. The steelbusiness, for example, is strong. And the steel plants in the Midwestare exporting--admittedly from a low base--but nonetheless that's anew market for them. Machine tool orders are up. Railway equipment--an industry that has been absolutely moribund over the last four orfive years--is showing some signs of increased orders. So, in amanufacturing context, it's our expectation that activity in theMidwest this year probably will be running ahead of the nationalnumbers. And certainly the other aspects of the Midwestern economycontinue to be pretty favorable. On the inflation side I have thoughtfor quite some while that of course the risks really were, on balance,for higher levels of inflation. I think that continues to be thecase; but it may just be possible that we're at one of those timeswhen the balance is shifting a little and that as we go into theupcoming period some of the moderating signs will become a bit morespecific. The real question--which we'll be talking about a littlelater--is how much more we need to do in a monetary policy sense, ifin fact we need to do more.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. First Vice President Stone.MR. STONE. Regionally, the labor markets in the ThirdDistrict have continued to tighten. The unemployment rate thisquarter for the three states represented in the District is estimatedto be the lowest it has been in 19 years. We'd be happy to borrowsome employees from whatever Districts seem to have some available.Businesses are reporting a shortage of labor across an increasingnumber of categories and that includes skilled and unskilled workers.And we're starting to hear about shortages in the professional area,including engineers. Prices and wages continue to increase at levelsabove the national average. We also see some early signs for ourregional outlook of more moderate growth in the near term, but not alevel moderate enough to reduce substantially the pressures on bothlabor markets and prices.On the national scene, we feel the staff estimates arerelatively reasonable. We probably see more risks on the up side,particularly for inflation. That concludes my report.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.-25-3/28/89VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me start with a couple ofimpressionistic or anecdotal comments. My sense is that most peoplein the business community that I talk to associate themselves with theview that there are these straws in the wind that the economy may besettling down a bit. But I think it's almost universally true thatthey would tend to be in the soft landing camp in that I haveabsolutely no suggestions [from them] of any accumulating downturn oranything even remotely resembling recession or remotely indicative ofthat. There is, I think, especially among major industrial companies,far less conviction today than there was three months ago about theprospective strength of exports. Some of that is exchange-raterelated but, seemingly, a lot of it is not simply a reflection ofexchange rates; there's a combination of capacity constraints andother considerations as well. But certainly there is less convictionabout the near-term strength of exports than has been the case. Evenhas changed his tune, Alan, quite perceptibly.The anecdotal material on the inflation side is, frankly, abit sour right now. Virtually all companies--small and large--thatwe've talked to in the recent past do point to both labor and nonlaborcost pressures. And consistent with Gary's comment [they report] lessdifficulty in passing costs through. I don't think I wouldcharacterize these impressions as symptomatic of a 1979-80 typeoutburst of inflation. Nevertheless, I think the perception is therethat the pressure is greater. One little tiny vignette that'sgermane: our small business and agricultural advisory committeemembers were talking last week--and this really shocked all of us, Ithink--about wage increases as high as 9 and 10 percent. Presumably,because these are small companies these are not wage increases as muchas they are increases in hiring rates. In other words, when they loseemployees they have to go out into the marketplace and replace them.And I think the thrust of their comment was that, in at least somecases, replacement rates are now 9 or 10 percent above prevailingrates for existing employees. So it's not a wage increase in theusual sense of the term but I think it is symptomatic of quite tightlabor markets throughout the District, including most of upstate NewYork at this point.The other impression that I pick up an awful lot lately--andI think it's just worth repeating--is an almost universal skepticism,bordering on cynicism, about the outlook for budget deficit reductionplans, as they may or may not emerge over the weeks ahead. Again, itdoesn't matter whether you're talking to small businesses, bigbusinesses, upstate, or downstate. There really is a growing concernthat nothing seems to be happening. Whether the Administration'squiet diplomacy will produce something is another question. But Ithink it is a matter of increasing concern.As far as the forecasts are concerned, the New York staffforecast for 1989 in terms of GNP, real GNP, and indeed almost all thecomponents of GNP, is virtually identical with the Board staff'sforecast. The only major difference we continue to have is on theinflation side. Depending upon which index you look at, our inflationrates are a half--MR. GUFFEY. Jerry, would you speak up a little? We'd liketo hear what you're saying.-26-3/28/89VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm sorry. The only materialdifference in our staff forecast versus the Board staff's forecast ison inflation. That has narrowed a bit but we still have inflationrates in 1989--depending upon which index you look at--that are 1/2 to3/4 of a point above the Board staff's forecast. That still seems toreflect, primarily, a different view on markups. Mike's forecaststill has a small negative spread between, say, the deflator and unitlabor costs and ours continues to have a small positive spread. Butwhen you add the two of them together it comes out to 3/4 of a pointdifference on the high side in our forecast. In 1990, for whateverweight one wants to put on a 1990 forecast, there's a fairly sharpdifference between the Board staff's forecast and ours. We don't haveas much of a slowdown in domestic demand as they do. And we have theexternal adjustment process essentially flattening out and indeeddeteriorating a little. So there's a quite a sharp difference in1990. I don't put any more weight on those forecasts than Ted Trumandoes, but to get back to the point the Chairman raised earlier--whether you take the staff's forecast or our forecast for '89 and '90on the external side--both imply an increase in U.S. net externalliabilities in balance sheet terms of about $275 billion for the twoyears combined. And I must say as an intermediate- or medium-termpolicy problem I am getting more and more concerned about theimplications of anything even resembling that kind of a result for thetwo years running.With regard to the near-term growth prospects in the economy,my sense of things, Mr. Chairman, is that under the best ofcircumstances the near-term inflation numbers are going to be bad.And if the economy is simply pausing rather than trending down theycould be terrible. So an awful lot does ride on the question of howmuch weight one should give to these signs, however tentative or firmone may think they are, as to the near-term course of the economy.Just one last point on the price side: Mike and Ted talked a fair bitabout oil prices and Governor Angell will probably talk a bit aboutcommodity prices. But one thing I did notice in looking atcommodities is that stocks of a very wide range of agricultural andindustrial crude materials are at quite low levels right now. I'dsimply observe that if we don't get some rain in some parts of thecountry pretty soon that could further complicate the near-termoutlook on the price front.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer, why don't you startoff by telling us about rain in your area?MR. MELZER. It's not a problem; we even had a foot of snowthree weeks ago. I think Roger might have something to say aboutthat. In terms of the District numbers, the most recent reportedactivity is very strong both relative to what we've been seeing latelyand also compared to the national numbers. In general, the morerecent anecdotal information would tend to confirm that. The generalsense I get is that orders are growing, albeit at a slower pace, andthat there is some weakness in the consumer area but the commercialarea is still quite strong. In particular, we're seeing strongmanufacturing employment growth and the industries that you see thereare transportation, textiles, food products, and chemicals. On thetransportation side--just picking up on what Bob Parry said--a fellowfrom mentioned to us the other day that they have afive-year order backlog in commercial aircraft and I think half of-27-3/28/89their workforce has about an average of one year's experience on thoseparticular assembly lines. He did go on to say that the order backlogincludes options--I think they call them reservations--so that some ofthat could fall away. On the textile side, where we've seen somestrength as well, a textile manufacturer who had just returned fromthe Far East mentioned that, looking at Korea for example, betweenwhat's happened to their currency and wage rates domestically in Koreathey're looking at cost increases of 25 percent in manufacturingthere. And to a lesser extent that's happening in Hong Kong andTaiwan. So, in particular types of products the United States is muchmore competitive.In terms of other insights of an anecdotal nature, thegeneral sense I get is that people--whether they are in a commercialbusiness or even in a consumer business--really feel that they areunder a great deal of margin pressure. Raw material prices are up alot, as somebody said, over the last year. I think the increases haveslowed down recently. There is some sense of potentially growing wagepressures. And certainly in businesses where they're selling tooriginal equipment manufacturers there is still a great deal ofdifficulty passing along price increases. But they will try to workboth ends of the costs savings, passing along increases where theycan.In terms of growth in orders, clearly the sense I got is that[the rate of] growth has slowed down in the last couple of months butorders are still growing. I've heard of no cancellations as yet, butreading between the lines I sense a little anxiety about thepossibility of cancellations. In a similar vein on receivables, oneconsumer products company mentioned that they are really taking a veryclose look at their receivables, which have been growing; and theynoted that now 20 percent of the companies they sell to have beeninvolved in LBOs. So, they view the quality of their receivables asreally quite low and they are looking at that carefully.On the national front, my observation would be--just goingback a month ago--that our forecast in terms of the result was veryclose to the Board staff's but it presumed roughly 4 percent M1 growthover the forecast period. Clearly, to the extent that we have verylow money growth, people who prepare [our forecast] have becomeincreasingly concerned about whether or not things are going to workthat way. In a sense that leads me to a bit of concern, to the extentthat in our discussions here we tend to focus on current inputs andwhether or not we see weakness and how we try to trade that offagainst price pressures. In a sense I think there's a trap in thatprocess in that it doesn't really take into account some of theinherent lags in policy. By the time we see the weakness it could betoo late; and when we do see the weakness we probably will continue tosee price pressure. What do we do then? If you look back to thediscount rate increase, to some extent the market in effect demandedthat, in my view. I'm not saying we wouldn't have done it anyway, butin a sense I don't think we had a choice because the perceptions outthere were basically that we were going to respond to these short-terminputs. So, I think at some point we have to introduce into thedialogue something else to look at that can be a guide. In general, Iwould just urge that we not ignore what's going on with theaggregates. We all know we set a target on M2 and we know where thatstands: it's a little below the lower end of the cone. I'm sure you-28-3/28/89all recall my proposal for a [monetary] base growth constraint. Inthe fourth quarter that grew at less than 5 percent, which is what Isuggested as a lower bound; this quarter it's probably right around 5percent. I took a look at reserves and I was interested in what Ifound there. If you go back to '79 we've only had two quarters overthat entire period of negative reserve growth: one was the fourthquarter of '88; the other was the third quarter of '87. And as youknow from the Bluebook, we're putting together a second back-to-backquarter of negative reserve growth of fairly substantial proportions.In any case, I just think that as we contemplate policy actions wehave to consider not only what's going on in the economy currently butalso some gauge of the thrust of our actions and the lagged impactsthey are going to have.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Well, maybe it's because I'm sitting next to Bob,but the New England economy sort of performs inversely to Texas. I'mnot sure whether there's any causal relationship. Contemporaneousmeasures of the region's economy are very strong: an unemployment rateof 3.2 percent; personal income still growing at faster than thenational level. But if one looks a little beyond that, particularlyusing anecdotal information from talking to people, there arecertainly signs of a number of areas where there are problems.Manufacturing employment has been declining in absolute terms for somesubstantial period of time. There was some mention of the computerindustry on a national basis; that's reflected to an even greaterextent in New England. One of largest employers, Digital EquipmentCorporation, had a very major decline in its stock price last weekthat reflected some problems they had in earnings. Consistent withthat, we're seeing that wage pressures are still pretty strong at theunskilled end of the labor market. At the skilled end of the labormarket pressures seem to be abating somewhat from what has happened inthe past. But going beyond that there is a variety of things that Ithink are going to lead to some further relative slowing in the NewEngland economy. We have serious tax problems in three of the sixstates that account for about 80 percent of the population and 80percent of the economic activity in the District. There are incipientproblems in the banking sector. Delinquencies have risen. Actually,it's the ultimate in anecdotal information, but in last Sunday'spapers we had three pages of ads for single-family houses, which isunusual for us. Granted, they were big ads so they end up taking alot of space. But interestingly, particularly in the housing area, Ithink what's driving it is not rates so much as this realization thatpeople are no longer going to buy a house at $600,000 and then twoyears later turn around and sell it for $800,000. That's what we weretalking about before--Bob Parry's point that people are buyingshelter. I would maintain that much of what's going on in New Englanddoes not really reflect monetary policy or overall constraints in thenational economy. It's sort of supply constrained and relative costshave gotten so high in the District; and actually, it's a very smallDistrict in terms of its weight nationally.In terms of the national economy, we too don't differ verymuch--hardly at all--[with the Greenbook forecast]. I have someslight difference with the unemployment path of the staff forecast andagree very much with the tone of the comments that Mike Prell madethis morning. However, I find those projections somewhat-29-3/28/89disconcerting--not in the sense that we don't agree with them but thatthey imply that we have a very difficult situation before us in thatwe know inflationary pressures are there. It seems to me there isn'tmuch question about that, regardless of what we do right now. Andwhile there have been some--to be different I'll use the word "reeds"--in the wind of a possible slowdown, I don't think we've seen anybroad signs. We have certainly seen substantial increases in personalincome; we don't know how that's going to be reflected later on.There really isn't any convincing evidence of a substantial slowdown,so we are rather dependent on a forecast for that. And the Greenbookforecast--which I'll say again we have very little problem with--shows, even taking out the drought in the second quarter, fairlystrong rates of growth. There was discussion about what the naturalrate is. I think that we're in a difficult position where if one doesbelieve that the risks are not symmetrical, the risks would lead oneto want to be more conservative.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to theDistrict economy, it continues to improve albeit at a rate somewhatslower than the national rate of growth. The strength comes largelyfrom the agricultural and manufacturing sectors whereas the weaknessis where it has been in the past couple of years--in the energy andconstruction areas. There is an event that I think is worth notingthat somebody spoke of a moment ago, and that's the drought. Thatwill affect portions of the Tenth District, largely an area from aboutthe plains in Kansas to the northeast through Kansas, northernMissouri, and portions of southeastern Iowa and western Illinois. Ifwe do not get rain, some generous spring rains, fairly soon theagricultural situation will be fairly grim. For example, in Kansasabout 3/4 of the wheat crop is now estimated to be either poor or verypoor, which are two of the lowest categories of estimates of thatparticular hard winter wheat crop. The one event that was frighteningoccurred about two weeks ago--and I suspect most of you know this--when there was a dust storm that was created by 50-60 mile per hourwinds that actually darkened the sun in midafternoon in Kansas City.In fact, there were some street lights that came on. I happen to beold enough to remember the 1930's dust storms and this was veryreminiscent of that. It happened to be [only] one day; nonetheless,if there is no rain through that belt that I just described I think wewill have very serious problems. The estimate of food prices, forexample, might be way off. Beyond that, there is strength in themanufacturing sector, and I'm thinking primarily of general aviation.Auto production, up until a couple of weeks ago at least, was goingfull bore with auto plants operating at two full shifts. That wouldappear to be slowing now; I don't know what's going to happen in thefuture but there is a very large inventory, as you know, of unsoldautos. The energy sector shows little or no improvement. As a matterof fact, it continues to decrease in terms of exploration activity.It has always been thought that a price around $17 a barrel wouldregenerate the interest in exploration; but the uncertainties aboutOPEC and what may happen to oil prices simply are keeping thoseindividuals out of that particular activity and the number of activerigs that are drilling continues to decrease.With regard to the national outlook, there is no realdifference between the staff forecast and our own for the horizon of-30-3/28/89the forecast with the exception that we're a bit stronger on bothgrowth and prices. In fact, there is some encouraging evidence thathas already been cited with respect to a slowdown. But it isn't veryconvincing, at least yet. I think we still have to wait for someadditional information on that. In our forecast, we'd put the riskson the high side rather than the low side, with rather a bit strongergrowth and stronger prices.MR. HOSKINS. The Fourth District really hasn't changed muchover the last year and a half that I've been talking to you about it.It's very difficult to pick up any signs that we have a slowing in thearea, either through casual observations, talking with people, ortrying to ferret through the data. What we did this time was to talkto a few capital goods producers, which includes firms likeWestinghouse and Eaton Corp., and several other basic capital goodsproducers, to try to get a handle on whether or not they see anychange in attitudes among the people they supply. And the answer tothe question is simply no. Any weakness that you perhaps see incomputers or office equipment is being offset, at least in theDistrict, in very traditional capital goods. The most optimisticperson was a guy in the capital goods industry who estimates real[growth] for this year at 6 percent, fourth quarter-over-fourthquarter. It's very difficult to find any signs of weakness in that.Now, to some extent I'm a little surprised that we didn't find moreprice pressures developing than we did. They all expect to be able tomove prices up in the coming year but they haven't moved aggressivelyas of yet generally. Order books are still good and lead times are inmost cases lengthening rather than shortening. So the picture forcapital goods expenditures--at least what the producers in ourDistrict think--is that the outlook for them is quite bright thisyear, with really very few concerns about a slowing economy. One ortwo raised a concern about that but they hadn't altered their plansfor production.In terms of the Greenbook forecast and the outlooknationally, as usual I am chagrined that, to some extent, again we arepushing back another year any decline we are going to see in theinflation rate. But that has been a continual concern. I haven'tseen us making a lot of progress in the last year and a half. I agreevery much with the comments made by Tom Melzer that we have done somethings that are unusual. One is the growth in total reserves. MaybeDon can talk about that a little later; I don't know exactly what itmeans. I know that it comes from interest-sensitive asset flows beingshifted around. But it seems to me if it's something that we oughtnot be concerned about at least we should question whether or notthere's some significance to it in terms of the outlook. The lagproblem is always with us. I presume Mike has built that into theforecast. Now, I have no confidence that any other forecast is betterthan this one. So, my concerns are the same as his--well, I don'twant to speak for him. I view the errors as likely to be on the highside in terms of inflation rather than on the low side. I'll save therest of it for the policy go-around.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I don't really have much to add. We got a rashof weaker indicators for the month of February, where almost acrossthe board all of the data suggested a weakening. But we don't know-31-3/28/89whether that is weather-related or not because of the strong data forJanuary. There certainly are some signs of slowing. I agree it's tooearly to assess whether things are significantly slowing or whetherthis is establishing some sort of trend. Real personal consumptionexpenditures seem to have been on a modest track for more than justone month and the order books on capital goods seem to have beenmoving at a moderate pace for several months now. So, I think thoseare promising signs. But I don't think there are any indications ofthings going overboard on the weak side. Or, at least if they arestarting to slow down quite a bit, we only have one month'sobservation. It's too early to make any judgment one way or the otheron that. I think the inflation news recently has been disappointing;but at the same time we knew these lags were built in. Those forceswere set in place long ago and we've got to look forward. So thequestion is whether we have put in place strong enough policy that,with a lag, we're going to get the results we're looking for. That'sthe key question. I don't think anyone knows this for sure; but wehave moved quite significantly over the last intermeeting period andwe will just have to see. Economically, I think we are in anuncertain period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. My sense is that consumer spending in the UnitedStates is rather gradually coming into line with what needs to happen.Maybe some of this is interest-rate induced; maybe some of it isdemographics; maybe some of it is actually the impact of higher pricesand higher interest rates on budgets. In many ways that looks like a1 to 2 percent growth rate of consumption, which seems to me isexactly what we would like to see happen. And it seems to me thatthis happens in an environment that's not very prone to a recession.When I look at inventories and at the factors that ordinarily lead torecession I just do not see the economy going into recession in theforeseeable future, and I guess that would take us through the firstquarter of 1990. I recognize it's a narrow path to have this slowdownin consumer spending without overshooting and getting a recession outof it. But it does seem to me that that's still a possibility.Hindsight, it seems to me, would say that some of us who watchcommodity prices didn't say as much about it as we should have said,but there is a clear indication that year-over-year rates of change incommodity prices have been moderating. But they have been plateauingin a very, very slow manner. Of course, we had the November-Decemberspike in which the world food situation began to be somewhat moreclear to the people that follow it. We saw food and fiber prices[rise] in November and December. We've had a year-over-year increaseof 42 percent in the price of wheat; the price of wheat is almost 80percent of its high, which occurred back in 1974. And that's a pricethat really is very conducive to increased production worldwide. Theweather situation is, of course, a very clear one; and it getsinterpreted into those commodity prices very, very rapidly. I supposesome things could go wrong but I guess I'm comforted, Tom, by the 2percent M2 number. Given the price pressures that are there, Icouldn't be more satisfied with any M2 growth that I can think of thanwhat we're getting. I suppose it does run some risk of being thatclose to the precipice. But I think it would be riskier still if wewere going along with growth of M2 at a much more rapid pace.-32-3/28/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other Governors wish to addanything?MR. HELLER. I think the general reluctance, Mr. Chairman, isindicative of the fact that we all like where we have been and wedon't like where we are going. Maybe Mike Prell said it best when hesaid we're in danger of overshooting the runway and when you overshootthe runway you tend to get stuck in the mud or something. So, withregard to the general picture of the economy that's unfolding here,I'm not particularly fond of the declining investment activity, whichdoesn't build additional capacity nor of the export picture not beingas good as it could be, although we continue to make progress. I seethe export picture mainly as a problem of different regions in theworld economy and relative exchange rates rather than our absoluteexchange rate levels towards Europe. We are in an approximate balancenow or actually are running very, very small surpluses, but [not]toward Japan and Korea; obviously that's where the problems arelocated. And I'm not sure that exchange rate changes are the rightway to go at that particular problem. So it isn't going to be verypleasant. But it's all we've got, right?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's only one economy. Anybody elsebefore coffee?MR. HELLER. Sounds better than anything else, right?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, why don't we break now.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The dollar is up to 133.20 on the yen;the bond market is up over 9/32nds; the stock market is at[unintelligible]. What do they know that we don't?MR. SYRON. Plenty of confidence in us, that's all!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Which was my opening refrain to DonKohn.MR. KOHN. Well, they're in a lot of trouble! [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Let me quickly ask on Chart7: I assume that you're not repeating before 1978 because that's whenthe whole survey started. Or is it because other proxies don't giveyou as good a correlation with the very present?MR. KOHN. Yes, I think it's sort of suspicious too. Thischart is plotted from 1978 because that's when the 10-year Hoey surveystarted. We have done some other experiments using, for example,1-year rates with 1-year inflation expectations. They tend to getvery poor results in the 1960s and somewhat better results in the1970s and 1980s. They also suggest that there have been changes inthe natural real rate, which was a little higher in the 1960s, alittle lower in the 1970s and much higher in the 1980s.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions?-33-3/28/89MR. JOHNSON. Just one. On the Hoey survey, was that lastsurvey taken before or after our discount rate [action]?MR. KOHN. I don't know.MR. JOHNSON. It's a February survey number.MR. KOHN. Yes, it was the last half of February, but I don'tknow the exact date. I know it was after that first PPI number andbefore the second; that I checked on.MR. JOHNSON. Okay. That's all I need.MR. KEEHN. Don, maybe you answered this, but in the coollight of hindsight has the Hoey survey had a reasonable degree ofaccuracy?MR. KOHN. Well, I don't know. I'm not familiar with--MR. PRELL. It only had one observation in 10 years. You'dhave to look back.MR. KEEHN. Well, on the shorter?MR. KOHN. I don't know, President Keehn. I haven't seen astudy which tends to do that. Generally, these market expectationstudies don't show that the market does a very good job of[predicting] what's going to come. But also, I look at it not as away to see if the market may in some sense be more accurate thansomeone else, but rather as giving us some clue as to what's goingthrough people's minds, whether it's accurate or not.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don? If not, let's moveon to a discussion of policy. I'd like to start off by saying thatthe [outlook for the] economy is generally uncertain, a view I assumea lot of us share. My own impression is that the odds are that whatwe're going through now is more likely to be a pause rather than thebeginning of a downturn. But the odds are less, I think, than theywere in earlier stages in this particular cycle, if for no otherreason than that we are at much higher levels of activity and theprobabilities that the economy will eventually tip over obviously arelinked to how long the expansion has been going on, even if age per sedoes not necessarily throw us over. But there are signs that ordersare a little shabby. Basically, with the dollar very strong and withthe money supply growth factor rather modest--even though the odds inmy judgment are somewhat better than 50/50 that we will probably haveto tighten again before this cycle is over--this strikes me asprobably a good time to pause and see what effects our actions to datehave. That would lead me to come out for "B" asymmetrical towardstightness. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I'd just follow up on that, Mr. Chairman.That's pretty much the way I see it. As I said in my statement justbefore the coffee break, I think there are certainly some signs ofslowing but not enough to feel that a clear trend has beenestablished, although I think we have enough observations on neworders and in the real consumption area to suspect that things are atleast slowing or moderating. Whether that will be sufficient is-34-3/28/89certainly not clear at this stage. But, given the fact that we havejust recently moved fairly significantly on policy, I think we atleast ought to wait a while to see how those lags work out. I thinkit's probably still true that the risks are somewhat asymmetric, so Ican certainly go along with an asymmetric policy position in terms ofour pause.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your view in regardto a pause, so I would go with alternative B also. I have a slightpreference for being symmetric but not for operational reasons. It'ssimply that I believe if we are symmetric and we need to take thatnext step--and I think there is at least a 50/50 chance that that'sthe case--we can do it with symmetric language. But if it happensthat we don't need to take that move, we just look a little wiser byhindsight. I don't know whether that impresses anyone or not.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I have a request for clarification.In the Bluebook it's stated that alternative B would assume roughly acontinuation of 9-3/4 percent [on the funds rate] and that moneymarket rates might tend to decline a bit if that indeed is where wecame out. It seems to me in terms of maintaining the existing degreeof restraint in financial markets that the market is probably thinkingmore about 10 percent. Could I interpret support of "B" as being anoperation which would cause money market rates to remain at roughlytheir current levels?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would think so. My own impression isthat it's much too soon to allow the markets to get any signals,erroneous or otherwise, that we're backing off. That would strike meas a very inopportune signal.MR. PARRY. So that could be consistent with a slightlyfirmer funds rate?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would think so.MR. PARRY. Okay. Well, in that case I certainly would favoralternative B and asymmetric language at the present time. However,if further signs of slowing do not become more convincing in the nextseveral weeks, I would certainly recommend that we consider moving toalternative C promptly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I favor holding policy steady overthe period ahead, for a period of the next few weeks anyway. My hunchis the same as the one that's there [in the forecast] and also the oneyou made in assuming that some further increase in the funds rate isprobably going to be needed later on to keep inflationary pressuresand expectations from building up over the months ahead. So, I wouldwant the directive to be asymmetrical. But I think it's also possiblethat we've done enough, particularly in looking at the behavior of M2and how that has decelerated. I realize a lot of that stems from howopportunity costs of holding M2 [have changed] just recently; but if-35-3/28/89you look at the last two years M2 growth is still down to 4.7 percentfrom many years at a trend rate of about 8.9 percent. That is onewhale of a lot of deceleration over that period. That leads me to bemore sanguine about what might happen to inflation than I would be inthe absence of that decided deceleration in M2. So, I would go with"B," at least until we have more information on the March figures; I'dwatch those closely because I may well be wrong on that. Certainly,the current statistics do not reflect anything that would suggest thatwe ought not tighten more. You've got to look way back at what hasbeen put in train, guess about those lagged effects, and reach theconclusion that now is the time to pause. And that's really where Ithink the focus ought to be right now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, as you know Mr. Chairman, Iblow hot and cold on this, to put it mildly. I probably have changedmy mind about what is the right thing to do about once every hour forthe past two weeks. I clearly think that we've got to maintain a tilttoward firmness; indeed, I think my preference would actually be tocome out somewhere between "B" and "C" right now. Let me justelaborate on two basic reasons as to why that's where my preferencelies. The first is, as I've said before, that it seems to me we havea period immediately in front of us just about baked in the cake inwhich the price statistics are going to tend to be on the bad side. Ithink that's kind of locked in. By "bad" I don't mean anything likethose January-February PPI numbers but something in the range of 5percent or higher. Again, if our forecast and our hunches about softlandings prove to be right then we could get lucky. On the otherhand, if our forecast and hunches about soft landings are wrong and wehave a pause rather than a slowdown then I think we have real trouble,which is another way of saying that I still think the risks aredistinctly asymmetric.I have another concern that reinforces my tilt [preference].And that is, notwithstanding Don Kohn's Chart 7--which I agree ispretty impressive to look at--I still worry that the changes in thefinancial system and structure may well have produced a situation inwhich it takes a higher level of both nominal and real interest ratesto get the same degree of restraint that might have been associatedwith that nice neat relationship in Chart 7. And that leads me to acouple of things. First of all, as we look around right now there isno evidence that I can see of any credit availability problems.There's plenty of credit there. That shouldn't surprise us, given allthe structural changes in the financial system and so on. But what itmeans, of course--and Ted Truman touched on this--is that one way oranother restraint has to come through price effects. Price effectseither mean the exchange rate--and if they are the exchange rate thatcomplicates immensely that medium-term problem I spoke of earlier thismorning--or they have to be one way or another through interest rates.But what I'm not so sure about is how much we know today about the waythe interest mechanism itself works. For example, take the consumersector: it's unambiguously clear that rising interest rates have a netpositive impact on personal income even after you take account offloating rate mortgages and home equity loans. Now, that itselfdoesn't tell you too much; you then have to make a lot of judgmentsabout relative propensities to consume. But it's unambiguous in termsof its cash flow effect on the consumer sector as a whole.-36-3/28/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But adjustable rate mortgages are only25 percent of total mortgages.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's true. That's what they areright now. But on the other hand, the business sector clearly is hurtmore in cash flow terms by rising interest rates than it once was.And we get the anomalous effect that at least in cash flow terms theeffects of rising interest rates are more of a problem in the placewhere we need spending activity rather than in the consumer sectorwhere it should go the other way. Just as another illustration ofthis financial engineering, we're now all familiar with the swapmarket but we now have emerging markets in interest rate caps,collars, and floors. And this market, which is only a couple of yearsold, we know to be $300 billion in size and we think it is probably$500 billion in size. This market didn't even exist three years ago!And as a reflection of the way that market has been working in recentmonths, the open interest in Euro-dollar futures contracts in Chicagois now up to $760 billion. Now, I just don't know myself how allthese things interact in terms of the way monetary restraint worksitself into the system by interest rate channels. But my hunch isthat, if anything, it probably works to slow it down rather than speedit up. And that's the second reason why I have that tilt. Havingsaid that my preference would lie between "B" and "C" right now, Iguess I can go along with your formulation in the spirit of BobParry's earlier comments.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I would be in favor of yourrecommendation, namely, alternative B. But at this point I certainlywould continue to favor asymmetric language. Not to go further intothe operational aspects of it but, if the market's perception is thatthe fed funds rate target is, say, 9-3/4 or 9-7/8 percent, it doesseem to me that we are in a period in which there may be naturalupward pressure on that rate. I wouldn't resist it if the rate weremoving up to 9-7/8 or 10 percent, whereas I would resist it if, infact, the rate began to trend downward. So, I'd have a clear biastoward allowing the rate to go up.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, Si Keehn and Bob Parry have already prettymuch emphasized what I would want to point out. That is, I'm afraidthat market participants believe we are targeting the federal fundsrate closely at this juncture. So, while I favor "B" I think it'simportant, as we pause in the process of tightening here, that we makesure we pause at the right place and don't give the market a signalthat we are in some sense backing off. That's all I would add.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. I think President Black gave my speech; I'm for"B," asymmetric.MR. BLACK. Both?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.-37-3/28/89MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm sensing that thetheme of this conversation is that it's time for a pause, and Icertainly share that. Consequently, I can comfortably support yoursuggestion. But I would like to repeat what Governor Johnson said alittle earlier when we were touching on the matter of lags, and thatis: Have we put into place already enough [restraint] that will get uswhat we want? It's in that sense that at this moment I'm in no hurryto tighten. While I would agree that we certainly don't want to beperceived as backing off in any way--that caveat having been given--Ireally personally would prefer symmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. My preference is for no change, which I guess is"B" with symmetric language. As has been said by a number of people,we have had a substantial tightening over the last 12 months or so;interest rates have risen rather dramatically. Because of these knownlags, much of that tightening has yet to be felt by the economy.Also, as Manley said, there have been some signs of slowing. Ipersonally would argue that there's going to be some more coming,particularly in housing and in the auto industry. I haven't heard itmentioned but I think that the thrift situation is something we shouldbe aware of, if for no other reason than we could easily do somethingthat would make the cost of the bailout quite a bit higher. Also,despite the Brady plan, I don't believe we've solved the third worlddebt problem; maybe it's coming but I don't think it has been done.Too much additional tightening, I think, could negatively impact thosethird world nations. Finally, I'm very concerned about the dollarperhaps not performing as Ted and his people think it will--that itwill stay strong and that that will prevent this export expansion thatwe all want which, in turn, will make it even more difficult to narrowour trade deficit. So, for all those reasons I would prefer to sittight and have symmetrical language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that a somewhatfirmer policy at the moment would be appropriate. My judgment is thatwe are, in fact, experiencing a pause and not a sustained downturn inthe economy. But even if it is not a pause, even if we are seeingsome real slowing, I think the risks of recession with a firmer policyare minimal. The Greenbook forecast, with which I agree, ispredicated upon some tightening beginning in the second quarter--sometightening from where we are at the moment--and that does not producea recession in 1990. Moreover, it does not produce any greatimprovement in the inflation rate. So, not only do I think that wedon't need to back off, I think we need to continue our pressure onreserves in order to stay ahead of this inflation curve. We ought togo ahead and do the job now and make a tightening move. I wouldn't doit to any great degree but I think a funds rate around 10 percent, orwhatever the equivalent borrowing is, would be appropriate. Mypreference would be to move now by some small degree.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I can't remember whenI was more concerned about the confusion of the signals that I'mreading or as uncertain about my own conclusions. But I guess I feel-38-3/28/89that the economy is a lot mushier and that there are more risksinherent in it than most of you around the table do. I'm kind of likethe guy who's gone into the saloon to play poker and is willing tocheck his sixgun at the door and accept the key as the alternative.But I'd like to keep a derringer in my watch pocket. So, I'm in favorof the asymmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So that's "B," asymmetric?MR. LAWARE. Yes, sir.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. My preference would be for "B," symmetric. Ican certainly live with what you suggested, Mr. Chairman. The otherpoint I would make, consistent with what I was saying earlier, is thatI'd be a little concerned if we reacted to a single number in theintermeeting period. It may be that the markets force our hand and wehave to do that. But I think there's going to come a time when--and Idon't know how this will be achieved--there will have to be somethingelse on the table so that when we decide it's right to start moving,the markets aren't sitting there saying, well, where's the Fed. Withrespect to the M2 ranges, I don't know whether we have confidence overa long period of time that if we stick with the lower end of theranges that that's going to contain inflationary pressures. I justthink at some point we've got to get out of this mode of theexpectation that if a bad number comes out, boom, the Fed ought to bethere doing something right then. And if we are not, all the markets[unintelligible]. That's a very difficult thing to deal with but itdoes trouble me. And, in my judgment, just not moving in response toa number won't solve that. But I think we're getting to a point thatwe ought to be worried about trying to break that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. We think that more tightening probably is goingto have to take place this year. I'm not terribly concerned about thetiming, provided that when we do--to reinforce Tom's point again--thatwe take a very credible action and to some extent lead marketexpectations at that point. We take those actions and we explainthem; we tell them what we're doing. So, I'm comfortable waiting fora while. But I am disturbed. Again, many of us have spoken out aboutprice stability; yet as we look at the forecast, we're starting 1991with roughly the same rate that we have right now. I think that's aconcern.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The truth of the matter is that none ofus has a clue as to what the price level will be in the fourth quarterof 1990.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's for sure.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The fact that it's in the forecast Idon't think [is important]. However, I think the issue that you raiseis. But I wouldn't state it as unequivocally as you state it.MR. HOSKINS. Well, I think we have to look into the futuresince, presumably, the lags are 18 months to 2 years or perhaps-39-3/28/89longer. And I don't know what else to look at. If that's not ourobjective then I think we probably ought to talk about it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I think it is our objective. Butwhen you look out in these forecast numbers--. You've done yourmodels and I've done my model; I would hate to go back and have anyonelook at our historical forecasts in this area. That's the reason whyI think the money supply issue is so crucial. I agree that if we canhold the money supply growth down, just keep it there persistently, Ithink we'll win this one. President Syron.MR. SYRON. I personally would be more comfortable withsomething closer to "C" than "B" because I think we are probably goingto have to tighten at some point and I would prefer to tighten soonerrather than later. But having said that, I'm comfortable with yoursuggestion of "B," asymmetrically stated. The point that was madethat we certainly wouldn't want "B" to be consistent with an easing ofmarket rates--I'm not sure what the exact number is--is an importantone. The only other point I would make is that I would not in theimmediate period be terribly concerned if M2 continued to grow ratherslowly, because I'm not as sanguine that some of these thriftproblems, in terms of the deposit outflows, are not going to continuein the immediate period ahead. That's based in part on looking atsome data of FSLIC insured thrifts as compared to FDIC insuredthrifts.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I should hope we would be able to makesome thrift-adjusted M2 judgments.MR. KOHN. Of a very rough sort.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't know. Here I am complainingabout the price forecast and--MR. ANGELL. We can call it M2t.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As in M1A?MR. BOYKIN. I would favor alternative B as you suggested.And I would strongly favor asymmetric language. I would do thatbecause I think projections are extremely important right now. I'mnot sure that we will know by the time of the next meeting whether weare in the pause or whether we're heading a little differently. Andwhen this policy record becomes public, following the next meeting, Ithink it could lead to some confusion in terms of our commitment tohaving inflation in the forefront of our thinking. I think it couldsend the wrong signal.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would favor "B" and anasymmetric directive. I'd just like to highlight the point that TomMelzer made, however. We have in the past been fairly quick to act ona single number that has been published, given the background of thetightening that we've done over the last year. And that's 3-40-3/28/89percentage points over the last year in the federal funds rate alone--or 2 percentage points over the last 8 or 9 months. I think it istime to pause and see what these numbers really mean. I would like tosee a little more accumulation of evidence of this slowing or the lackof slowing before we take any further action. I don't know what thatmeans [in terms of timing] but I think it should be at least a monthbefore we do anything. In my mind that would give us the employmentnumbers and the next PPI number, I guess. In other words, I need acumulation of numbers going one way, really, before taking anydramatic action on the asymmetrical language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, let me say--and I think it deservesto be said--in the event that some number [becomes available] or thatsomething occurs that is significantly out of tune with thisconversation we're having, I think it is obligatory that we have atelephone conference and some rethinking and rejudgments of this.First Vice President Stone.MR. STONE. I probably come out where Vice Chairman Corrigancomes out, somewhere between "B" and "C." But I certainly would beable to live with "B" with an asymmetric guideline. I am verysensitive to the points that President Melzer brought up about howwe're going to get out of this cycle of reacting to each of thenumbers that comes out. One of the ways to get out of that is to beahead of that; and that's why I'd probably prefer to be between "B"and "C." But, for all the reasons stated, I think there is somereason to pause at this point and to be a bit more conservative. So,I could support "B" with an asymmetric guideline.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It appears as though the critical massis on "B" with asymmetric language. We could insert that into thedirective. Let's have it read and we can put in what we need to as wego along.MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. Taking account of indications ofinflationary pressures, the strength of the business expansion, thebehavior of the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreignexchange markets, somewhat greater reserve restraint would or slightlylesser reserve restraint might be acceptable in the intermeetingperiod. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to beconsistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from March throughJune at annual rates of about--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. 3 and 5.MR. BERNARD. --3 and 5 percent, respectively. The Chairmanmay call for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager forDomestic Operations that reserve conditions during the period beforethe next meeting are likely to be associated with a federal funds ratepersistently outside a range of 8 to 12 percent."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would anyone like to amend that or doesanyone have any problem with the language as such? If not, could youpoll the Committee?-41-3/28/89MR. BERNARD.Chairman GreenspanVice Chairman CorriganGovernor AngellPresident GuffeyGovernor HellerGovernor JohnsonPresident KeehnGovernor KelleyGovernor LaWarePresident MelzerGovernor SegerYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesHow do I vote for no changewith symmetrical?Martha?MR. ANGELL. You say yes.MS. SEGER. That being the case, I'll say no.MR. BERNARD. [Continuing the roll call for the vote:]President Syron YesMR. BLACK. You would have said yes if he hadn't helped you,MS. SEGER. I would have.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next meeting is May 16th. We willadjourn for lunch.END OF MEETING-42-