Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 16, 1989A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 16, 1989, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellGuffeyHellerJohnsonKeehnKelleyLaWareMelzerSegerSyronMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Hoskins, and Stern, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta,and San Francisco, respectivelyKohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPatrikis, Deputy General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey,Ms. Munnell, Messrs. Promisel, Scheld,Siegman, and Simpson, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Zickler, Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Wajid, Assistant to Governor Heller, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMr. Thomson, Executive Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of San FranciscoMessrs. Broaddus, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum, andMs. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Richmond, Philadelphia, Minneapolis,Dallas, and Atlanta, respectivelyMr. Sniderman, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof ClevelandMs. Krieger, Manager, Open Market Operations,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMay 16, 1989CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. The first itemon the agenda is approval of the minutes. Would somebody like to movethe minutes?MS. SEGER. I will move them.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Cross, would youbring us up to snuff on foreign currency operations?MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Mr. Cross?MR. BOEHNE. Sam, what is the sentiment in Germany and Japanabout intervention? Are they cooperative, are they reluctantlycooperative, or are they more than cooperative? What's the feeling?MR. CROSS. Well, it's not easy to give a generalizedstatement that covers all the situations. The Germans have intervenedmore or less throughout the period, although not in very largeamounts. In part, the Germans tend to have a different attitude,tactically, about what is the best way to intervene and [believe] thatthe intervention is more effective if done in certain ways. As forthe Japanese, views differ because the institutions are divided overthere. The Bank of Japan has been much more interested in interveningto stop the decline of the yen than the Ministry of Finance. And theMinistry of Finance calls the tune. In the past several days theJapanese have begun to take a much more active role in theintervention and they have done against the dollar/yen ineach of the past two days.MR. HOSKINS. Sam, since our last meeting we have intervenedin yen. [Prior to] that time, I think, we didn't do that. Do we havea change in policy?MR. CROSS. No, we focus our intervention on what has beenhappening in the market and where the pressures have developed. Thisis the first time we've intervened in yen in a long time. But it isbecause the conditions were such that it seemed to us appropriate tointervene in yen. Before then the yen had not fallen so much. As Isaid earlier, the yen had risen substantially more than the othercurrencies. If you look back at the direction in which it has moved,the yen has not been as weak as the other currencies--and still isn'tin a sense, if you compare it with where it started off at the time ofthe Louvre agreement. However, the yen did begin to slip more and wewere concerned, looking at it from the other direction, about the risein the dollar. The Japanese have been concerned about it too. So, wehave been intervening as the yen began to slip more in the past threeweeks.MR. HOSKINS. Is there any discussion amongst the G-7 andyour counterparts as to how much we're willing to do in terms of thisintervention?5/16/89MR. CROSS. Yes. We talk to them every day, repeatedly. Wetalk about the activities that we're proposing and we work it out withthem.MR. STERN(?). Sam, given this significant increase, are thepressures, looking out a bit, still for a further rise in the dollar?Or are there some ongoing worries about a precipitous decline in thedollar and so forth?MR. CROSS. Well, the dollar has been on this very strongupward [course]. As I said earlier, certainly there's no evidencethat we have turned the situation around. As the dollar gets higher--and it has gotten above the levels that have been seen before--thereis some greater apprehension and nervousness within the market, partlyabout what the response of the central banks is going to be andwhether the market is going to face a movement in the other direction.But so far the pressures have continued to be on the upward side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Sam, you mentioned a while ago that the Germanshad some differences over the type of intervention. What is theirpreference on that?MR. CROSS. Well, sometimes the Germans have a view that theway to get the market's attention is to andkick it in the teeth very strongly. We get a little nervous about toomuch of that. I don't want to overstate it because we usually areable to work these differences out and reach an agreement.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Sam, you mentioned that one thing that may bedriving this is the expected capital gains, given the anticipationthat the peak in interest rates is close. You may be right, but Iguess one of the things that bothers me a little about thatexplanation is that the bill market and the bond market have beenanticipating a turn of events for a while. That's why long bond ratesare below short rates, or the funds rate, right now; and bill rateshave drifted down on the expectation of lower rates. I guess myquestion then is: Are the capital gains already there? They arealready taking capital gains; would there be a further advantage thatwould cause people to rush into bonds at this point?MR. CROSS. Well, I think that's true. To some extent thecapital gains already have been a factor. In my report I was talkingabout some of the factors that have been tending to put upwardpressure on the dollar. Recently, as statistical reports have comeout that suggest that the economy may be a little less robust, you dohear people drawing the conclusion that that makes the long bond anopportunity for some capital gains. But you're right: presumably, ifthey feel that way they have been acting on that, and that may be afactor that is already discounted to some extent.MR. HOSKINS. Just one more question, please?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.5/16/89MR. HOSKINS. In your discussions, is there any mention ofthe rates of monetary growth between the three countries primarilyinvolved in this--that they have monetary growth rates roughly twiceours and that that might have some influence on it?MR. CROSS. Obviously, we talk about whatever factors areaffecting the directions of the currencies. Certainly, the Germanshave been concerned at times about the fact that their money has beengrowing more rapidly than their targets. That is certainly a factoraffecting their situation.MR. HOSKINS. But it doesn't lead them to think that perhapsthe way to rectify this problem is to slow the monetary growth ratherthan to intervene?MR. CROSS. I think they're trying to; I think there areefforts to try to get their own situation under better--MR. TRUMAN. President Hoskins, certainly their action inApril to raise interest rates, which Sam reported on, was triggered inpart by the continued rapid growth [above] their targets. Andcertainly the Bank of Japan, while maybe not excessively concernedabout monetary growth per se, would be delighted--if I might put itthat way--to raise interest rates. What will they do? In both cases,as far as the central bank is concerned, there is a concern about[unintelligible] monetary growth, inflation, and so forth.MR. CROSS. Since the last meeting the short-term interestrate differential between the dollar and the mark has narrowed by 125basis points and against the yen by 113 basis points. There hasbeen--MR. ANGELL. But the growth rate of the monetary aggregateshas not narrowed.MR. HOSKINS. In fact, it has gone the other way.MR. TRUMAN. Well, I don't know about that.MR. CROSS. No, I don't think it has gone the other way.Well, I'm not talking about ours, I'm talking about theirs. I thinktheirs has so much--MR. HOSKINS. But it has relative to theirs. If we have--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's roughly--MR. CROSS. Well, if I assume that this manifests itself to alarge degree in the interest rates, the interest rate movements havecertainly been in that direction: 1-3/4 points is not an insignificantreduction in the margins for a 6-week period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mr. Cross?MR. GUFFEY. Yes, Mr. Chairman. This may be to Sam or toyou, I guess. I don't quite understand the objective of ourintervention, particularly to the level that we have intervened overthis intermeeting period. I understand that our objective is to5/16/89moderate the movements. But the pressures are coming not from thespeculators, as I understand it, but rather from those who see thedollar as a good investment at the moment. Maybe I didn't understandyou totally, Sam, but I thought you said that we are intervening moreheavily than the remainder of our G-7 partners and I don't know why weshould have that big a burden, given the rest of the environment. Mylast question is: Who calls the shots on this? Is it the Treasurythat believes that intervention at this level is appropriate?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The Treasury has the legal lead on thesedecisions. We discuss it with them but the ultimate decisions aretheirs. I think the issue isn't so much a question of how much eachdoes. The more critical question that you're asking, as I see it, is:Why do we think that intervention can make very much difference whenall the various studies we've been involved in suggest otherwise? Andwhat we're partly reflecting are views of the G-7 finance ministerswho believe more in intervention than economists and central bankersdo. But underneath it all is the very annoying concern as to why thedollar is strengthening in the face of our current account imbalance.You can look at the issue in one of two ways: either 1) that we areintervening for the purpose of trying to stem the rise becauseultimately it has to adjust back downward; or 2) why not, because thisvery large potential capital gain is in process. That has not beenthe case in the last couple of days. There's something very odd--apuzzlement as to why the markets have moved as strongly as they have.Certainly, if they move from here it will take a lot of explanation.But I don't see it particularly on the surface at this stage. Sam, isthat consistent with your judgment?MR. CROSS. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no further questions, Sam,would you mind reintroducing your recommendation so that we can put itin the form of a motion?MR. CROSS. I recommend, with respect to the recent activity,that the Committee approve our operations since the last meeting whichare just under $1.4 billion equivalent worth of sales of dollars. Iwould also like to raise with the Committee a point with respect toour foreign currency authorization limit, if I can present that atthis time. That limit, which is a public figure, provides that theSystem can hold foreign currency balances up to a total of $12 billionequivalent. At present we have nearly $11 billion equivalent. As Imentioned earlier, since the Plaza agreement in September of 1985 whenwe embarked on this practice of a more active intervention role wehave bought about $14 billion and we have sold about $14 billion. Butthe value of our foreign currency balances during that same period hasdoubled from about $5-1/2 billion to about $11 billion. The reasonsthey have doubled are really three-fold. One, we have made a profitin that we have sold the dollar when it was relatively high and wehave bought the dollar when it was relatively low. About 40 percentof that increase in the value of our foreign currency holdingsrepresents those profits. A second factor is that we have, along withthe Treasury, bought yen--not through intervention operations butthrough some direct transactions between ourselves and the JapaneseMinistry of Finance and other bodies. That, too, has added about 40percent to the increase in the value of these foreign currencybalances. The third factor is that we have our balances invested and5/16/89we continue to earn interest on them; and the remaining roughly 20percent represents the earnings on our balances. So, we now aregetting up much closer to the authorized limit of $12 billion. Iwould like to propose that the Committee raise the authorized limitfrom $12 billion to $15 billion in order to provide more headroom sothat if circumstances are such that the value of our foreign currencybalances increases we will have room to accommodate that within theauthorized limit. So my recommendation, Mr. Chairman, is that theCommittee raise the limit in the Foreign Currency Authorization from$12 billion to $15 billion.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I would--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Hold the questions on this.MR. ANGELL. I was just going to make a motion; maybe youdon't want a motion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, not yet.MR. ANGELL. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's do this in two separate motions.Let's first have a motion to ratify the transactions since the lastmeeting.MR. JOHNSON. So move.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Let's have a motionand then discussion on this level issue.MR. ANGELL. I move it, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there any discussion on this?MR. FORRESTAL. Are the balances basically in yen or are theydistributed more evenly?MR. CROSS. No, they are much more heavily in marks.MR. FORRESTAL. Marks.MR. CROSS. We don't have very many yen at the present time.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me this is an issue inwhich dogmatic views really aren't that helpful. It seems to me we'regoing to deal with questions here as a matter of practicality. We areworking with the Administration, and I'm somewhat pleased that we havean Administration that's willing to have some kind of exchange rateintervention versus one that says absolutely not. Sam, I would like alittle better accounting--that is, I believe for our purposes youought to keep track of the opportunity costs of those balances and not5/16/89consider the entire gain to be in a sense out of the blue, because wewould have had earnings on U.S. Treasury balances. Is that notcorrect?MR. CROSS(?). Yes sir.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.MR. ANGELL. So, it seems to me that the opportunity costsshould be subtracted out. Now, I would say that I believe--as some ofyou know by my no vote last June--that exchange rate interventionought never to go at cross purposes with monetary policy. I thinkit's always a mistake because we're going to demonstrate ourineffectiveness in one camp or the other any time we do that. Itseems to me that there is some merit in going forward with this movebecause there are some necessary adjustments in monetary aggregategrowth rates that will take place. That would mean, then, that thedeutschemark interest rates would tend to move up relative to our ownso the relative opportunity cost it seems to me is not unusually high.So, I support the proposal.MR. BOEHNE. This is more of a question than a comment. Iview this as follows: If we are going to play this game we need theammunition and this is just a way of storing the ammunition. If we'regoing to go from $12 billion to $15 billion, is an increase of $3billion enough? Would it make sense to go to $18 billion or anothernumber? I ask that because I'm not sensitive enough to know what willbe read into increasing the limit from $12 to $15 billion. So, ifwe're going to raise the limit might we not just raise it enough tolast a while? Or do you think that $3 billion will last a while andthat it doesn't make any difference whether we raise it once or twiceor whatever?MR. CROSS. Well, I doubt that this is a very controversialor newsworthy issue; I don't know. It is a matter we report and Idon't believe it has gained much attention in the past. I proposed a$3 billion increase on the grounds that that would provide somereasonable comfort and that if circumstances arose where somethingfurther were needed then we would have to reconsider the question. Ifthe Committee proposes a higher figure, that's fine with me.MR. TRUMAN. The last time we did this was after the LouvreAccord; we raised it by $3-1/2 billion when we had, in fact, lessleeway than we have today. So if you want to look at it in thatperspective it gives you quite a lot of leeway [unintelligible] givingyour [Foreign Currency] Subcommittee some opportunity to revisit theissue from time-to-time.MR. CROSS. It only becomes effective on the one side ofintervention: when we're selling dollars, if we're selling any.MR. TRUMAN. Unless we should go into debt.MR. CROSS. Yes. But I must say that there is some value inhaving some marbles to play with if we're going to be in this game.And I think the level of reserves that we have, compared to almostanything, is really very modest. But I think the $3 billion I5/16/89proposed would be adequate; if [the Committee preferred] $5 billion, Iwould be quite happy to see that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins, then Governor Heller.MR. HOSKINS. At the risk of being dogmatic, the reasons thatwe--or at least the Chairman--discussed had to do with going alongwith our counterparts abroad. He also discussed the evidence that inlarge open economies intervention is not a very effective tool. Ifthe reasons we intervene are really just reasons of cooperation andnot of trying to affect the economic outlook it seems to me that weought to limit that intervention. In other words, I think we ought tolimit it and send a signal to our G-7 partners that we're thinkingthat they need to adjust some of their policies in a more formal wayand speed the process along--in terms of making the monetaryadjustments that you were talking about, Governor Angell. But if wehave this latitude they have less incentive to make those adjustments.So, I think it depends on the reasons that we are intervening. If youbelieve that it's an effective tool, then sure, go up to $15 billion.If you believe that it is not effective--if you're doing it simply forcooperative purposes and you also want to send a signal to the rest ofthe G-7 partners to adjust their monetary policy--then I think youshould not raise it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Part of that cooperation is with theTreasury.MR. HOSKINS. Well, you can also send the message to theTreasury.MR. SYRON. The same message--which would be given to both, Ithink--is that a lot of us do have skepticism about the value ofsterilized intervention over a long course of time. I understand theneed to do it and I don't want to be terribly dogmatic. But theproposal for $3 billion makes a lot of sense: [it requires] comingback to the Committee again rather than having a very large increase,which possibly could be interpreted by people--even though they maynot pay much attention to it--as saying that this is a change in thefundamental approach that's being taken.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. Thank you. First of all, I think it is a goodtime for us to accumulate reserves. We are not--well, I don't want tospeak about what's going to happen later today--but I certainlywouldn't think that we are ready to ease in a very major fashion atthe present time. Neither are the Germans and Japanese ready totighten. Those policy moves would be counterproductive as far ashelping the international adjustment process is concerned, which isstill a very major problem confronting the world economy. So, whilethe basic principle that one shouldn't undo with the right hand whatthe left hand is doing is certainly valid, I think we have a classicsituation here where we have an external problem on the one hand andvarious domestic problems on the other hand that call for differentpolicies. With intervention you can overcome some of thosedifficulties and try to reconcile those conflicting goals. But I dohave also a very quick question. In the data, Mr. Cross, you have5/16/89Japanese yen holdings of $1.1 billion; does that include the specialtransaction with Japan? Is that already in there?MR. CROSS. That includes it. That's all we have in yen. Weused up our yen balances and have not acquired very much. So, we onlyhave that amount; and a large part of that came from outsidepurchases, not from intervention.MR. HELLER. Okay, thanks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Well, I'm very sympathetic with PresidentHoskins' views and yet at the same time it seems to me that there's noparticular disadvantage of having an international trade adjustmentprocess in which United States exports grow more rapidly than ourimports grow. I can't see that that's a disadvantage. Consequently,I favor having a bit of a gesture in the foreign exchange market priorto the time in which the needed change in monetary aggregate growthrates will emerge--because I have no doubt that the Bundesbank has aserious problem on its hands in regard to how fast they have beengrowing the monetary aggregates and that they will have to bring thosein check. But it seems to me that it's somewhat to our advantage tohave a divergence in these growth rates at this time. I'm convincedthat the real moves will take place in terms of interest rates andtheir conversion into monetary aggregate growth rates. It's in thatatmosphere that I don't mind our taking a bigger step.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further discussion on this issue?MR. HELLER. Sorry, I meant to say also that I'm in favor ofEd Boehne's suggestion to give a broader limit.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anyone here have a strong viewbetween $15 billion and $18 billion, for example? What's on the tableis $15 billion. We have heard a couple of people say they'd like togo higher.MR. HOSKINS. And one to stay at S12 billion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't I simply find out byrequesting a vote on the--MR. ANGELL. On that $15--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. --on the motion on the table, which isthe $15 billion. All in favor?MR. HELLER. Mr. Chairman, what is the proper way to go forthe $18 billion? Should we amend that motion now?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, if you would like to.MR. HELLER. Okay, I'd like to amend the motion to $18billion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second on the amendment?That's what I was worried about.5/16/89MR. HELLER. Ed Boehne doesn't even second the amendment.SPEAKER(?). He can't vote.MR. BOEHNE. I can't vote. I'm sorry; you hooked up withwrong guy. Try next year.MR. BLACK. I can't now, Bob, but I'd give you--MS. SEGER. I'll second it for you.MR. HELLER. That's all right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. All in favor of the amendment to themotion say "aye."MR. HELLER. Aye.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Noes?SEVERAL. No.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That leaves us with the original motionon the table of $15 billion. All in favor say "aye."ionSEVERAL. Aye.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Opposed?MR. HOSKINS. No.SPEAKER(?). I counted two noes.MR. HELLER. Nevertheless, we got the votes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is a formal vote so we have to--SPEAKER(?). It will be published.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It will be published so let's get aformal count. Why don't you call the role quickly?MR. BERNARD. All right.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Guffey YesGovernor Heller YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare NoPresident Melzer YesGovernor Seger YesPresident Syron YesVICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I had a brief postscript, Mr.Chairman. I didn't want to confuse the discussion further. I justthe5/16/89wanted to say, after Bob Heller's comments, that we're sitting heretoday discussing this in the context of concern about a strong dollar.I still fear the day will come when we'll be sitting here looking atthis question from a very different perspective. I would simply liketo add that quickly to the discussion.MR. ANGELL. Well, Jerry, if you keep saying it, some dayyou'll be right!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I join in with the Vice Chairman on thisissue. If we go a few more months with what's been happening I'llhave to start to rethink my view of the world. Let's move on to thenext item on the agenda, which is Mr. Sternlight on domestic openmarket operations.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Sternlight?MR. PARRY. I'd like to ask a question about the primarydealers. How many are Japanese owned?MR. STERNLIGHT. There are 4 major Japanese securities firmsthat started their own operations in the United States. There are 3other situations of existing firms that had been domestically ownedand have been bought by Japanese banks within the past few years. Sothere are 7 in all.MR. PARRY. One keeps hearing that that has changed themarket somehow. Is that correct or not?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it has been part, and perhaps themost prominent part, of the whole move toward internationalization,but not the entire thing. We have had entrants from other countriesas well and some additional new firms who have come in on the U.S.side. In the last 7 years we've had an increase in the number ofprimary dealers, primarily from foreign entrants but not exclusively.And I would say that the increased number of dealers, along with someslowdown in aggregate activity and just the way the markets have gonein the past few years, has tended to make it much more difficult torun a profitable operation. Last year more than half the dealersshowed losses in their government securities operations.MR. PARRY. Well, I guess it's just vicious rumor or whateverbut one issue is that in Japan information is exchanged a lot amongcompanies. One hears that that may be an issue in the United States.Is that just vicious rumor?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, there has been concern about that.There has been an allegation that officialdom in Japan seems to shareinformation with Japanese firms, whether banks or securities firms.The Japanese realize that there is that criticism from the market, andI think they are trying to do things to change what has been theirmodus operandi. They seem to have a philosophy of not wanting themarket to be surprised by new statistical reports or policy changes orwhatever. So they apparently have some tradition of sounding out somemarket sources and word gets around from this kind of thing. That may-10-5/16/89be what you're referring to. And it is an issue that causes concernamongst U.S. firms operating in Japan.MR. HOSKINS. Peter, I have a question about the mix ofoutright purchases and repos during a period of heavy seasonalactivity. Would a larger volume of outright purchases rather thanannounced repos perhaps give a better mix so that the market has abetter perception of where we are? I just don't understand how youdecide that mix.MR. STERNLIGHT. We had this large need, which in fact turnedout to be bigger in the short run than we had thought it was going tobe. But because of the way some other longer-term factors wereoperating, the longer-term need did not look as great as we wentthrough the period. We kind of geared ourselves to doing throughoutright purchases approximately what looked like the long-term need--although we went somewhat beyond that and we're now in the position ofhaving to do a little draining as we come up to this next reserveperiod. I would say we determine the mix on the basis of how we thinkwe and the market can best manage those reserve adjustments. We knewwe were leaving a lot to be done with repurchase agreements but we'vehad really good experience in doing heavy amounts of repurchaseagreements, particularly if we give the market a few hours advancenotice. Announcing to the market at 3:00 p.m. on a previous afternoonthat we're going to look for propositions for repurchase agreementsthe next morning seems to give us very sizable propositions. That hasworked well and I think took us, in pretty good shape, through aperiod like this one with a very heavy, but temporary, reserve need.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. Going back for a second to the primary dealers:In total, how many are foreigners and do you have any idea about theirrough market share as far as trading volume is concerned?MR. STERNLIGHT. Thirteen are foreign-owned.MR. HELLER. Associated or whatever?MR. STERNLIGHT. Primarily foreign-owned. There would besome others with some partial [foreign-owned] shares. And 7 out ofthe 13 would be Japanese. This is a rough recollection, but I thinkthe market share of the foreign-owned is in the low 20s--about 21 or22 percent. So, 13 out of 43 would be about a third of the total; butthey tend to be a little smaller, representing about 21 or 22 percentof the market.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Mr. Sternlight?MR. JOHNSON. Just one, related to the intervention activity.You may have mentioned it and I just missed it but have all the dollarsales had much of an impact on our open market operations?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, because we added through ourintervention about $1.3 billion to foreign currency holdings, that wasa long-term factor putting in reserves. Had that not happened wewould have had that much more to be added through domestic Deskoperations. I wouldn't say it's an impediment to our operations. We-11-5/16/89get notified immediately and fold it into our reserve projections.But in a sense, if you will, it is sterilizing the intervention.MR. JOHNSON. I guess what I'm asking is: Has that added anyuncertainty to the market in terms of what our reserve need is?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think the market tends to take account ofit although there may be a bit of a lag in comprehending fully theextent of it from one day to the next. It might be a minor factoradding to their uncertainty.MR. JOHNSON. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Mr. Sternlight?If not, would somebody like to move to ratify the actions of the Desksince the March meeting?MR. JOHNSON. So move.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We now move to thestaff report on the economy. Mr. Prell.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Prell?MR. PARRY. I have a question, Mike, that is related to yourfinal comment. In the Greenbook the comment was made that aggregatedemand will still have to moderate further to relieve pressures andreverse the current upturn in inflation. And as you indicated, in theGreenbook forecast you've assumed additional restraint. What would bethe impact of not implementing that restraint? In terms of ananalytic exercise, what would it be costing us in terms of progresswith regard to inflation and, for that matter, with regard to growthas well?MR. PRELL. With our baseline Greenbook forecast--extendingit informally at this point into 1991 and assuming that growth isn'tso rapid as to move the unemployment rate back down in that year butthat it will stay in the 6 percent or so neighborhood--our expectationwould be that in that environment we'd see a fractional decline ininflation in 1991. But the trend would be turning discerniblydownward. Using our quarterly model and not doing a particularlyelaborate exercise but leveling out rates--or keeping the federalfunds rate about where it is now--the result is that, in essence, weeliminate that downturn in inflation in 1991.MR. PARRY. In 1991?MR. PRELL. In 1991. In our current forecast we're talkingabout, in the greater scheme of things, a rather small further rise ininterest rates. But it's enough to make a slight difference in outputgrowth in the near term, building to something a little morenoticeable in 1990. And we end up with a lower unemployment rate andeliminate most of that slack that would otherwise emerge.5/16/89MR. PARRY. So there's really no improvement in underlyinginflation through the forecast period through the end of '91 unlessone gets some further restraint?MR. PRELL. Yes, I think that's right. And we're readingthese numbers very finely. That's probably the predicament that weface, in general, in interpreting the incoming information. If we areon the kind of track that we have projected, I think every meetinghere we're going to go through a sort of Chinese water torture intrying to judge whether the latest data are suggesting that we'removing up or moving down. To use these econometric models to come upwith some precise notion of whether we will go up a little or down alittle on the inflation rate from the current level is probablypushing things. I think the uncertainties are greater than that. Butrunning it through [the model] in a straightforward way, that's thekind of conclusion we get.MR. PARRY. That's what I thought. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. I have a technical question, Mike, that youraised when you talked about the inventory behavior. In the Greenbookforecast you have a fairly noticeable decline in the change ofbusiness inventories over time. I was wondering, looking attraditional relationships between sales and price expectations andthat sort of thing, whether that reflects some judgment on your partabout structural changes--more just-in-time inventory kinds ofpatterns on the part of manufacturers? Or, are there other reasonsthat are more fundamental for the decline in the change of businessinventories?MR. PRELL. Basically, we need to have a decline in order tosee the kind of moderation in final demand that we feel is necessary,in essence, to diminish inflationary pressures. Unless there is asubstantial slowing in the rate of inventory accumulation, inventory/sales ratios are going to move up. With what we have been seeingwe're going to get a growing imbalance. In terms of structuralchanges I'm reasonably impressed by what I read and hear--particularlyin the manufacturing sector but in the trade sector as well--about thekind of inventory management changes that have occurred. It's clearthat there are efforts underway and that manufacturing firms have beenquite successful to date in reducing inventories relative to theirshipments. I think they will try to maintain those trends. So inthat sense, even a leveling out might imply in some cases someundesired accumulation relative to plans. So, we feel we really needto see a substantial slowing here if we are to avoid an imbalance thatwill create the need for even bigger production adjustments in the[future].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Mike, I can't resist asking this question againthat I've been asking every time. I'm not just looking at the BlueChip forecast but I'm reading the financial markets and what they seemto be saying. They have been giving us a slightly different picturefor some time now and I've been asking this question. You have beensaying basically that you think the market will come back to the-13-5/16/89forecast--that the market is probably wrong and that you are stickingto your forecast. I just wondered if you're still willing to saythat; it sounds like you're hedging a little more. The Blue Chipforecast has the funds rate peaking this quarter and then going down,but they have about the same GNP forecast. You suggest that the dataavailable recently are showing maybe a slightly weaker case, althoughwhat will happen over the next few quarters is uncertain, of course.But I just wondered if you feel any differently about the market'sreading of the outlook as compared to the forecast?MR. PRELL. Well, I think there is a diversity but thecentral tendency of the private forecasters, as I read it, is for asoftening that is probably at least as great as what we have in thisforecast. My sense is that the disinflation payoff that is seen isfractionally greater than what we have. I think many of those peopleas they look out into 1991 also see the likelihood of a pickup and, inessence, an impatience with any Federal Reserve [forecast] that lookslike the possibility of a recession. In a sense, we may have asmoother track in our forecast than some of them. But I think we are,on balance, a little less optimistic about the inflation payoff of theslack that is predicted to emerge, and we're expecting interest ratesto have to stay a bit higher.MR. JOHNSON. Yes. As a follow-up to that, I think maybeyou're a little less concerned that this slowing relative to theforecast is a permanent feature. You think it might bounce back someand, therefore, you've got this further rise in interest rates builtinto your assumptions. But--MR. PRELL. Indeed, that's really more an end of this year/early 1990 story. We feel that even if things did slow to a ratesomewhat less than we have in the second half--barring some majorinventory imbalance or something like that--we probably are not goingto continue on a slow enough track to open up the kind of slack in theeconomy that we still think is necessary in order to really turn theinflation rate down.MR. JOHNSON. I think I know what your answer would be, butlet's just assume that the economy is running below your forecast. Itseems to me that an additional 75 basis points or so on the fundsrate, if you project that against this weaker forecast, puts you inthe recession category. Now, I don't know what you think, but itseems like that would clearly tip the economy over; maybe it wouldn't.MR. PRELL. We're very close to recession in this forecast inthe first part of 1990. So an error of that dimension, so to speak,could make that kind of difference as to the sign--whether we're inslightly positive territory or slightly negative territory. Iwouldn't want to suggest that we think we can predict these thingswith that precision. We have tried to raise the flag repeatedly thatwe feel this is at least a growth recession. In essence, we have afine-tuned forecast. Whether policy can be so finely tuned is anothermatter.MR. JOHNSON. Sure. I'm simply suggesting that if the datacontinue to come in weaker than the forecast, I think your interestrate scenario would go with a stronger interpretation.-14-5/16/89MR. PRELL. Sure.MR. JOHNSON. But that interest rate scenario would be, Ithink, somewhat tougher to follow.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Governor Johnson just covered exactly the pointsI wanted to raise, Mr. Chairman, so I pass. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. He's a good mind reader. PresidentStern.MR. STERN. Is that what you have in here--a further increasein interest rates of about 65 or 75 basis points late in the year orsomething?MR. PRELL. We put the federal funds rate by the end of theyear up to or approaching the 10-3/4 percent level.MR. HELLER. Mike, what did you say? I didn't hear you. Bythe end of the year--MR. PRELL. I said we had the federal funds rate somewhere inthe 10-1/2 to 10-3/4 percent range.MR. HOSKINS. Maybe this is better directed to Don but, giventhat interest rate forecast, what is the growth rate of M2 running atyear end?MR. KOHN. We have projected about a 4 percent growth of M2for the year. But we would be running closer, even with that upwardnudge in interest rates, to the 5 to 6 percent area in the second halfof the year. Part of that is the bounceback from what we see as theshortfall with the taxes. But that additional rise in interest rates,particularly coming later in the year, doesn't have that much effecton M2 for the year 1989.MR. PARRY. Half a percent more than [unintelligible]?MR. KOHN. Probably, yes.MR. KELLEY. May I come back again?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. KELLEY. Don, could you explain that? From where we areright now on M2, given the prospect of perhaps a 3/4 of a percentagepoint higher funds rate, it's a little unclear to me how we'll wind upat a substantially higher M2 for the year than we're running now.MR. KOHN. I'll actually be covering this in my briefing tosome extent, Governor Kelley. But, very briefly, we think we'll get alittle extra push as people rebuild what we see as depleted cashbalances after the [tax] season. We see that adding about apercentage point, at an annual rate, to the growth over the nextquarter or two. We also see most of the interest rate effectsgradually drifting behind us. After all, most of it happened by-15-5/16/89February, right? Those effects should be easing off over the balanceof the year, even with this relatively small further increase ininterest rates near the end of the year. So, in our view, given themovement of opportunity costs, we'll see M2 pick up and start to runcloser to nominal GNP.MR. KELLEY. Am I hearing you say that part of that dependson this 3/4 of a percentage point increase coming late in the year?MR. KOHN. Well, it doesn't affect the year that much if itcomes in the second half.MR. KELLEY. If it comes late in the year it clearly won't.MR. KOHN. If it comes in the second half or at year end.MR. KELLEY. Okay, thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mr. Prell? Ifnot, we are ready for the roundtable discussion. Who would like tolead off? President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. There has been some definite slowing in thePhiladelphia District. I think the economy there is slower than it isin the nation. Until the last few months that slower rate was mostlydue to supply constraints--tight labor markets and that sort of thing.But in the last several months I think there has been a slowing on thedemand side as well. Housing is clearly weak; retail sales andmanufacturing are flat. Capital spending is slower in the secondquarter than it was in the first, although it's mixed by industry.Housing-related petroleum, gas, and electric utilities are still notgoing very far on new projects whereas chemicals and pharmaceuticalscontinue to have some expansion projects. The steel industry--atleast that part in my District--seems to be feeling a little betterthan a couple of months ago. I think they feel better now that someof the labor negotiations are behind them. And they feel that they'llget this voluntary restraint package on steel renewed in Congress, sothey released some projects that they were holding. On the whole, Ithink capital spending is definitely slower now than it was threemonths ago. As for the future in the District, I think the outlook isfor flat to slow growth with unemployment rates still on the low side.As far as the nation, I think what's happening is about asgood as we could hope for. We ought to be reasonably pleased withwhat we're seeing on the growth profile. My sense is that the risksbetween recession and inflation have shifted. Until fairly recently,I was thinking that the risks were clearly on the side of moreinflation. I think the risks are more even than they were. The mostlikely outcome is a period of slow growth with inflation higher thanwe would like but not accelerating significantly. But if we're wrong,I think we have about as much chance of being wrong on the inflationside as on the too-slow-growth side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, in the Eleventh District oureconomy continues to grow. Even in Louisiana, where for the firsttime in quite some time the unemployment rate has slipped down to5/16/89single digits, it's looking a little better. Growth is gettingincreasingly closer to the national rate; part of that, of course, issome of the slowing of the U.S. rate. We are seeing more and moresigns that we are looking more like other Federal Reserve Districts;we're not quite the outlier that we were. Labor shortages of specifictypes are cropping up. Engineers, for example, are in very shortsupply. We're even seeing help wanted signs appearing throughoutDallas. Unemployment rates in many Texas cities are now in the low 5percent area. Nonetheless, the greatest strain still is centeredalong the Gulf Coast area--Houston in particular--and in the lower RioGrande Valley. We still have problems in some of the other areas ofthe District. Banking and real estate are still dragging us down alittle in Dallas, Austin, Shreveport and similar areas. Manufacturingcontinues to grow above the national rate. And in the services sectoremployment was matching the national growth. In sum, Mr. Chairman, wefeel a little more optimistic about our area. Having been burned asbadly as we were, we don't want to overstate that. We are coming froma fairly low figure but people really are feeling better.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Tenth District iscontinuing to improve but rather slowly. The strong farm income lastyear has positioned the agricultural sector to withstand probably theimpact of the drought, given otherwise good weather throughout most ofthe crop areas. In Kansas, for example, which is a very large redwinter wheat producer, the latest estimates are for production ofabout 200 million bushels and that's down from about 325 million theyear before. That's the latest official forecast. However, intalking with some of the producers and some of the grain peoplethroughout Kansas, their projection is that if they get no furthermeasurable rain in the next couple of weeks they would be very happywith 150 to 180 million bushels. But the interesting aspect of thatis that, given the drought conditions in the high plains areasproducing red winter wheat--basically Kansas, Colorado, Wyoming andOklahoma--the total production would be down about 8 percent. But ifyou look at wheat totally, which includes spring wheat, the totalwheat production would be up about 13 percent. As for the rest of thesmall grains: corn, for example, will be up about 60 percent from lastyear; beans will be up 27 percent; and oats will be up 100 percent.They are projecting a very strong farm production year given, ofcourse, that the drought doesn't affect it measurably. So, in theagricultural sector things are looking pretty good. That does notmean, however, that spots such as Kansas won't feel the impact of thisdrought; but the nation as a whole probably will not. As a matter offact, given those projections, we would see very modest increases infood costs, not unlike what I think the staff has projected--about3-1/4 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do the crop estimators at this time ofthe year assume normal rainfall for the rest of the period?MR. GUFFEY. Yes, with the exception of whatever damage hasalready occurred to the winter wheat crop, which is large in the highplains states as I just mentioned. Ninety percent of that winterwheat crop, by official estimate, is rated poor or very poor as aresult. But that's only a part of the wheat production for the nationas a whole.-17-5/16/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What I'm trying to get at is this: Whenthey estimate 200 million bushels for the winter wheat crop is that onthe assumption of normal rainfall from here until harvest?MR. GUFFEY. That's correct--some further rainfall.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They don't factor in the rainfallforecasts that they now have in estimating the actual outcome andyield per acre, do they?MR. GUFFEY. I guess I don't understand your question.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, at the moment, the crop estimatorslooking at the condition of the crop can judge its outcome either onthe basis of an expected rainfall that is normal from mid-May throughharvest or they can use the forecasts of rain that they have nowdeveloped over the years as a factor in making that judgment. Itoccurs to me that I don't even know whether there's an official waythey do that. They used to do it, as I recall, years and years ago onthe average. But I don't know whether they've changed.MR. GUFFEY. Well, I don't think I know that. Maybe GovernorAngell does. The fact of the matter is that the 200 million bushelestimate for the state of Kansas is based upon the damage that hasalready occurred to the wheat. Given further normal rainfall fromhere until harvest they come out with 200 or 202 million bushels.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's what I mean--the normal rain fromhere until harvest.MR. GUFFEY. Normal--that's right. But you see we're onlyabout 2 or 3 weeks away from the start of the harvest of that crop.That's an early June start in Oklahoma.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does Kansas start in early June?MR. GUFFEY. Kansas will be when, Wayne?MR. ANGELL. Normally, it will start the first of June butthis year it's going to be a little later--probably around the secondweek in June.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, it starts down in the Panhandle,usually, in June.MR. ANGELL. Well, actually, they start around the south ofWichita first.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They do?MR. ANGELL. Yes, and it moves in a line to the northwest.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry, I didn't mean to [interrupt].MR. GUFFEY. Yes, let me just proceed. In the energy sectorthere's a bit of an uptick. For example, just in the last month therig count within the District has moved from 211 to 245. That's stillwell below year-ago levels, but nonetheless there is some exploration-18-5/16/89taking place. The manufacturing sector continues to improve andthat's largely related to the commercial aircraft and high-techindustries. On the other side, the construction industry--bothcommercial as well as residential--is very weak.On the national level we have no real difference in ourprojection for the upcoming period from the staff's forecast. I havea little problem--the question has been raised and there will befurther discussion--with respect to the current status of thisweakening or not weakening. And it bothers me a little when we talkabout another 3/4 or full percentage point increase without somefairly good evidence. I would be not very happy with that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. At our last meeting, Mr. Chairman, I thinkGovernor LaWare said he thought the economy was probably a littlemushier--if I remember his words right--than most people werethinking.MR. LAWARE. Exactly.MR. BLACK. I understand words like that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a technical term!MR. SYRON. Recognized only by commercial bankers.MR. BLACK. Well, I think the national data that have beenreleased subsequently support that, and we see confirmation of that inour District. The Beigebook report showed that consumer spending andmanufacturing activity were moderating a good deal in March and Apriland the comments of our directors at the last couple of meetings havebeen noticeably less bullish than before. At our meeting lastThursday several of the directors who live in what they like to callthe golden crescent, which reaches from Baltimore through Washingtonand Richmond down to the Tidewater area around Norfolk, said activityactually has slowed up somewhat. And this has been a boom area forsome time.So far as the outlook is concerned, I think the Board's staffhas made a solid case in the forecast that they have in the Greenbook.And I think Mike made a further solid case by modifying that in thedirection that he suggested when he drew on the later numbers. Thismeans essentially a soft landing. Of course, everybody hopes that'swhat we will have. It has been so long since we've had one that Idon't think I would even remember. Like Ed Boehne, up until recentlyI've been thinking that the risk of error was on the up side and now Ithink it has become more balanced between the up side and the downside. I do think, however, that it would be premature to concludethat the risk is definitely on the down side at this point. It'sstill possible that the sluggishness we have seen in the economy couldturn out to be temporary. A lot of it comes from the weakness inautomobile sales and the incentives there are pretty sizable; so it'squite possible that that will turn around. I remember so many timesin the past when we thought we saw signs of weakening and they turnedout not to have materialized. For example, in the face of the weakemployment reports that we had back in July and August we were really-19-5/16/89worried about the economy for a while; and then they shot back up inthe fall. Don't misunderstand me: I'm not suggesting that there isgoing to be a reacceleration. As a matter of fact, I think that'sunlikely. The only point I mean to make is that I think it's a littlepremature to conclude that the economy really has turned downward atthis point. I would hold off a little on that judgment, although wecertainly can make a better case for that now than we could have atthe last meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I think there is increasingevidence that the economy is moderating. Mike has gone over all theindicators that I would have suggested would substantiate that. Atthe outset a couple of months ago we may have been seeing these trendsbecause we wanted to, but at this point I do think they are becomingmuch more tangible. The question is: Will these moderating trends besustained? My hunch is that they will and that they can be sustainedwithout further tightening.From a District perspective, though, the moderation thatwe're seeing nationally is not quite as apparent. Many of theindustries in our District are doing pretty well--indeed, very well.The auto industry is a mini exception to that but it's not a dramaticchange. They are reducing their forecast for the year; commonly, thesales forecast for cars is 10 million and for trucks 5.1 million.Inventories at the dealers are very high and for the first time inyears the dealers are beginning to resist the delivery of new units.Therefore, production is probably going to come down. The second-quarter number looks to be a reduction of about 3 percent. Theproduction risk in autos is clearly on the down side, not on the upside. But as they reduce production it's going to come out ofovertime; therefore, the reduction in production will not result inlayoffs. But the sales level of, say, that 10 million on cars and 5.1million on trucks can only be maintained with the incentives thatthey're running. As I hear it, the incentives are the richest thatthey have ever offered since they initiated these programs. As aresult of this, the steel business, at least in our District, isexpected to be down--not anything significant but down certainly fromlast year, which was very, very heavy. Other parts of the Districtare doing very well. The demand for industrial machinery is high;chemical products demand continues to be high; construction activity,despite higher rates, also continues to be at much higher levels thanthe national numbers would suggest; and our employment numbers arecontinuing to come in quite strong.In the agricultural sector, though, we have a littledifferent outlook than Roger's. At this time of the year it's alwaysuncertain but this year is particularly uncertain. Parts of theDistrict--specifically western Illinois, southern Iowa and southernWisconsin--are really very dry. As a consequence, the planting thisyear is slower and is running behind the normal schedule. Also, inMichigan we've had a very cold spring and we've had some frost damageto the fruit crops. There is plenty of time to recover from thisbefore any permanent damage is done, but the next month or so is goingto be pretty critical.-20-5/16/89On the price side, I don't see any particular changes. Atleast as I see it there is no further deterioration. Some prices--aluminum and steel, for example--are continuing to go up but prices ofother products are coming down. For example, there's some weakness onsome chemical products. On the labor front, despite very tight laborconditions as I've reported in the past, I continue to be impressed byhow well some of the contracts come out. I did talk to a chiefexecutive officer last week of a company that just concluded a verymajor three-year contract which calls for increases of 3-1/2 percentover the three-year period. So, certainly, those numbers are comingin better than I might have expected. While I see no further pricedeterioration, on the other hand, there's no improvement either. Ithink the overall situation is a bit better than at the time of thelast meeting. It's too early to be conclusive but the outlook, atleast as I see it, is more constructive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Recent information fromthe Twelfth District suggests that the growth may be slowing. Somesectors that have been contributing strength now are limited bycapacity or supply constraints. For example, in the forest productsindustry they are facing severe constraints in obtaining logs, andthat has actually resulted in some shutdowns of mills. In theaerospace industry you've heard a great deal about the situation amongcommercial aircraft producers: orders continue to build but thecapacity is slow to respond and, consequently, they're not gettingmuch growth at all. Other indicators throughout the District aresuggesting somewhat slower growth even though capacity constraints inthose areas are not a factor. As an example, the recent data onemployment in California indicate significantly slower job growthduring the past two months. In manufacturing, employment growth alsohas slowed. Construction activity may be slowing in the District butthe picture is not all that clear. The weakness is principallycentered in Alaska, Arizona, and Utah; we still see rather stronggrowth, particularly in residential construction, in Seattle, Oregon,and especially California. Anecdotal evidence does suggest that thereis increased caution on the part of small businesses, with many ofthem reporting--at least in the cases that we were told about inOregon and California--that they are holding off expansion plans andare also in the process of trying to keep inventories at lean levels.Our outlook for the national economy is really fundamentallysimilar to that of the Greenbook. The slowdown appears to be moreconvincing now than it looked when we had our last meeting. It alsoseems as though slow growth could persist for a number of quarters. Iwould agree, however, that the risks of recession don't seem all thatgreat. Moreover, even with the slowdown, real GNP will remain aboveits full employment potential with continuing upward wage pressuresinto next year, as was indicated by Mike Prell. The pace inunderlying employment costs and unit labor costs is likely to rise.We do not have much evidence of increases in contract settlements inthe Twelfth District but the L.A. school teachers went on strike onMonday. That's the second largest school district, in the UnitedStates. They had on the table a 21 percent three-year package andthey rejected that and are on strike. And everyone is beginning tospeculate about what's going to happen in the aerospace industry.When you're bringing people in from Atlanta and other places and-21-5/16/89you've got a contract coming up there's not a lot of optimism aboutwhat that contract might result in. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, the Sixth District seems to berunning counter to the rest of the country: at the end of last year wehad a slowdown; but now, when the rest of the country is slowing, weseem to have relatively strong economic activity, although obviouslyit varies from sector to sector. Industrial construction remainspretty healthy and that's being bolstered by declining vacancy ratesand some relocations from the northeast part of the country. Some ofour key industries like steel and textiles are showing really quiterobust health. Even the apparel industry, especially women'sclothing, has begun to pick up. The tourism and business travelindustries also are doing very well despite the impact of the EasternAirlines strike in certain areas, particularly south Florida andAtlanta. The transportation sector also is showing increased shippingactivity, and activity at our District ports is quite healthy. I wasinterested to learn that our contacts in south Florida are reportingsubstantially increased trade with Latin America, both on the importand on the export side. Louisiana is the weak spot--our part ofLouisiana anyway, Bob. Oil drilling continues to lag; the number ofrigs is down and is still trending lower. Our contacts down therereport substantial uncertainty about OPEC plans after June; also, wefind that there is a shortage of drilling pipe due to strongreplacement and export demands. So that is having an adverse effectas well. On the other other hand, we are getting some good news fromMobile Bay where there has been an expansion of natural gasproduction. That's working to offset the weaknesses in the otherenergy sectors in the District. The Mobile gas find, in fact, is thelargest in the United States since the discovery of the Prudo Bayfields in Alaska. Agriculture in our area is also reporting a prettybright outlook. We've had normal rainfall this year. I don't knowwhat the projections are for the future but I think we're looking forrelatively good agricultural conditions. The market for farmequipment is also very strong. Retail sales are about the same as inthe rest of the country. Automobile sales are especially poor and Imight say that for the first time in a long time I am gettingtelephone calls from people about the economy--unsolicited complaintsabout the level of automobile activity. They are really crying aboutterribly distressed conditions, which doesn't seem to follow from theincentive pickup that we've had. So, in general in the District,things are looking pretty good. There isn't a great deal of evidenceof a substantial slowdown; in fact, it's fairly robust. Having saidthat, the people that we talk to, including our directors, areconcerned that the evidence of deceleration in the rest of the economymight turn into an outright recession. Also, they are not seeing muchrelief on the price side and they feel that they're not going to seeany relief on the price side in the near future.With respect to the national economy, I was somewhatskeptical about the degree of the slowdown in the economy, but myskepticism has been converted to some degree by the latest data.However, our forecast in Atlanta is somewhat stronger than theGreenbook forecast. Even taking into account the assumptions aboutpolicy, we think we're going to have stronger investment and strongernet export growth in 1989 than is shown in the Greenbook. More-22-5/16/89importantly, as we look out to 1990, we see the expansion continuingat a pace only a bit slower than the present one. Our unemploymentrate is lower throughout, although that's probably due to labor forcegrowth, which will slow. Now, I realize that our forecast is anoutlier, if you look at not only the Greenbook but the Blue Chipforecast and others. But to me what is suggested by this forecast isthat the inflationary momentum is still rooted in the economy and it'srooted rather deeply. So I'm still inclined to think, notwithstandingthe recent data, that the risk of recession is relatively low and thatthe risk of inflation is still relatively high. Just one otheranecdotal piece of information: one of our contacts recentlydiscovered that his managers are stockpiling linerboard in inventoryin anticipation of price increases. So, I think that this price fearis still there and that the inflationary danger is still there. AndI think that is really what should guide policy over the near term.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. In the District we continue to see some relativestrength in the most recent three-month period that we have numbersfor, both in nonagricultural employment and particularly inmanufacturing employment. But a lot of that strength was in the earlypart of the period and some weakness has started to show through inthe last couple of months. In autos, which is a big industry inMissouri, both GM and Chrysler have announced four- or five-weekshutdowns when they do their retooling in the June-July period asopposed to a normal week or two. Also, a consumer durablesmanufacturer, an appliance manufacturer, apparently eliminated a thirdshift some time back and now there is talk of going to a four-dayworkweek because of softness in that market. Residential constructionhas been flat, a bit better than nationally. We've had particularweakness in nonresidential construction. There was recently a strikeof operating engineers in connection with which 20,000 of 30,000construction workers in the St. Louis area went out. That strike wassettled in about two weeks with total compensation increases of about2 to 3 percent in salary and benefits.In terms of our broader view, our forecast for the year isvery similar to the Board staff's in terms of the outcome, although itis based on 4 percent money growth. We've become increasinglyconcerned that, with virtually no M1 growth since July of last year,the risks of recession either later this year or early next year arebecoming considerably greater. Also, I have the same impression thatManley described before: many of the private forecasters who useinterest rate-driven models really have an interest rate scenario ofrates coming off in the latter part of this year to achieve the softlanding that's in the Board staff's forecast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. First of all, I think the New England economy,like most of the Northeast, is slowing markedly. In the past I thinkwe've seen some slowing for a few months that has largely reflectedidiosyncratic kinds of factors of mix; the difference now is thatthere is some more evidence that the slowing reflects a big systemwith national kinds of trends. Retail sales are soft really acrossthe board, particularly in the durables area. I don't think it'slargely because of interest rates; it's because of excesses of the-23-5/16/89past. Housing is very soft and we have very, very substantialoverhangs, particularly in the condominium market. As a matter offact, the headline in last Sunday's Boston Globe--I would say it wasgreatly overdone--in 3/4 inch black type on the business page was theword "bankruptcy." It was about a number of developers and others whohad gone into bankruptcy, and it was saying that the rate of increasein bankruptcy in the New England District and the cost were nowgreater than they had been in Dallas. The level is still extremelylow. But we have had negative commercial space absorption in thegreater Boston area for the first time since--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Negative absorption?MR. SYRON. Negative absorption of commercial space is where,because of consolidation of firms and cutbacks, less space was rentedin the most recent period than in the period before that, leading toan increase in the vacancy rate in the suburban areas.MR. BOYKIN. We're familiar with that term.MR. SYRON. Really, we have a few [unintelligible]. Ourmanufacturers have reasonable backlogs but they say their new ordersin many cases don't look very good, particularly in defense and in thecomputer areas that tend to be very defense-dependent. One reason Iasked Mike the question earlier about inventories is that some of ourmanufacturers in the aerospace business--particularly those in thebusiness of supplying parts to jet engine manufacturers--say that,given the backlogs they understand the manufacturers have, they arenot seeing as much in orders as they were earlier. The large jetengine manufacturers, particularly General Electric and Pratt andWhitney, seem to be going more to just-in-time types of inventorypractices. So, as I say, we think some of these things reflectearlier excesses, a deterioration of our competitive position. Bob[Forrestal] mentioned some expansion in the Southeast of firms basedin the Northeast. Some of those are our firms because they decidednot to expand [in our region]; generally, when they close the planthere they don't open a new one because of labor costs and otherfactors.As far as the national economy goes, our view is very similarto that contained in the Greenbook. While I have some sympathy forwhat people have said, I'm inclined to think that there is moreslowing going on than I would have thought a month ago. I find thatsomewhat heartening in that what we're seeing really is consistentwith the Greenbook forecast and what we'd expect, given the rise thatwe've seen in rates thus far. Looking at the employment numbers,while last month's number was a little low it wasn't enormously belowwhat one might think of as a sustainable rate of growth in employment,especially when one looks at strike-adjusted data. Given where we arein the labor market right now, I think Bob Parry's remarks on thatscore are very apt. I don't know a great deal about the details, butwe're somewhat concerned about what we're seeing in the BethlehemSteel settlement, though that might be taken care of over time bycompetitive factors with USX or something. But I think developmentsin labor markets still indicate that some inflationary pressures arebuilt in there that will take a while to work out.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.-24-5/16/89VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I am encouragedby recent business statistics and recent business developments in thatthey suggest the kind of adjustment that I thought was needed. It'salso true that, broadly speaking, the statistics and the anecdotalcomments we get from business people are more or less compatible witheach other, which isn't always the case. The one exception to thatmay be a bit more concern on the anecdotal side about near-terminflationary prospects. But like Ed Boehne, when I look out at theprofile over the next six or seven quarters, in some ways I concludethat it is indeed about as good as one could hope for. On thequestion of risks, I'm still impressed on balance with the resiliencyof the economy. Far more often than not the surprises tend to be onthe plus side rather than on the negative side. And I guess that'swhere I would hedge my bets.Having said that the outlook in Mike's forecast in some waysis about as good as one can hope for, I think it's worthwhile to thenask: Where does that leave us? What does it look like out there atthe end of 1990--keeping in mind that these point estimates are notworth a darn? Nevertheless, where are we by the end of 1990? Well,even in Mike's forecast the underlying inflation rate is still 5percent, maybe a shade higher. The external situation is terrible.In the staff forecast the current account deficit in the fourthquarter of 1990 is $135 billion; in our forecast it's more like $155billion. I would stipulate that if that combination of numbers isanything near right the economy at the end of 1990, if not sooner,will be a good deal more vulnerable in many respects than it is rightnow. In addition to the kind of recession--financial and other typesof things--one thing I'm quite sure of is that the protectionistproblem will be a heck of a lot greater if we get out that far andwe're still looking at external imbalances of the type that are builtinto the forecast.Then I start to ask myself the questions: What's going tochange that? What might produce a better result than those 1990 pointestimates? And I start to go down the list: U.S. fiscal policy, notlikely; U.S. monetary policy, well, which way? Do we want to easemonetary policy? That might help stimulate domestic demand a bit butthat's going to hurt on the trade side. It might help net exports alittle but that will be offset partly in terms of domestic demand.And both are going to be inflationary. So, I don't see much helpthere. We could tighten U.S. monetary policy, but that's going tomake the dollar go up, among other things, and I don't see much helpthere. If you look to foreigners, there's very little excess capacityabroad for the industrialized countries, so we're not going to seemuch there. Indeed, while they may tighten monetary policy fordomestic price inflation reasons, that in turn is going to restrictthe growth in their own domestic demand, which in turn is going tohurt in terms of the adjustment in trade and exports from the U.S.point of view. In short, I don't think you can fix it either way withthe exchange rate. And I think there are great risks on both sides ofthat, especially in a context in which the protectionist problem islikely to get worse, not better. That's a long-winded way of sayingthat I don't mind at all running the risk prospectively that theeconomy will slow; indeed, I wouldn't even care if it slowed a bitmore than Mike's forecast as long as I do not see signs of arecession, which I do not see right now.5/16/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I agree with those who like what they see interms of the conditions that are out there right now. It is good newsto have consumer spending running at a much lower level and to havemore room for the hoped-for capital spending and for exports. It's alittle scary to me to see that we're in a place that we'd like to be;it's scary because you ask yourself how we got there. And you say wegot there by slowing down. But I don't think we're that good that wecan actually pin it down just exactly as to what we might want to haveon consumer spending. So, rather than look at the far out [timehorizon] I would look at the monetary aggregates at this stage. Ithink they are our best guide in terms of where we may be in 5 to 6months. Restraint is indeed the proper course, but it probably oughtto be a measured restraint not an increasing restraint. Increasingrestraint, if shown by continued deterioration of the growth rates ofthose monetary aggregates, I think can increase the risks. I don'tthink that exists now but it could be there in the near future. Ijust do not recall, Don, seeing any item like checkable deposits year-over-year being negative. I just do not recall the possibility thatMl, if it remains soft for another month, could also be flat for anentire year. I just do not recall M2 declining as much as it hasdeclined and then, in a sense, having the bottom drop out of it in thetax-paying season. All that, it seems to me, would say that there's ahigh degree of risk in letting those aggregates deteriorate further.And we ought to be mindful of that. We ought to avoid extremism onthat which we know about rather than worry so much about that which wedo not know about. It seems to me that declining monetary aggregatesin the face of an economy that shows some signs of slowing actuallycould give you a tightening of monetary policy while interest ratesappear to be stable. You can have stable interest rates and atightening of policy in that kind of environment. And I think we needto be cautious in that regard because the long-run inflation problemsare indeed great and we need to be able to maintain a posture of slowgrowth into the future. But the way to do it is not to get caught upin the extremism of letting the monetary aggregates fall out of bed.So that's what I want in terms of caution.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I, too, like most of what I see at the moment.To review the District economy briefly: in the rural areas we have hadfor some time now, and it's continuing, an expansion led by recoveryin copper and iron ore mining, specialty mining, strength in theforest products and the pulp paper business--strength limited mainlyat the moment by environmental concerns and some shortages of rawmaterials. The agricultural situation is shaping up in a verypositive way, at least at the moment, because moisture in most of theDistrict has been pretty good. And people are optimistic about theupcoming tourist season. With regard to the diversified metropolitanareas, those economies have been strong for a long time and generallyremain so. There have been some layoffs in some of the high-techareas but those economies seem to absorb that pretty readily. Thereis concern about the pace of automobile sales. That's maybe the onemajor new element on that side of things. There are also, though,labor shortages; both skilled and unskilled labor has been tight forsome time. What I'm picking up now is growing concern about themilitancy of both organized and so-called disorganized labor. There-26-5/16/89is some concern about that translating into further wage pressures;businessmen seem to be divided at the moment as to whether they willbe able to pass those wage and cost increases through fully or not.With regard to the national economy, our model forecastdiffers in many particulars with the Board staff's but the overallpicture isn't very different at all. It looks to me like things areunfolding about as well as we could hope for at the moment. Havingsaid that, I do think the risks have changed since we last met. But Iwouldn't want to exaggerate that. One of the things we routinely dowith our model is calculate the probability of recession,conventionally defined, going out the next 7 or 8 quarters. Whilethat probability has gone up a bit recently it hasn't gone up verymuch; it's not far from where it has been most of the last two years.So, I take that to mean that things have shifted a bit but not a greatdeal.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. In terms of the national economy, I'd like toassociate myself with Governor Angell's views on the risks withrespect to the aggregates. I think policy is tight as judged by theaggregates, perhaps appropriately so right now. I'd also like toemphasize the point he made that even with interest rates being heldsteady, if the aggregates continue to shrink, [that's a] tightening ofpolicy. That's something that hopefully Don Kohn can relieve ourconcerns about shortly. I'd like to compliment the staff, Mike'sgroup, for putting right out front in the forecast what I think isrealistic and appropriate, and that is that we could have a quarter ortwo of negative growth.In terms of the District--although I'm a little hesitant todraw conclusions from the District about national economic conditions--we see a rather worrisome trend. It starts with the willingness ofmanagement, looking at Bethlehem Steel, to sign off on relativelyhigher rates of increase for pay--8 percent the first year, a 5percent average over 50 months, and a 3 percent trigger on cost ofliving indexes, or COLAs. We called a couple of other steel people.indicated that it was likely they would followBethlehem in a similar type contract. Again, they're not at the toplevel. said they would not do it; they thought it was a badpractice in that it was short-term oriented to avoid the strike butdidn't fit in terms of the long-term health of the industry. It'sparticularly worrisome for us because of our unemployment levels andalso the tendency for some manufacturing to follow the steel model.Now, unemployment rates are very low relative to where they have beenin both Pennsylvania and Ohio. There is a lot of tightness in thelabor market. Looking around the District, we had an Ohiomanufacturing index that came out at 4.4 percent for the firstquarter. The only softness that we could dig up--and again we focusedon capital goods and steel [producers]--was in certain steel products.The stainless strip indicator that one of the companies uses isrunning about 20 percent below its 5-year average for that same timeperiod, in terms of new orders.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Did that ever work out as a goodindicator? I remember we discussed that.-27-5/16/89MR. HOSKINS. I was afraid you were going to ask that. Wehaven't examined it as thoroughly as we should. It's one of thosethings that I tend to watch. The answer is that in terms of directionI think it has been all right; in terms of magnitude you can't readmuch from it. So, it would tell me that the quarter should be softerthan it would have been if the indicator were higher; but I don't knowwhether that's 0.1 percent or 2 whole percentage points. But in Marchand April that indicator was running 20 percent below the norm. Weasked other firms, particularly the capital goods firms, about theimpact of rising interest rates and it has been almost nil. They haveinternally generated funds; they don't see a recession or at leastsufficient signs of recession to concern them. They're going aheadwith their normal production plans. So, really, the Districtcontinues in some sense to be an outlier; relative to what I heararound the table it has been strong with some softening in certainsteel products. That's about it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I don't have much toadd on the U.S. economy but let me just call your attention todevelopments abroad because they do have a significant impact.Overall, I think you can say that after a surprisingly strong 1988foreign economies are now slowing down as well. In particular, yousee a significant weakness in industrial production in our majortrading partners where about half the monthly changes now are in thenegative range among the 10 leading industrialized countries. At thesame time inflation abroad has been higher than expected, which isleading to a tightening of policies by many of our trading partners.And that is partly due to the oil price increases and partly due tothe exchange rate deterioration that they have seen in the past. Addto that weakness abroad the rather strong dollar at the present timeand I think we will see a significant slowdown in export growth.While last year we were comfortably in the double-digit range as faras real export growth was concerned, it is probably going to slip tosomething in the 3 to 5 percent range by early next year. So, thatmeans that our strongest single sector in the economy will be a lotweaker than it has been in the past. Combine that with the tightmonetary policies and low M growth and I think we'll see a very, veryshallow expansion indeed.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I'd like to associate myself with those peoplewho generally view the current environment as satisfactory. Theevidence clearly is showing a slowing in economic activity. In myopinion it has gone beyond the stage where this might be a temporarysituation. I think it is [likely to be] sustained. And I think theslowdown in domestic demand or consumer spending is a desirablefeature that we've been looking for. Like Governor Angell, I thinkgetting that excess demand out of the economic system with our policyfrees up our capacity for other uses in our export sector and capitalgoods, which is something we've desired. The inflationary picturelooks more promising than we might have expected, although I don'twant to make too much of any one month's number. But going beyondjust the April CPI, I think the wage patterns are better than what wemight have expected, even taking into account the Bethlehem Steel[settlement]. I've seen some reports--as a matter of fact I asked the-28-5/16/89International Division to report on this because I wanted to know ifthe VRAs had anything to do with the wage pattern. The report I gotback was generally "no"--that basically this wage settlement involvedsome catch-up on big productivity increases in the past and some ofthe very slow wage growth or even give-backs that had been imposedearlier. So I think there are some one-time features in there. Theactual change of the wage base, I think, is very small. At least thereport I got back was that that was not a discouraging wagenegotiation. There are a lot of good signs. The April PPI, ofcourse, was a real positive feature. If you add that one month in,the trend in the PPI, excluding the [volatile] components like foodand energy, so far this year is below last year. I think that's anencouraging sign. At the very least you can say that ex-food andenergy the underlying producer price growth is not accelerating. Itmay even be a bit more modest than last year.As others have said, the risk has certainly shifted frombeing on the up side to being more balanced. I put myself in that campand maintain more of a neutral position at this point. But I do wantto emphasize what Governor Angell and others have said: It would be arisk to perceive a neutral policy, and one that is balanced, as onewith a steady funds rate. To me the great success of our actions lastyear in achieving what we wanted has been our ability to move thefunds rate. Some people want to talk about this in terms of theaggregates; but my view is that our willingness to be flexible oninterest rates and to move them subject to changing conditions hasbeen the reason we have been able to stay ahead of this process andcontain inflationary pressures. That means that we show flexibilitywith respect to interest rates rather than targeting some interestrate level. And I think that is important to keep in mind. Thatmeans that a neutral policy in a weaker situation or a slowingsituation is not a steady interest rate, just as steady interest ratesweren't the answer when we were restraining policy. We need to keepthat in mind because as credit demands start to slow we could easilysee maintaining the same level of interest rates as a drain onreserves and ultimately on the monetary aggregates--if you want tolook at it from the point of view of the monetary aggregates. Anyway,that's my point of view.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. As so often happens, Governor Johnson has mademost of my speech for me. I would only like to add that I thinkfurther tightness may only aggravate some of the problems that wehave. In the first place, I don't feel that the wage and pricepressures that are already there are going to respond or be damped byhigher interest rates. I think the pressures for wage increases werebuilt in a year ago. And some of the price pressures are really notpart of a controllable environment because they are related to oilprices or to drought-increased food prices. It doesn't seem to methat further restraint helps those pressures; on the other hand,[additional restraint] may be counterproductive in that it discouragesfurther investment and may result in further price increases becauseof the higher cost of capital. So I think this is not the time eitherto ease up on the brakes or to stamp down on them any harder. I agreewith your balance concept.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.-29-5/16/89MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I agree with the thrust of most ofwhat I'm hearing said around here. But at the risk of becoming a bitof a Cassandra of the FOMC, which I certainly don't want to do, Ithink that we're probably getting to the point where it should be onthe table for us to keep a weather eye out to the possibility of asubstantially worse result than anyone has heretofore addressed.Governor Angell and others have talked about the aggregates and theirslowness; that has been going on now for two years with a littlehiatus in the winter a year ago when we had the stock market problem.It has probably been more severe most recently than it has at anyother time over that period. With that as a background, we now see aneconomy that is slowing to an extent that I think surprises all of usa little, compared to where we were at the last meeting or evencompared to the Greenbook that was written hardly a week ago. How farand how fast can this go? I'm not sure that we can be very confidentthat we're not beginning to see the first of some downside momentumhere. I'm not predicting that; that's not where I am, but I do thinkthat we've reached the point where we need to keep a weather eye outfor that. Governor Heller points out that the prospects for exportsare getting a little less rosy. It's hard to see housing andconstruction coming back. I don't think there will be any fiscalstimulus; we may actually get some reduction in the deficit but Icertainly wouldn't anticipate any further stimulus from that. I hopethat fixed investment will hold up; I will keep my fingers crossed onthat one. That puts it all back on the head of the consumer and weall know the consumer can be very fickle. Again, I would emphasizethat that's not my forecast and it's certainly not my hope. But I dothink that it's worthwhile for us to begin to keep that on the tableas a part of the consideration.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger, incidentally, had to goup to the Hill to testify on a consumer issue. She should be back bythe time we are completed with our coffee break, which starts now.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Kohn.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Kohn?MR. JOHNSON. Don, that was an interesting briefing. Whatdid you say in the beginning about the yield curve? I didn't quitehear that.MR. KOHN. Looking at the first chart, Governor Johnson, wecontinue to have this rather mild overall downward slope running fromthe federal funds rate to the 30-year bond.MR. JOHNSON. Is that the dotted line?MR. KOHN. Virtually, in the upper panel, that's the cross.MR. JOHNSON. Oh, I see. I'm sorry.-30-5/16/89MR. KOHN. That represents the most recent week in each ofthese charts.MR. JOHNSON. Okay. I've got you.MR. KOHN. I was interpreting that as not nearly as steep,certainly, as we've come to before past recessions and more indicativeof a slight downward slope--well, it is a slight downward slope of theyield curve. Then, in the bottom panel, I was noting the fact thatthat hump was no longer there, which suggested that the marketcertainly wasn't expecting the Fed to tighten over the intermediaterun. These are all difficult interpretations, given uncertaintiesabout term premiums.MR. JOHNSON. Wouldn't you say more that they're expectingsome easing?MR. KOHN. I was discounting the upward slope in the shortend there as being supply-related and term premium-related. Lookingat various expected federal funds rates, term federal funds rates andrelated shifts among 30- 60- and 90-day rates in the short-termmarket, I do think they are expecting a mild easing over the nextseveral months--not necessarily next week, but sometime in the nextcouple of months.MR. JOHNSON. Okay. Also, one other thing on these inflationexpectations measures: those were April surveys?MR. KOHN. That's correct, both the Michigan and the Hoey.The Hoey you see on the next page.MR. JOHNSON. So they don't really contain any of the Aprildata?MR. KOHN. They don't contain the information that becameavailable in May; that's correct.MR. JOHNSON. Okay.MR. KOHN. So that increase from 5.3 to 5.7 percent that yousee in April from February in the first column of chart 5 could verywell have been reversed in May.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I see.MR. KOHN. The Michigan survey, I believe, had 5 percent inApril inflation expectations. That may have dropped in May also; it'shard to tell. But in any case, it remains at a fairly high level.MR. JOHNSON. Okay, thanks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Kohn? GovernorAngell.MR. ANGELL. On Chart 11, Don, is the V* your long-run V*?MR. KOHN. Yes.-31-5/16/89MR. ANGELL. If you take the short-run V*--MR. KOHN. If you take the short run, then P* is furtherbelow P and would be exerting a little more downward pressure oninflation than you see in that bottom panel.MR. ANGELL. I guess I'm surprised that you used the long runrather than the shift adjusted one. From the staff study I thoughtthere was a slight preponderance of evidence on the side of the shiftadjusted. Didn't the numbers come out a little more accurate on theshift adjusted?MR. KOHN. I think the numbers--well, do you mean adjustedfor the shift in the--MR. ANGELL. In the monetary aggregates.MR. KOHN. In 1983? Is that what you're referring to?MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. KOHN. But that wasn't adjusted. Yes, the shiftadjustment begins in 1983. But the numbers didn't come out better ifwe lowered the whole V* to the average of the last few years,extracting from that one quarter or two of shift adjustment. I thinkyou were suggesting that we go with the lower V* all along or at leasthave some 1982 floor.MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. KOHN. That did not prove to be better.MR. LINDSEY. Right, the staff did a statistical test inwhich they tried the average of velocity since 1982 as opposed to theaverage since 1955. And, as Don has indicated, the regressionanalysis suggests no statistically significant difference between thetwo. So, in this chart we went with the simpler longer-term average.MR. KOHN. I can give you the results for the quarter.MR. ANGELL. Okay. Well, I heard the answer.MR. KOHN. It's curious that running it with the shorter-termvelocity I get 3-3/4 percent inflation in 1990 instead of 4-1/4percent inflation in 1990.MR. ANGELL. Thank you. The second question, Don, relates tothe bounceback in M2 that you're forecasting on Chart A, which seemsto me ample, or maybe strong. If it did not turn out that way, or ifthe second half was by and large a continuation of the 2-3/4 to 3percent range, would you have a different policy prescription than youdo with the present forecast?MR. KOHN. I think I'd have to analyze why it wasn't bouncingback. If it wasn't bouncing back because of some special factors thatmeant that the relationship between opportunity cost and velocity hadgone off track--that is, that there had been a shift in money demand--obviously, I would be much less worried. If it wasn't bouncing back5/16/89because this scale variable, the underlying income growth, was weakerthan we're projecting then I think that would be cause for concern.So I'd have to think a little about why it was happening before Icould give you a reason. The other reason for it not to bounce backwould be an even stronger rise in opportunity cost. That implies evenmore of a rise in interest rates than the Greenbook forecast hasthere. I don't think that's what you were thinking.MR. ANGELL. No, no.MR. KOHN. So, I'd have to think carefully about why itwasn't bouncing back--whether the relationship was going off track orthe underlying income--MR. ANGELL. But you really expect this phenomenon to beginto show itself in the next three to four weeks, is that correct?MR. KOHN. I expect by the time we get to the middle of Junethat we would have some sense of things, hopefully, bottoming out inthe middle of May. Without getting too tied into week-to-week moneyprojections--MR. ANGELL. Oh, I understand.MR. KOHN. I'm very skeptical of week-to-week moneyprojections, but I'd want some sense of it moving up at least towardthe end of May.MR. ANGELL. I would agree with that. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I have three questions. I may have missed theanswers. On the technical adjustment of the borrowing target from$500 to $600 million for alternative B, what do you think the fedfunds rate would be if you didn't make that adjustment and you stuckwith the $500 million that we currently have?MR. KOHN. I think funds would tend to trade a bit below9-3/4 percent. Peter?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, I think the rate would be in the areaof 9-3/4 or 9-5/8 percent.MR. KOHN. We're running above $500 million--MS. SEGER. Sure.MR. KOHN. --in the early part of the maintenance period,which is unusual, and partly it's the seasonal borrowing that'srising. In the past I've argued that the seasonal borrowing doesn'taffect things very much but I think the level of adjustment borrowingis so low that the increase in seasonal borrowing is showing throughmore; it's not covered up by the noise in adjustment borrowing.MS. SEGER. Do we have an alternative for no change inpolicy? It seems to me that what we have is: an easing, which is "A;"a slight tightening, which is "B;" and more tightening, which is "C."-33-5/16/89MR. KOHN. Well, I interpreted alternative B as maintainingabout the same funds rate level as we've been running over the lastintermeeting period. If what you're referencing is what might happento market rates I agree, as we stated in the Bluebook, that themarkets now have an easing built into that. It's quite possible thatif the data continue to come in weak the markets will continue toexpect an easing and rates may not move very much. But if the datastrengthen a little and we don't ease, I think these short-term ratescould back up a bit--retracing some, but by no means all, of thedecline that occurred over the last intermeeting period. We do have,I think, some sense of a further easing--MS. SEGER. But without even looking forward, doesn't the fedfunds assumption in alternative B, at least in a relative sense,represent some tightening? I say that because we've already seen, asI read the numbers anyway, quite a significant decline in short-termrates. And if you--MR. KOHN. It doesn't represent a tightening in the reservesmarket. It may represent a tightening in other markets. It wasn'tintended to represent a tightening in the reserves market.MR. BLACK. Martha, you've raised an interesting questionabout whether the borrowed reserve target or the federal funds rate isthe better indicator of policy. Earlier Governor Angell raised thequestion as to whether the behavior of the aggregates or the federalfunds rate was the better target. And I think we all--MR. HOSKINS. You want to start that again?MR. BLACK. I'm saying there are three ways we can measure itthat have been discussed here today, and I like Governor Angell's waybest. I like the federal funds rate second best and the borrowedreserves third best. And they are all incompatible with one another.We had a pretty interesting discussion earlier.MS. SEGER. I'm sorry; I was up [on the Hill], having had adate with a couple of my Congressmen.MR. BLACK. Yes, I know what you were doing.MS. SEGER. I think you answered my third question when youtalked about what the market impact might be in the future if they, infact, are expecting an easing. If it doesn't materialize--or I guesseven more importantly if they're expecting an easing and thensomething registers as a slight tightening--I would imagine therewould be even more of a market impact.MR. KOHN. Peter, please correct me if I'm wrong, but mysense is that the market doesn't have us easing out of that 9-3/4 to9-7/8 percent range now. But they're looking for signs that it mayhappen.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that's correct. When they talkabout their views they don't expect any overt or active policy movetoward ease. But what emerges from the rate relationships, as yourearlier statement suggested, does seem to imply--looking out over a-34-5/16/89few months--some slight easing just in the existing marketrelationships.MR. GUFFEY. But that has only been in the last 10 days.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MR. GUFFEY. Before that they did not.MR. STERNLIGHT. That's about right.MR. KOHN. Well, as Peter said in his presentation, comingout of the last meeting they expected us to tighten.MS. SEGER. Right.MR. KOHN. When we didn't tighten, short-term rates camedown. And then they fell further when they started to--MS. SEGER. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. Excuse me for asking the question maybe in aslightly different way from the way it has been asked before. TheGreenbook built in a 3/4 percentage point increase in the fed fundsrate.MR. KOHN. That's correct.MR. HELLER. You're putting in a $100 million technicaladjustment in the borrowing.MR. KOHN. Right.MR. HELLER. And yet you are projecting a rather significantturnaround in monetary growth. Would you tell me what brings thatabout? I don't quite get it. Maybe that's an easier way to answerthe question about what caused the very significant drop in the Ms,especially Ml, that we were seeing before and the flatness and morerecent drop in M2.MR. KOHN. I think there are a couple of things going on.The most fundamental factor was the rise in opportunity costs ininterest rates over the period from March of 1988 through February of1989. That has particular impacts on Ml not only because demanddeposits as compensating balances tend to be very, very sensitive tomovements in interest rates but also because NOW accounts serving assavings deposits tend to be extremely sensitive to interest rates whentime deposit rates adjust and NOW account rates don't. Essentially,NOW account rates have crept up but not very much so we've seen hugegrowth in time deposits--in the last month we're talking about 25percent at an annual rate. I think, in part, that's a shifting fromNOW accounts. So we've had very, very weak growth in M1 just becauseof the past tightening in policy and the rate relationships among bankand thrift deposits that have emerged. On top of that, you add thetax situation. I put that chart 10 in there to try to underline mypoint that this drop in M2, which had a counterpart in Ml, seemed to-35-5/16/89fall off a cliff after a certain point. And the timing of that dropis tied very, very closely to the timing of the overage in the taxpayments and the increase in Treasury balances. We only projected 3percent M2 growth last time under alternative B; so on top of thatrather weak projection, given the increase in interest rates, we hadthe tax effects, and that's what reduced M2 and M1 as well.MR. HELLER. I'm sorry, that still is my question, in a way.Now we're going to increase the fed funds rate more.MR. KOHN. No, alternative B is intended to keep the fedfunds rate where it has been.MR. HELLER. The Greenbook--MR. KOHN. The increase of borrowing [in the path] is notexpected to have an effect on the funds rate. In fact, borrowing hasbeen running above $500 million.MR. HELLER. The Greenbook is the same as the "C"alternative.MR. KOHN. The Greenbook is not tied that specifically to analternative that really only stretches to the next 6 weeks. In fact,the Greenbook's interest rates, as Mike said, really increase in thesecond half of the year. In essence, the Greenbook is--MR. PRELL. We're neutral.MR. HELLER. Endogenous, right?MR. PRELL. We're neutral at this meeting.MR. ANGELL. Well, the Greenbook is "B," "B," "C," "C".MR. HELLER. What?MR. PRELL. The Greenbook doesn't slice it that thinly, butwe didn't assume anything in the next few weeks.MR. HELLER. Okay, thanks.MR. BLACK. But what the Bluebook did assume was that thebest measure of the degree of reserve pressure was the federal fundsrate, because you've adjusted your borrowing target to influence thatrate.MR. KOHN. It is the case that we adjusted our borrowingtargets last year as borrowing came in weak relative to the targets,in order to keep the funds rate from deviating very, verysubstantially from what we thought [it would be if the borrowingfunction had not shifted]. Yes, we are indexing, basically, on thefunds rate.MR. STERNLIGHT. Or even earlier this year, when we had thatcut of $200 million in mid-February, we did not consider that aneasing but a technical adjustment.-36-5/16/89MR. BLACK. All the worrying about viewing the borrowedreserve target flexibly was designed to give preference to the federalfunds rate which [unintelligible] was probably given--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I think you've answered this question but letme put it forth one more time. We usually hear about uncertaintiesaround tax time--the seasonals, for example. And yet the Bluebookseems to read with a degree of certainty that is higher than I wouldhave expected that that was a factor in the slowdown in M2. You'veanswered part of it by saying you looked at the calendar--MR. KOHN. Fundamentally, that's correct. I think therecould have been a little slowing in addition to that. I don't want toslice this analysis to oversell my ability to track every dollar oreven every billion dollars of M2 or M3, so let's--MR. HOSKINS. Well, the thrust of the question really is theconfidence you have in a bounceback.MR. KOHN. It's our best guess. We think we've analyzed thesituation.MR. HOSKINS. Yes, I bet on the Caps too, so--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Don, two questions. One: If you look over thelast year or so how good have we been at projecting future M2 growth?MR. KOHN. Not too bad, taking into account--SPEAKER(?). You were ready for that!MR. HOSKINS. They worked it out at the coffee break!MR. KOHN. --taking into account where the interest rateshave ended up. There have been some Bluebooks where the actual hascome in under, say, alternative B in the Bluebook. I haven't donethis for a couple of months but I did look at our projections and theerrors we had in 1988. Basically, we had captured the fundamentalslowdown in the second half of the year pretty well--not to the lastpercentage point, but we had the basic structure.MR. MELZER. My second question is: As people rebuild theirbalances, what implications do you think that will have for the realside?MR. KOHN. I think it depends on how they do that. Thepresumption here is that most of the rebuilding comes from redirectingsavings flows, perhaps a little asset portfolio shuffling. Thatwouldn't really affect their spending. It's possible that some peoplemay cut back on their spending temporarily to rebuild their balances.The question [hinges on] what the element of surprise was for you.You could have been surprised by the fact that taxes relative to yourincome came out higher; but you could have been surprised because yourincome was a little higher--say, you had more interest receipts or-37-5/16/89capital gains were higher. It's not clear that that would affect yourspending in the same way as other things. So, the effects on spendingare very ambiguous, whereas I think the rebuilding of cash is lessambiguous.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I don't have a question but an observation. Ifind the charts to be very helpful. I wouldn't advise necessarilyhaving you send them out in advance, but I do find having these kindsof charts as you go through your presentation to be a very useful partof the presentation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody else have any questions on this?If not, why don't I just start off with the round table. As I hearthe basic comments on the outlook it strikes me that there is a fairlycentral tendency in this group's evaluation, which says in a sensethat the economy clearly has slowed and probably will stabilizewithout going into a recession. I think the evidence at this stage isfairly solid on that conclusion but probably needs to be audited withsome degree of sensitivity. The crucial pieces of evidence that wehave that suggest the economy is not cumulatively going down are theinitial claims data and the level of insured unemployment. Both,after having weakened in the period when we got the pickup in theunemployment rate, have since eased off to levels that suggest aperiod of much stronger employment growth, certainly, than we've seenin the data of the last two or three months. Similarly, we're lookingat an industrial price pattern that would not be consistent with anerosion of orders in the materials area. As a consequence, I think wehave very little indication that the softening which has been sopatent is cumulatively deteriorating, at least at this particularstage. The one element that still seems to be reasonably solidly inplace is the inventory situation, which as yet doesn't appear to becreating problems. The increases in inventory investment, I suspect,are to a large extent still in work-in-process; and probably a verysubstantial part of that work-in-process pattern is in the civilianaircraft area, which is not suggestive of inventory backing up. So,we don't have evidence of what I view as the crucial danger--namelythat when you go from tightness to softness that you then justcontinue on. That evidence at this particular stage is lacking. Theone negative, which I must say bothers me as much as it has bothered anumber of people around here, is the money supply data. The evidencesuggests, as Don points out, that the money supply is coming backrather quickly. And I think that that's the most likely outcome. Butif it fails to do so, then I think we'd better be looking very closelyfor other forms of evidence that may be signaling that the stabilityin the system which now seems to be in place is in fact lacking.Wages clearly have slowed down. The Bethlehem [Steel] case probablyis an aberration. I didn't like the L.A. teachers turning down thatcontract; that seemed to imply a much more aggressive attitude, whichmay be a delayed effect of the unemployment rate falling as low as itdid and staying as low as it did earlier in the period.So, it's not a clear-cut balance of risks, as I see it. Wehave moved, as best as I can judge, from a tilt toward inflation beingmore probable and are now closer to some form of symmetry. I wouldconclude that probably the sensible thing to do at this stage is tohave alternative B symmetrical. I would be careful specifically to-38-5/16/89watch the money supply more closely than we usually do, although I'mnot sure I would recommend that we move it up in the directive. Butcertainly I think that is crucial to what we are doing and we justneed to watch it. I have the impression that even though we didn'thave a telephone conference in the last intermeeting period--there wasnothing that really happened that deviated substantially from ourgeneral expectations as far as policy was concerned--that we ought tohave one just on general principles this next time. I'm pretty surewe should have one if for no other reason than to try to get a sensefrom all of you whether you see any [need for an] alteration in thepolicy. So I would suggest that we do have a telephone conferencejust for the purpose of auditing what's going on. Roger, do you havea question?MR. GUFFEY. It's not a question. I just want to follow upon your comments, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, go ahead.MR. GUFFEY. Okay. Sticking with "B," with the $600 million,seems to me to be appropriate. I'm not sure, however, that going to asymmetrical directive at this particular meeting is what I wouldrecommend. It seems to me that the data we are relying on as[indicative of] a slowdown are nothing more than three weeks' to amonth's data. To be sure, the aggregates are slow; but the projectionby the staff is that the growth of M2 will return to the 6 to 7percent area within the next 30 days. Given the attention that themarkets pay to the directive, it seems to me that a directive verymuch like that adopted at the last meeting--that is, [with a tilt]toward restraint--would be appropriate this time. It would give usflexibility; if we want to go the other way that's available via atelephone call. I can't remember how it was but it was something like"somewhat and would" and "somewhat and might" in the language of thedirective itself. I would prefer asymmetrical toward restraint as itwas last meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Yes, I wanted to ask a question in regard to theaggregates. I agree with your position. You used the word "evidence"--evidence that the money growth is coming back. I don't think wehave any evidence yet and--keying on Governor Seger's suggestion--I'mwondering whether we could make that adjustment from the $500 millionto $600 million with some discretion on the part of the Chairman asthose numbers come in. Would that be a problem, Don?MR. KOHN. It's not a problem; it would be a phenomenon.That is, I think you'd have an easing of the funds rate and then you'dhave a tightening if you went back to the $600 million. So, it woulddepend on how you felt about things.MR. ANGELL. Well, my view on the aggregates is that theproblem with the aggregates is right now. If we're ever going to beconcerned about the aggregates we should be concerned right now. Idon't know whether they are going to come back or not come back; ifgrowth does come back I'm going to feel very comfortable. If theycome back as much as you suggest I think I'm probably going to want torestrain them too. But---39-5/16/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's what we have to worryabout. The worst thing we can do right now is to whipsaw. That wouldreally do damage.MR. ANGELL. You think the markets would interpret ourstaying at $500 million as an easing?MR. KOHN. I think if you get to $500 million [on borrowing]federal funds would trade noticeably below where they have traded overthe last intermeeting period. They averaged 9.83 or 9.84 percent overthe last intermeeting period.MR. ANGELL. But then, Mr. Chairman, let me ask you anotherquestion. Do you believe that under a symmetric directive, if theaggregates do not come back, that you would not hesitate to have aconference call or to act?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's correct.MR. ANGELL. Okay; on that basis I agree.MR. JOHNSON. I have a technical question, though, that Ineed to ask as a follow up on what you said. Going back to the openmarket operations report and looking at the borrowing, we've beenoperating under a $500 million [borrowing assumption] for a while andborrowings actually have been running close to $600 million since mid-April. Is that right?MR. KOHN. They were--MR. JOHNSON. The weekly averages here are $612, $612, $582,and $581 million. What I'm saying is: If we didn't concern ourselveswith the borrowing target then, why should we be concerned about itnow? We ran at $500 million and didn't worry about it [coming inhigher].MR. ANGELL. What is this new deal you're introducing?MR. JOHNSON. All right. Just for the record I wanted tomake it known.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let the record show. PresidentForrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I seem to be the only onearound the table who is forecasting a stronger economy over theforecast horizon. But I think that things are sufficiently uncertainat the moment that we ought to stay where we are. For that reason Iwould opt for alternative B, which I too interpret as no change. ButI do feel fairly strongly that we would be sending the wrong signal tothe market if we went with a symmetric directive. If the economy isin fact at the point where we have been working to get it, then weought not to move from our position prematurely. And I think asymmetric directive would send that kind of signal to the markets.So, I would much prefer to keep these--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's not published for six weeks.-40-5/16/89MR. FORRESTAL. Right. I understand, but still I think itmight have that effect. We need to underline our commitment even inthe future to price stability and I think that's what the asymmetricdirective has done and will do even six weeks from now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The other thing I would say on that isthat the markets look at the forward position in the federal fundsfutures market or the position in the Treasury bill market, forexample; yet the implicit funds rate that the Treasury bill rate is infact indicating for 90 days from now is something like 9.3 percent.In other words, what I'm saying is that if we were to stay where weare, symmetric, that is actually tighter than I think the marketsperceive us to be going, at least as I read the various--MR. JOHNSON. That's what the markets say.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, I guess what I'm basically concernedabout is that we not move from the position of restraint that we havehad. If we have had some success I think we ought not to back offfrom that on the basis of some data that really have not beenconfirmed. The data are fairly recent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's a question of interpretation. Ifwe moved toward ease and backed off, frankly, I think that would bemost premature and probably very counterproductive. I'm not sure whatis happening in the market is read that way. If we move that's adifferent issue. But I don't disagree with the concern that you have.I must say "hear, hear." President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I'd agree with your analysis of thesituation very, very closely. I would support your recommendationwithout change. It seems to me that it would be appropriate tomaintain [the current] policy under alternative B and that this is atime that we could shift toward the symmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I would agree with your recommendation withregard to Bluebook alternative B, but I would very much favorretaining the asymmetric language for the simple reason that I thinkwe ought to impress on the markets our longer-term resolve with regardto inflation. I think symmetric language could be, and probably wouldbe, misinterpreted. I'm afraid that if we went to symmetric languagethey would think we have a greater tolerance of current rates ofinflation than I think we really do. I just don't like the message itcommunicates at this point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. I'm a little confused about what currentrestraint means. Does it mean the fed funds rate or does it mean themoney growth that is currently underway or does it mean the borrowing,which it has been suggested should be revised upward? I favoralternative B if it means keeping the fed funds rate at about 9-3/4percent, with symmetric language. I would not throw in the $100million more [on borrowing] if it could possibly be interpreted asmeaning a move up in the fed funds rate.-41-5/16/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We don't publish that.MR. HELLER. No, but I mean if it could be interpreted by theDesk as leaning toward restraint. Mr. Chairman, you indicated earlierin your remarks that this was the time to watch the Ms carefully. Youalso said that you didn't want to change the order [in the directive];but if the order means anything, then I think this is the time to givethe aggregates a little more prominence, maybe.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, we can do it; and we can do it inthe order in the directive itself. What do we knock out if we movethe order? What's the--MR. HELLER. It goes: inflation, then expansion, then the Ms.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Surely we don't want to move it in frontof inflationary pressures.MR. HELLER. How about adding--MR. ANGELL. Intervention.MR. HELLER. How about adding "and in particular the behaviorof the monetary aggregates"?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That puts it number one.MR. HELLER. Well, but you keep the order and then give itsome additional emphasis.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would it be satisfactory to you if weput something about the interest of the Committee in monitoring theaggregates in the language prior to the directive ?MR. HELLER. Sure.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's probably the same thing.MR. HELLER. But that doesn't get published, right?MR. KOHN. Yes, we publish the Policy Record.MR. HELLER. Oh, that. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I find your suggestion, Mr. Chairman, eminentlysensible. It reflects what's going on in the economy. And I thinkthe timing on moving to a symmetrical directive is just right. Ithink our success to date has been that we have stayed ahead of therisk curve. When the risks were heavily on the side of inflation wemoved in a series of small steps. And I think staying ahead of therisk curve at this point does mean taking that small step to symmetry;it's quite consistent with what we've done over the past year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman: "B;" $600 million; symmetry.-42-5/16/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Period. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I have a lot of sympathy for yourview of staying where we are. The problem we seem to be having isdefining just where we are. I think policy has been prettysuccessful. Where I am, to try to use Governor LaWare's approach, is:"B;" $600 million; but asymmetrical.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Asymmetrical in which direction?MR. SYRON. The way it has been. I would keep it the way ithas been, but I think to some extent that asymmetry is muted by movingup the emphasis on the Ms within the directive, because people knowwhat has been happening to the Ms.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I'm hard pressed to find thedifference between where I stand and where you stand.MR. SYRON. My only point is that I would leave the languageon the "mights" and "woulds" the same.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I understand what you're saying. Butyou would put language [unintelligible] with respect to the Ms.MR. SYRON. On the Ms.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I'm for no change and, again, I'm trying tofigure out what that is. To me it's either "B" with $500 millionborrowing or something between "A" and "B" anyway, with symmetriclanguage. The main reason I feel this way is that, as I read theeconomic statistics for the last couple of months, I think there aregrowing signs of some sluggishness or slowing, particularly in housingand auto sales. The first-quarter figures for real GNP are expectedto be revised downward, according to the staff's briefing yesterday.The second-quarter [growth rate] is expected to be coming in below 2percent, which I don't view as particularly strong. Also, we've donequite a bit of tightening over the past year or so but I don't thinkthe tightening moves--particularly those taken at the beginning ofthis year--have been completely felt by the real economy. I thinkthere's some chance that fiscal policy is going to move at leastmodestly in the direction of restraint. As for the monetaryaggregates, Don Kohn yesterday told me that I can start payingattention to them, so I'm going to; and I think they look sort ofweak, both currently and looking forward, based on their growth fromthe fourth quarter of 1988 to date. Also, I haven't heard a lot ofdiscussion of it, but I'm very impressed with the terrifically strongdollar--the fact that it's at its highest in over two years. I'd liketo see some manufacturing survive in this country and, therefore, Iwould hope that we don't do anything ourselves to make [the dollar]still stronger. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I would favor "B;" $600 million;symmetrical language with "slightly" and "might." I'm not reallyworried about abandoning that asymmetrical directive because by the-43-5/16/89time it comes out it will be after our July meeting and you will havetestified before the two Congressional Committees. The market, Ihope, has the wisdom to look back and [recognize that] when we removedthe tilt [the outlook] was very uncertain and that tilt wasjustifiably removed at that time. It may subsequently have beenreversed by whatever actions we take, but I think that a rationalmarket observer--and there are a number of them--would think that wasthe logical thing for us to have done.MR. SYRON. Excuse me, a point of information: Are yousuggesting "slightly" and "might" on the second part or "somewhat/would" and "slightly/might" in terms of symmetry?MR. BLACK. I was suggesting "slightly/might" on both ofthem.MR. SYRON. "Slightly/might" on both?MR. BLACK. Yes. That predisposes us not to move unless wehave some evidence that we don't now have. It's a stronger vote toremain where we are than "somewhat" and "would," I think. We may begetting into minutia here but--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I wish policy were that--MR. BLACK. If I were voting I would [accept] "somewhat" and"would;" I even toyed with the idea of "somewhat" and "might" andother permutations and combinations of that.MR. SYRON. "Slightly/would," I suppose.MR. BLACK. That's possible, too, but I thought that woulddrive Don and his associates crazy.MR. LAWARE. That's really symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I strongly support yoursuggestion. In the light of the surprisingly weakening economy thatwe see now, I think that is eminently called for. On the borrowings,Governor Johnson noted that we've been running pretty much at $565million for some time now, so I could support either $500 million withleeway up $65 million or $600 million with leeway down $35 million.MR. BOEHNE. You're really broad minded!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I support your basic recommendation, Mr.Chairman. It seems to me that this is a good time to go to thesymmetric language, both to recognize the change that has occurred inthe circumstances but also because I have a hunch that--as a practicalmatter both for our own internal purposes and from the perspective ofmarket participants--the nuances involved in asymmetry and so forthare not likely to matter a lot. People know the general structure ofthis directive and they know that they're looking at the same incominginformation we're looking at. They know pretty much where we are.-44-5/16/89And I think this is a good time simply to remove the asymmetry and letthe evidence tell the tale.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it's possible to remove theasymmetry and put it back without danger. I don't think it's possibleto ease and then tighten without danger.MR. ANGELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, we did in January of '88.MR. JOHNSON. '87.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I think that's correct.MR. JOHNSON. Oh, '88.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, we didn't really start to tightenat that particular point; that was the beginning. But it's[unintelligible].MR. ANGELL. I think the markets don't have to worry that onemove is necessarily a great--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "B;" $600 million; symmetric. Iwouldn't dare try to add to the nuances of this.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. This is tough one. I looked back before I cameto the meeting; since December, I think, I've been expressing myconcern about the aggregates. What I am struck by at this meeting isthis sudden shift in the outlook and perceived risks and so forth thateven 6 or 8 weeks ago didn't seem to be very apparent. And what Iworry about is that if we wait to see signs of recession, given thelags in the impact of monetary policy, it's basically going to be toolate. In terms of money, we've talked a lot about the short-termaberrations; but we're really looking at a pattern of monetaryrestraint that has been very tight for a long period of time.Certainly, the technical aberrations may add to that somewhat; but Idon't suspect that's the whole issue. To sit here hoping for abounceback--I don't know. That to me sort of smacks of looking atcurrent indicators and making the judgment; and I think ultimatelywe're going to get trapped.Now, I continue to think that the major problem we face isinflation. But I don't think it's going to be any easier to deal withif we destabilize the economy through a monetary policy that's tootight. In fact, I think the response will be such in terms ofmonetary growth that it will make the long-term problem even tougher.I don't believe in strictly targeting monetary aggregates but I dothink in the extreme we've got to observe them, in some sense. And Ithink we're at an extreme at this time. So, where I come out is thatI would favor slightly less pressure on reserve positions. In otherwords, I wouldn't move all the way to "A" but I'd be willing to let,say, 25 basis points show through here. I think that's really quiteconsistent with the approach we've taken to policy. We haven't beentaking a big risk approach such as "We're going to wait until we're-45-5/16/89sure that we're at an inflection point and, boom, move it 100 basispoints, or whatever." We have been gradually adjusting. I think therisks of recession as they relate to the inflation problem are reallyquite significant; and I think we ought to be moving earlier to try toget those aggregates growing again. In terms of market expectations,there's no question that there are risks involved if we move slightlyin one direction and then have to reverse. That could create someconfusion. But I think we ought to put some weight on the long-termmonetary targeting procedure that we go through each year; we couldpoint out that we're falling below the range and we're taking someaction to try to get in the lower end, but we intend to run money fora long period of time near the lower end to contain inflationarypressures. So, I think it's doable. I wouldn't view a move like thisas an irreversible move that somehow says: "That's it; we've thrown inthe towel on inflation." I personally think we could deal with that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I have some sympathy for what Tom is saying.However, I certainly support the Chairman's view for symmetriclanguage. My concern is also: Exactly what does no change in policymean and what do we really mean by symmetry? But I basically support"B." Again, I'm not hung up on the borrowing number whatsoever. Iwould define "B" as a 6-3/4 percent funds rate--I mean 9-3/4; I hopethat's not a Freudian slip--a 9-3/4 percent funds rate and I wouldlike to be more clearly focused on centering it there rather thanletting it edge towards the upper end of that. I am concerned aboutthis neutrality issue; if bill rates and other short-term interestrates stay down over the intermeeting period and don't show a tendencyto bounce back toward the funds rate, I certainly would think thattrying to remain neutral would imply bringing the funds rate more inline with those rates. I would like to think that symmetric languagewould mean that the Chairman would have the discretion during theintermeeting period to make some adjustments there. I certainly thinkthat that fits into a symmetric and neutral policy. But for thepurposes of listing my position it would be: "B;" 6-3/4--rather 9-3/4percent; and symmetric. I wrote that 6-3/4 percent down for somereason!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It is Freudian. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I don't think I can contribute much to what hasbeen said here already other than to say that the long-term objectiveought to remain consistent, and that is to bring down the rate ofinflation. The reason I gave Mike Prell's staff credit for puttingthe notion that we might have a recession into the Greenbook is thatif we don't walk up and take a look at one we'll end up always havinghigher rates of inflation than we anticipated and, therefore, lessoutput and employment than we expect. Given the way we operatepolicy, I think we have to be prepared to face the possibility that wecould slip, at least for a short period of time, into a contraction.Having said all that, I am uncomfortable suggesting that we ought toease at all. I did dissent on the long-term target; I wanted itcentered around 2 to 3 percent. We're slightly below that right now.Don Kohn assures me, however, that we'll be back on target shortly.In fact, if we are, we probably won't have to tighten policy down theroad. So, my view would be to accept "B." I don't feel stronglyabout the language because I don't think the market will misinterpret-46-5/16/89it. The Humphrey-Hawkins report will be in front of them when thatlanguage comes out; I don't know what we're going to want to say atthat point in time. My bias would be to leave it asymmetric as wehave been doing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I would agree with "B" and the$600 million. My preference really would be to remain asymmetric or"as-symmetric," as Mr. Syron says. The [weak] money growth istroublesome; but the forecast is for some rebound and if that holdstrue, that's fine. But it seems to me that more or less what I'mhearing is the commitment for a conference call before the nextmeeting, which gives the opportunity to make any slight adjustment ifthat's wrong. But I would still lean toward "B," asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As best I can judge, the critical massis for "B," symmetric. That is $600 million borrowing but, listeningto enough of the people here, I think the Desk is going to have to besensitive to the issue of whether in fact $600 million really willrepresent what is essentially a no-change environment. We will try tobe cautious on that question.MR. HELLER. Mr. Chairman, why don't we change it to $550million?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, because that starts to get to adegree of fine tuning about what these numbers represent, which Ithink we shouldn't do. I think the numbers should be--MR. HELLER. I think the Committee's exactly down the middle.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm not sure about that, because Ihave a potential real problem here.MS. SEGER. With $600 million?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No. My definition of unchangedpolicy from a market perspective is that the market views that policyas the funds rate in the 9-3/4 to 9-7/8 percent area.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But that's what the $600--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, but there has been some effortto try to define that at 9-3/4 percent. I promised not to get intothe semantics of this but at that point it's more than semantics tome.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The issue is "unchanged." Basically,the funds rate has averaged 9-3/4 to 9-7/8 percent and there's atechnical question as to whether or not the borrowing target thateffectively created that was $600 million or slightly less.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That I can--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is what I'm arguing for.-47-5/16/89VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That can be dealt with and finessed.But that's not--okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's all I'm saying. I would proposethat halfway through the period, or if the data or any other evidencesuggest it sooner, we schedule a call. If nothing has changedsignificantly, the basic purpose of that call will be to review whatit is that we all see in the outlook and try to find out whetherthere's any alteration of the view of this Committee. I think we arein a very sensitive period at this point and we have to be more thanattentive to specific evidence that begins to emerge in various areasto see if we can catch any evidence of deviation from what appears atthis moment to be a reasonably good path. Yes sir, [Mr. Guffey].MR. GUFFEY. Just a point of clarification: Is it impliedfrom what you just stated that there will be no change in policyabsent a telephone call?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Correct.MR. ANGELL. "Somewhat/would."MR. SYRON. "Somewhat/would."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. "Somewhat/would"?MR. ANGELL. It seems to me we have never used "slightly"with symmetric [language].MR. GUFFEY. "Somewhat/might."MR. ANGELL. So, I suggest that we not introduce that nuance.Let's stay "somewhat/would" balanced.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody object to that?MR. BERNARD. It would read: In the implementation of policyfor the immediate future the Committee seeks to maintain the existingdegree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking account ofindications of inflationary pressures, the strength of the businessexpansion, the behavior of the monetary aggregates, and developmentsin foreign exchange and domestic financial markets, somewhat greaterreserve restraint or somewhat lesser reserve restraint would beacceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserveconditions are expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 overthe period from March to June at annual rates of about--MR. KOHN. 1-1/2 and 4.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. 1-1/2 and 4.MR. BERNARD. --1-1/2 and 4 percent, respectively. TheChairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to theManager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during theperiod before the next meeting are likely to be associated with afederal funds rate persistently outside a range of--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. 8 to 12.-48-5/16/89MR. BERNARD. --8 to 12 percent.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. 6 to 12 percent.MR. HELLER. [Unintelligible.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the role.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Guffey YesGovernor Heller YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesPresident Melzer NoGovernor Seger YesPresident Syron YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Our next meeting is on July 5 and 6.END OF MEETING-49-