Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeAugust 22, 1989A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 22, 1989, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellGuffeyJohnsonKeehnKelleyLaWareMelzerSegerSyronMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Hoskins, and Stern, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Forrestal and Parry, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Atlanta andSan Francisco, respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Kohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPatrikis, Deputy General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey,Scheld, Siegman, Simpson, and Slifman,Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office ofBoard Members', Board of GovernorsMr. Smith, Assistant Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Hendricks and Monhollon, First Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and Richmond,respectivelyMessrs. Beebe, Broaddus, Rolnick, Rosenblum, andMs. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond,Minneapolis, Dallas, and Atlanta, respectivelyMs. Lovett and Messrs. McNees and Meyer, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Boston, andPhiladelphia, respectively1. Left meeting after action to approve special reciprocal currencyarrangement with the Bank of Mexico.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofAugust 22, 1989MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Cross?MR. FORRESTAL. Sam, are we under any particular pressurefrom the Japanese or the Germans to do anything in terms of monetarypolicy to relieve pressure on the dollar?MR. CROSS. No, if you're speaking of--MR. FORRESTAL. Well, it's just a general question. Iwondered if they were agitating and--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I haven't heard anything from them. Infact, there has been a remarkable quiescence and lack of the usualdiscussions. Things are as quiet as I've seen them in a long time.Jerry, have you sensed anything?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No.MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you.MR. JOHNSON. All of Europe is on vacation.MR. FORRESTAL. Like Washington.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Sam, I'd like to get your personal viewconcerning two scenarios in regard to the exchange value of thedollar. Over the next six months, if U.S. interest rates remainlargely where they are now, what would happen? Alternatively, whatwould happen if we had a somewhat substantial decline of, say, 100basis points over the next six months?MR. CROSS. Well, of course, the exchange market isinfluenced by a vast number of factors in addition to interest rates.But I would not differ from the statements in the Bluebook and allthat has been presented, which suggest that higher interest rateswould tend to add to the pressure on the dollar. But there are many,many other factors involved. It depends, of course, on all of thethings going on in other countries. During the last several months,we've seen some fairly substantial changes in the interest ratedifferentials between the United States and some of the other majorcountries. And that has not taken away the structure--MR. ANGELL. I don't quite understand your answer incomparison with what your report said. Your report seemed to indicatethat during July and August there seemed to be quite a difference inperception about what direction U.S. interest rates might go. Now,you don't think that would be very significant in the next six monthsif there was--?MR. CROSS. That was certainly a factor during this period,and the pressures on the dollar did change at about the time when8/22/89there seemed to be a change in the market's perception of U.S.monetary policy. But I think what I said was that there are many,many other factors involved that are also going to affect thepressures. I don't think it is simply a matter of the interest rates.MR. ANGELL. No, I don't know of anyone who thinks it'ssimply the interest rates.MR. CROSS. All I'm saying is that over the past severalmonths we have seen the narrowing of the interest differentials--ithas been a couple hundred basis points--and there has continued to bepressure on the dollar despite that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think a lot would depend upon whythe market thought interest rates were going down. Just to take twocontrasting possibilities: If the market really thought that theunderlying rate of inflation was coming down, and interest rates werecoming down in response to that, that would be one thing. On theother hand, if the market felt the economy was ready to fall out ofbed and interest rates were coming down because of that, I think you'dget quite a different [slide]. It really does depend very much onperceptions as to why.MR. ANGELL. I was more interested in the constant interestrate scenario than I was in the falling interest rate scenario. Thankyou.MR. CROSS. Well, at the present time, the market is[unintelligible] and continues to be reasonably bullish on the dollar;[investors] see the dollar as a good place to be. They compare thedollar with some of the [alternatives] and, as I say, there's relativestability here politically and economically as compared with Japan andelsewhere. Throughout most of this year there has been a tendency for[investors] looking very long term to see the dollar as a good placeto be. And there has been some reassessment and shifting ofportfolios with a tendency to have a greater share in dollarinvestments and less concern about hedging against it. So, in thatsense I think the market has been pretty bullish on the dollar andcontinues to be.MR. ANGELL. Okay, that's the response that I was lookingfor. In other words, you think that if the perception in themarketplace were that we would have no further interest rate declines,that would tend to be somewhat bullish for the dollar.MR. CROSS. Well, that's not quite what I was saying. Giveneverything that's going on--and not just interest rates--I think thereis a firmness and a strong support for the dollar.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mr. Cross? Ifnot, can I have a motion to ratify the transactions of the Desk sincethe July meeting?SPEAKER(?). So move.MR. JOHNSON. Second.8/22/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. I sent out amemorandum--basically a poll with questions on system foreign currencyoperations--in response to a discussion, as you may recall, at theprevious meeting. I would be most interested in any reaction thatanyone had to that. Is there any sentiment to change, alter, rethink,or the like?MR. HOSKINS. Well, I think it was an appropriate request forinformation. It certainly helped me to understand the history of thisdevelopment in terms of the swaps and the Exchange Stabilization Fundand our activity over the last--well, I don't know how far back we go.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think periodically we reallyought to review the whole system, largely because our information basecontinues to change our views about how we affect markets and what theimplications are. A general review and updating, I think, is probablydesirable just to make certain there are no structural changes thathave occurred and, accordingly, altered how we should view the wholeprocess. Well, if there are no further questions on it, we'll justgo--MR. MONHOLLON. Mr. Chairman, would it be helpful to includein the outline a review of the academic literature on this subject?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Probably not.SPEAKER(?). Give us two years.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, Jerry answered your questionliterally. Having trudged through most of that, the word helpfuldoesn't immediately strike me as [germane]. We will, however, make abibliography so that one can go back and see the particular efforts inthis whole area over the last decade or so; it's quite extraordinary.If there are no further questions, we'll just proceed further on thatand keep you informed of the progress. The next issue on the agendais the question of the Mexican swap drawing.MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, we circulated a memo, which I hopewas self explanatory, relating to the provision of a certain amount ofbridge financing to Mexico in connection with the Mexican agreement inprinciple with commercial banks on July 23. It's a total amount of $2billion: a billion dollar's worth would be a multilateral facility ofwhich the U.S. share would be $250 million split equally between theFederal Reserve and the Treasury; the second billion dollar facilitywould essentially draw upon existing swap lines--our $700 million swapline and the Treasury's $300 million line for the full $1 billion--The otherhalf of it would draw, after the multilateral facility, ondisbursements from the Fund and the World Bank. As outlined in thememo, there is a small anticipated shortfall--on the order of $86million--of the full $1-1/2 billion that would be paid out of Mexico'sreserves; or, if they somehow couldn't draw any other monies after the15th of February, we could [if necessary] obtain repayment fromproceeds of sales of oil as we have done in the past. The proposalhere is to approve a special swap arrangement for the $125 million--aone-time only arrangement that would be drawn on once and then onrepayment would expire. The proposal is also to delegate formal8/22/89approval of that to the Chairman, and also to delegate to the Chairmanthe approval of the drawings once they [are requested]. The reasonfor the lag is that there is a desire to have a certain linkage--Ithink that was the phrase you used, President Corrigan--between thisfacility as a whole and the consummation of the term sheet between theMexicans and the bank advisory committee. So, it is conceivable thatthat never will happen, in which case we wouldn't want to have this onthe record, so to speak. That's why we have suggested this procedurein the first place; normally, when we activate these things, Normwould send out a telegram asking for the Committee's concurrence. Wethought it would be just as easy to get your concurrence in advance,assuming none of the terms changed.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Mr. Truman or Mr.Cross on this issue?MR. GUFFEY. Ted, I guess I don't understand your statementthat you prefer not to have it spelled out in the record. I assumethis would take a Committee vote?MR. TRUMAN. Yes.MR. GUFFEY. And, therefore, it will be indeed on the record;and it will reveal not only the authorization for the full $700million [swap drawing] but also this special--MR. TRUMAN. Well, [that would occur] when it was activated.Our intention would be for the Committee to act to delegate thisdecision to the Chairman. And when he acts and implements thedecision, then it would go on the record. But if this whole thingfell apart in the meantime, between now and your next Committeemeeting, it would not [go on the record].MR. GUFFEY. You ask for a vote now and it's not submittedfor the record unless it's activated?MR. TRUMAN. That's right. I've been told by the authoritiesthat that's a reasonable procedure to follow.MR. GUFFEY. The authorities?MR. TRUMAN. Legal--that is, the General Counsel.MR. CROSS. Legal.MR. ANGELL. Well, that offends my sensibilities.MR. HOSKINS. I don't understand why we need to make thechange in procedure now when we--MR. TRUMAN. We have done this before. We used this sameprocedure for the same reason in 1982 when we made an arrangement withMexico; we weren't sure that the conditions would be such as to needthis arrangement. If you want to do it the other way, you can approvethe swap line [increase] and then explain in the policy record thatbecause the conditions never were met we never [implemented it]. Idon't have a strong [view on a] way of doing it. We had done it theother way in the past, and that's why we proposed this arrangement.8/22/89MR. GUFFEY. Okay.MR. GREENSPAN. I think there's a certain advantage to doingit the way Ted is suggesting. Even if we put the vote on the record,in a sense, we are not effectively implementing the swap from ourpoint of view; and then if it falls apart, we're sort of hanging outthere with--to use your analogy--half a bridge. I think authorizingit and then delegating final approval to the Chairman leaves us in aposition where, should the term sheet fail or something like that,then it is never implemented and there is no final action by thisCommittee. And we don't sit there in a sense having said yes, and afinal yes in effect, and then having the thing unravel. It's really acosmetic request.MR. ANGELL. Well, Mr. Chairman would it not be possible tohave a telephone conference call and do it that way? Then it would beon the record. It just seems to me--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but I agree with you on this. I'msaying that the vote that we would take this morning would be on therecord.MR. ANGELL. Fine.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But the action would be a two-stageaction: authorization by the Committee and granting to the Chairmanthe ability to say that the Committee's action should be implementedbecause the other party or some third party accomplished a certainaction. My sole authority is merely to make a determination onwhether the Committee's requirements have been met. If they have not,then the issue is moot.MR. ANGELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And there is no further action required.MR. ANGELL. That satisfies me, yes.MR. TRUMAN. That is what we intended. The other parties aredoing essentially the same thing. The BIS, while it has gottenagreement of all the central banks, is not going to tell the New YorkFed that it is in agreement to its part until everything is ready togo. So we're all on the same procedure.MR. ANGELL. But if we take the vote, the minutes published[after] the next meeting would include the vote, then.MR. TRUMAN. It's up to the Committee what they want to do.If it's never implemented, one might argue that you would not want topublish it. But you do it either way you want.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But there is a question; we did take anaction. The issue of whether it is implemented or not is really asecondary question. The issue is whether we report the nature of this[decision] in detail and [whether] an official vote was taken. Ithink it would be appropriate to record that vote. I agree withGovernor Angell on this issue.8/22/89MR. KEEHN. What are the disadvantages to having it show onthe record?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Si, this is still an important leverin the overall process. We had a meeting--about 10 days ago, Ted?--when most of the ducks were in a row in terms of this deal being done.But there are about 4 or 5 categories of things that have to be lockedup, several of which are very difficult, by August 30th. There willbe another meeting--the "lock-up meeting" either next week or the dayafter Labor Day, I'm not sure which yet. What we have said to bothparties is that the official bridge will be activated and disbursedonly when these other things are done, mainly that all of the detailis agreed to by both parties. I think the issue here is trying tokeep as much pressure [as possible] on the process. And I think Ted'ssuggestion, the Chairman's suggestion, and Governor Angell's are allcompatible with that, in that you authorize it but you don't give theimpression that it's an absolute done deal. You keep the trump cardin the Chairman's pocket. That's the rationale.MR. KEEHN. Well, the fact that it would only be activated ifthose things happened, it seems to me, is consistent with what youwant. Also, these minutes won't come out for six weeks.MR. SYRON. They won't come out until after these discussionsare all through.MR. KEEHN. Long after your--MR. TRUMAN. Well, unless everything falls apart; that's theonly other contingency.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Then we will have looked good not tohave disbursed it, anyway.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions on this swapissue?MR. MELZER. does thatjust largely give them reserves? I guess it gives them the appearanceof more fire power?MR. TRUMAN. That's right. There is another feature here--ifthey get everything done by the first of September they will thenannounce a bigger number for their reserves on the first of September.I think it's also partly the cosmetics of the number. When we lookedatThat's how the structure was negotiated in July.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The implication is that flight capital,or reverse flight capital, might ensue if they show higher reserves.So it's a smoke and mirror scheme.SPEAKER(?). [Unintelligible] hold his breath.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You do these [unintelligible]. If thereare no further questions, would somebody like to move that action?8/22/89SPEAKER(?). Yes, move it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection so ordered. The nextitem on the agenda is--MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, for staff purposes could weclarify that the contingency was established--that this was anauthorization of the special swap but also concurrence [on thedelegation to the Chairman] of the activation? We will let you knowwhen it happens. Otherwise we tend to send out a notice [requestingCommittee action]. One of my housekeeping concerns is that this mighthappen around the Labor Day weekend when people aren't even around.So do we take it that all is encompassed in that action? Is that howpeople interpret it? Or do you want to have another round?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Maybe the safest thing to do would befor you to phrase the motion as you think it would be appropriate, fortechnical purposes, in implementing this policy--just to be sure wehave it correct.MR. TRUMAN. I think the motion was to authorize the specialswap arrangement, with its activation subject to the Chairman'ssatisfaction that the understandings have been met and to concur inthe activation of the two arrangements, again subject to theunderstandings being met. That would be the easiest.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's essentially what's in the motion.SPEAKER(?). It's in the vote.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Unless there is any objection,that will be part of the record. Our next item on the agenda is Mr.Sternlight on Desk operations.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, Mr. Sternlight. Questionsfor Mr. Sternlight?MR. MELZER. Peter, when does this need to drain reservesend? In other words, how soon would you expect that? Generally,funds have been trading a little below 9 percent. When would youexpect them to trade at 9 percent or above? And what have marketparticipants discounted? Normally, they expect the funds rate to besoft when you have that need to drain.MR. STERNLIGHT. That is a contributing factor. Just on thebasis of the reserve outlook, we're very near the end--at least on thelatest projections that I've seen, which were as of yesterday when wewere nearly done with the prospective draining for this period.There's a small draining job of roughly half a billion or so for thenext reserve period, unless things change because of the Mexicandevelopments or foreign exchange developments. Any of those things,and some other factors also, could change our reserve outlook. As forthe market people, there are two camps of thought about the funds8/22/89rate. Some expect to see funds right around 9 percent give or take asmall margin; others would be thinking more of 9 to 9-1/8 percent. Idon't think there's that much expectation imminently of the Fedwanting to see the funds rate pushed down noticeably further to 8-3/4percent or something like that. Some see that as something that couldcome further down the road, but not in the very immediate future. ButI must say I have a little question in my mind currently, and we'vehad this question right along, about gauging the proper relationshipof borrowings and funds rates now. It's hard to make a strong case onthese things, in any event. But I have a slight doubt at the momentas to whether, with $550 million of borrowing, we really should beexpecting funds to be 9 percent or a shade above or more right around9 percent or maybe even a hair under. A lot depends on just whathappens with seasonal borrowing, which has stayed pretty high; it hascome off a little but is still pretty darn high.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions?MR. HOSKINS. I just have one, Peter, on the size of theTreasury balances. Does [implementing] that drain when it comes causeambiguity about the size of our easing move in the marketplace? Haveyou had any discussions with Treasury about perhaps their changing thevariability of their debt issues as opposed to their balances at theFed? Or is that not really a problem for you?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think it has been a particularproblem. They had high balances at the end of June; they were more orless forced to have the high balances because there are big seasonaltax receipts. And they had more than used up the capacity of thebanks to hold these note balances; that capacity is around $31 or $32billion, as I recall. And those balances did come off in July. Theyhave been holding pretty well around their normal Fed balance of $5billion as a working balance recently.MR. HOSKINS. That's not really a problem?MR. STERNLIGHT. It has not really been a great problem.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think Lee is raising a question,as I assume, that they have the capability of--MR. HOSKINS. Issuing debt.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. --funding directly out of their cashaccounts or borrowing new money. The issue, I gather, is should theybe more variable in borrowing new money to smooth out both the tax andloan account and their balances with us? I think the answer to that,as far as monetary policy is concerned, is that I assume it's easierfor us to adjust than for the Treasury.MR. HOSKINS. I think that's what's--.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MR. JOHNSON. But [unintelligible], I think, is the issue.MR. HOSKINS. That's what [Peter] implied.8/22/89MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we have sometimes had discussions withthem about whether it would be useful for them to make greater use ofcash management bills that could get them by some of these post-taxdate bulges in cash and the like. They traditionally have beenreluctant to make much greater use of cash management bills, feelingthat that was a relatively costly way to fund the debt. But, that'skind of an ongoing debate that we have with them.MR. KOHN. I think there are one or two other points,President Hoskins. One is that I don't think the need to drain[reserves] has really hindered Mr. Sternlight's ability to let theeasing show through over June and July. In fact, it may even help alittle in the sense that it lets the reserves sit out there a littlelonger and tends to put downward pressure on the funds rate by waitingto take it out. In some sense it's helpful. The other point is that,to a large extent, our need to drain--although it has been revealed bythe decline in the Treasury balance--resulted importantly from thewarehousing of the ESF funds and also our own intervention. Thissterilization, really, of that part of our balance sheet gave rise toa lot of this need to drain.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, that's certainly true.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Also, the degree of instability thatoccurs is largely our inability [unintelligible] matter of using cashmanagement bills or allowing the balances to move. Everything isexact, but we can't--. I guess you could argue, though, that the morevariables they have to play with the more likely that the forecastsare--MR. HOSKINS. Offsetting errors?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but sometimes they aren't.MR. JOHNSON. Compounding.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Peter? Ifnot, would somebody move to ratify the transactions of the domesticDesk since the July meeting?MR. KELLEY. So move.MR.JOHNSON. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We now move to thegeneral economic evaluation. Messrs. Prell and Truman.MR. PRELL. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for either gentleman?MR. SYRON. Mike, I have a question about a prospective pieceof data. The claims data have looked very good so far. My questionhas to do with the Nynex strike. I happened to talk to the fellow whoruns the Nynex in New England and there's an issue about some people--I guess in New York State--who after seven weeks on strike are8/22/89eligible to file claims. In some other states they may not beeligible to file claims but they may be filing the claims anywaybecause the company has to send someone into the employment office todispute the claim or else it ends up counting against the company'sexperience rating. I'm wondering if that perhaps could have someeffect on the claims data that we are going to be seeing over the nextperiod--whether the markets know that and how they are likely to[react].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You mean if claims were to go up?MR. SYRON. Yes. Claims could go up artificially becausethey would be--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That would almost surely be reported inthe BLS weekly release. They do discuss technical reasons as to whyclaims move as they did. Should that be the case, they almost surelywould put it in the press release. And it would probably be in our[unintelligible] and aggregate amount. It certainly would make itclear that--MR. PRELL. I must admit you know more about this from yourconversations than I do. Larry [Slifman], have you--?MR. SLIFMAN. What the Chairman said is correct. There isthe issue of whether or not the claim is accepted; then it shows up inthe ongoing benefits. But the BLS in most instances knows who'sfiling the claim, so they can sort of monitor these things since it'san administrative count. And they normally will note it, as theChairman has said.MR. PRELL. I think the more important question is whateffect this will have on the employment and hours numbers for August.I suspect there will be considerable [doubt] when we see, on net, avery low employment growth number. But we've also assumed that thereisn't a lot of lost output with this [strike]. There will be a fewphones that won't have been installed and so on, but the calls aregenerally going through. So this looks like something that won't havea large GNP effect.SPEAKER(?). On the payroll numbers themselves, we estimatethat during that survey week of the 6th to the 12th of August about150,000 telecommunications workers were on strike.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Ted, a question about net exports: In Part II ofthe Greenbook there was an interesting discussion of the revision inthe export numbers that was done for '86, '87, and '88. Analytically,how do you treat that when you're using a model or you're doing youranalytic work since they haven't done a benchmark and you don't knowwhat happened before that?MR. TRUMAN. Well, first the answer is the add factors; wehave reestimated our equations in any case. You are right that thereis a problem because it creates a gap between '85 and '86 and you havea discontinuity here. In answer to your question about what we would8/22/89do, we either would try to smooth it or [unintelligible] back.Normally, they take these things back.MR. PARRY. I know.MR. TRUMAN. For some reason they didn't do it this timebecause they ran out of resources.MR. PARRY. So you have a whole year, too.MR. TRUMAN. Yes.MR. PARRY. Is there a similar problem in inventories becausethere were big changes there?MR. TRUMAN. I don't know about inventories. It may havebeen [just] this particular area; what they did essentially was addnew information that they collected on these exports and imports ofvarious services that they didn't have [information on] before. Theymay have felt that they couldn't quite figure out how they wanted tofeather it into the past. So, it's more than a correction of pastnumbers; it was [brand new] information.MR. PARRY. Could it add a little uncertainty to theforecast?MR. TRUMAN. Yes, we put them right in. We've discussed thathere with the Board and to some extent that's good news. It is goodnews in the sense that the base on which we forecast our exports isthat much higher and one might even argue that some of these services,which are education and medical services and travel, are ones thathave rather high income elasticities. Therefore, the overallelasticities might be a little boosted by this.MR. PARRY. They were moved out of consumption right intoexports. It wasn't something that had been missed?MR. TRUMAN. It was moved out.MR. PARRY. And formerly it was in domestic consumption?MR. TRUMAN. That's right, I guess. Yes, to some extent,that's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible] transportation servicesfrom domestic to foreign--MR. SYRON. It's a reallocation.MR. PARRY. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mike, [some] of the numbers that have beenreported going back to the second quarter may be revised up, and thereis some speculation that growth in the second quarter might have beenas much as a full percentage point faster than you show in theGreenbook. How do you construct your forecast? Do you simply take it-11-8/22/89out of the third quarter or do you project the third and fourthquarters from that higher base, if indeed it is revised?MR. PRELL. We do think there will be an upward revision. Asbest as we can do the arithmetic--making guesses where we need toabout how BEA may interpret some of the data--we think an upwardrevision of about a point is in store. Basically, our forecast is a[net] change forecast and thus isn't affected by this. That meansthat the levels of some of these variables--if we were to redo theforecast with the revised second-quarter numbers--would lookdifferent. But in terms of the GNP growth path, it wouldn't be afactor.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I gather that's not true forinventories.MR. PRELL. It is true for inventories as well. Ifinventories were revised up, inventory investment throughout theforecast, all other things equal, would be revised up. That means itpotentially affects inventory/sales ratios.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's what I'm getting at. In otherwords, to the extent that you view the level of inventory/sales ratiosas a relevant consideration of inventory investment then, unlikecapital investment, the [net] change is not fully appropriate in thiscontext.MR. PRELL. To the extent, though, that we digest theincoming information and are aware of whatever surprises there are forBEA in the latest inventory data, for example, that conditions ourthinking about whether inventory levels are too high or too low.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me give you a very specificexample: BEA comes in with a major tripling of inventory change in thesecond quarter. Can you tell me that that does not affect the third-and fourth-quarter inventory changes?MR. SLIFMAN. Clearly, if that were the case, under thosecircumstances we would have to do something that was a combination ofa [net] change for all other items and then worry about the level ofinventory investment. It turns out, however, that in this instancethat's not really the case.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is not the case; I understand that.MR. SLIFMAN. So it's not a problem this time.MR. PRELL. This is an issue that we've debated many times.In fact, recently, we have been debating whether we ought toanticipate changes in BEA's numbers and put down our guess instead ofthe last BEA number. But there's a long tradition; this problem hasbeen going on for decades here and we have been discussing how oneought to approach this issue.MR. JOHNSON. At least two.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No one has the guts to do it and theprivate sectors don't. President Stern.-12-8/22/89MR. STERN. Mike, you made a passing reference to fiscalpolicy. What difference, if any, would it make to the forecast if youhad CBO's spending number rather than yours? It's about a $36 billiondifference but--MR. PRELL. Well, a lot of those differences come from policyassumptions. We think it is unlikely that this agreement is going tofall apart entirely; but if it did, then presumably we'd have somewhatstronger aggregate demand over the next year in this forecast and lessrestraint coming from the fiscal side. Relative to GNP, I don't thinkthat we're talking necessarily about numbers that are night and daydifferences; but they are potentially of some significance. Let mejust add one thing. One of the reasons CBO is higher reflects theirassumption that the thrift resolution expenditures in this fiscal yearwill be lower than the $20 billion that we've built in. That'slargely a paper shuffling transaction, as we've interpreted it, sothat would be of no effect in--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is raising an interesting legalquestion. We are uncertain as to whether we have to spend that moneyunder the statute. They have made a judgment that we won't, and it'snot clear that it's that simple. We may find out that we're forced tomake that expenditure in the RTC.MR. PRELL. Their report suggests that they are aware of somequestion here, but they've interpreted this as something that can becarried over and will show up as a budget outlay next year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That has not been clearly evaluated hasit? It's a very interesting problem.MR. JOHNSON. Following up on that: Do we know how much ofthat authorization has been borrowed already?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think it's very hard to categorize.Clearly, the Treasury did step up their borrowing when it finallyemerged how the compromise was going to come out. They tacked on atthe last minute some $5 billion to a cash management [bill]. It wasrather explicitly tied to the need for the $20 billion of budgetexpenditure in this fiscal year. And they have rather promptly addedto the regular weekly bills. They might have had to add, anyway. Butmy impression is that they added somewhat more to that and also to the2- and 5-year issues that are being sold this week. I think it'splanned, though, that some of that $20 billion, if not all, will bespent; my impression is that they're aiming to spend it. That wouldbe coming out on September 30 and would lower cash balances by some $6or $7 billion--maybe more than that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Actually, we've only spent somethinglike $1-1/2 billion so far.MR. PRELL. You have your work cut out for you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, we're behind the curve.MR. JOHNSON. I think borrowings may be $5 or $6 billion. Isthat where it---13-8/22/89MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it's not tied dollar for dollar.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I understand, but I mean relative to whatyou had expected.MR. STERNLIGHT. The way we're looking at it, from theTreasury financing standpoint, I'd say they already have come into themarket for $6 or $8 billion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Then how much [unintelligible] have theygot to run down the cash balance after September 30th?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't know.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I guess the question really is: What'sthe normalized expected Treasury cash balance from the period throughSeptember and is there much leeway to run it much below?MR. PRELL. We have in our forecast a $32 billion end-of-the-quarter cash balance, so there's [room].MR. STERNLIGHT. My impression is that they were going to aimfor $20 billion instead of $30 billion, or something like that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor, are you finished?MR. JOHNSON. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. There were some changes, I think, in theestimates of productivity. Has that led to any different views aboutwhat [potential] growth in the economy might be?MR. PRELL. As all of these revised data washed through, therevisions really didn't have much effect on our assessment of trendproductivity growth. Our guess about the trend growth in realpotential GNP is still close to 2-1/2 percent, maybe 2.6 percent atthis point.MR. MELZER. I just wanted to ask about durable goods orders.Did they come out this morning?MR. PRELL. Yes, they came out; I must say that based on thedata we have it's a little hard to interpret these things. Theoverall durable goods orders were down almost 2 percent. Nondefensecapital goods orders were up 5 percent and June was revised up to 5percent from about unchanged. But there are--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ex-aircraft there's a significantdecline.MR. PRELL. Ex-aircraft it is down 10 percent. But lastmonth was revised up to 6.6 percent. The big swing factors in thelast couple of months seem to have been a category called ordinance,ship building, and tanks, which is part of nondefense---14-8/22/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Part of [unintelligible] called domesticdefense.MR. PRELL. So these numbers are pretty murky at this point.It looks like there's a touch of weakness in orders for computers, andthat doesn't come as a great surprise in light of the anecdotalevidence about what's going on in that industry. On the whole,though, at this point I'd only venture the guess that this reportdoesn't suggest a very big departure from what we have been trackinghere. Overall, unfilled orders for nondefense capital goods continueto rise substantially month-by-month, really.MR. GUFFEY. Do we have any indication of why these numbershave been revised so dramatically over the last two or three months?Is there something going on?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The usual.MR. JOHNSON. Difficulties and errors.MR. GUFFEY. Well, they are of larger magnitude. Are theyorders?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it's [mostly] revisions from theones on the military contracts, which are--MR. PRELL. The release indicates that the average revisionfor new orders is about 2 percentage points, so this constitutes apretty healthy revision. But this is a series that's very volatile,and on top of that you get these--MR. HOSKINS. How do the markets interpret it?MR. KOHN. The bond market went down on balance by a verysmall amount, about [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The bond market went up on the initialrelease of the July numbers; then when they got the revision it wentdown.MR. PRELL. The market is going to be handicapped ininterpreting this because some of the crucial detail isn't going to beavailable until the final release of manufacturers' orders andshipments next week.MR. JOHNSON. I'd wait 'til the end of the day.MR. PRELL. It's really difficult to sort through thesenumbers.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The question of the inflation forecastdepends crucially on the [unintelligible] of the average compensationper hour forecast; when all is said and done, everything else prettymuch washes out. How comfortable do you feel with the relationshipbetween labor market tightness and the wage forecast? In other words,it's clear that it has been slipping, but how would one characterizeit? Is it significant or is the relationship still there but muted?How comfortable do you feel with the [mutual] relationship between-15-8/22/89labor market tightness on the one hand and the wage forecast in theGreenbook on the other?MR. PRELL. We don't perceive this as a simple relationship.Obviously, there is interaction here, and there are price surprisesthat could affect the inflation expectations that could in turn affectcompensation. And then this all cycles around. Basically, it dependson what model you look at as to whether there has been a very bigsurprise in the behavior of wages. If you refit your models throughthe recent experience and you capture all the data revisions that haveoccurred along the way and you select your price expectationsvariables correctly, you can pretty well capture what has been goingon in compensation inflation over the past couple of years--notquarter-by-quarter, but the general drift.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me put the question slightlydifferently. Did you say before that you are a percentage point lowerthan you were two Greenbooks ago?MR. PRELL. Percentage point lower?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In the compensation [forecast]. Did Ihear you say that?MR. PRELL. No. In fact, there hasn't been much change inour compensation forecast since last fall. We have been projectingpretty much the same compensation increase this year as we have allalong.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, is the structural equationsignificantly changed? Or, in a sense, are you saying that with allthe recent data we can now explain comfortably what has been happeningin the last couple of years in the employment forecast?MR. PRELL. My feeling is that it depends on which data youlook at. There's the compensation per hour series, which has beenshowing about 5-1/2 percent increases over the past year. There isthe employment cost index, which has been showing 4-1/2 percent or alittle above that. That number looks rather low against the kind ofconsumer price inflation we've been having in an environment where wethink the unemployment rate is essentially in line with the naturalrate--fairly tight labor markets. Judgmentally, we would haveexpected to see that 12-month change in the ECI creeping up over thepast year, and that hasn't occurred. On the other hand, I think thebasic tenet of this forecast is that there was an acceleration here.We have not turned down, in terms of this trend; the labor market isremaining tight. It is very difficult, barring some significant priceshock, to see why we would go lower on wage inflation. In light ofthe large increase in consumer prices over the past year, inparticular over the past half year, we think there is going to be somepressure--self-inflicted or not--on employers to boost their wageincreases a bit to keep their employees whole. And we think we'regoing to see some slight further upward movement in compensation perhour over the next couple of quarters. Then next year we have the hitfrom the legislative increases, which accounts for almost all of thefurther increase in 1990. So I'd say we are comfortable that we haveassessed the risks properly and that it's most likely that we're goingto see some edging up rather than stability or a downward movement.-16-8/22/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do we have any further evidence as towhy the ECI, which has theoretically the same establishment coveragethat creates the compensation per hour, [differs]? It can't be a mixfactor, solely.MR. PRELL. Well, but there could be a mix factor here.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That large?MR. PRELL. I don't think we can fully explain this; we'renot entirely comfortable with this.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Feel like making a judgment?MR. PRELL. There are possibilities. One is, since thecompensation per hour series doesn't collect the same kind of directinformation on benefits, that it's missing something in that area. Wehave seen significant revisions in the past as, with a considerablelag, they incorporate that information. But it is a source of somediscomfort. Looking at the ECI, I suppose we might feel that there issome upside risk because of the low level of that increase over thepast year or so against the kind of consumer price inflation we havehad.MR. PARRY. Pursuing this a little further: you made thestatement that the underlying rate of inflation really doesn't showany progress between now and the end of 1990. I know for the nextmeeting you will come out with [a forecast for] 1991. Have you takenany preliminary looks? Based upon the assumptions that you use, isthere any improvement in the underlying inflation that occurs later?MR. PRELL. Well, I must confess that in all likelihood therewill be some decline in the inflation rate in 1991 in our forecast bydesign.MR. PARRY. By design?MR. PRELL. Because we are assuming--MR. PARRY. That's the objective.MR. PRELL. --that it is an objective of the Committee tomake some progress in that direction, while avoiding recession. Thequestion is what kind of economic environment it will take. If weassume that the dollar continues to appreciate, that argues all themore for our assuming that growth in 1991 will have to remain on thesoft side. That will be the kind of forecast we most likely will bepresenting; and that's in line with what we presented in our previoussimulation, for example, in the Chart Show.MR. PARRY. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I just have one question about profits. As I'veread some of these profit reports the last couple of weeks, basically,it just seems to me that for the second quarter of the year there area number of very soft stories that came out. Now, maybe they weren't-17-8/22/89any softer than we expected; I don't know. But I just wondered if infact there is a significant deterioration showing up, particularly inthe high-tech area. That was the one that surprised me the most. AndI wonder if the aggregate numbers forecasted here are sufficientlyweak to reflect that.MR. PRELL. We have a very pronounced drop in the profitsshare in our forecast. We think it is ongoing at this point; and bythe end of 1990 in this forecast, the profit share is historically ata very low level. That's one of the factors in our thinking about theinvestment outlook. Overall cash flow will be constrained; thecurrent profitability of businesses won't look so great. So we thinkthere is going to tend to be some drag on investments going outthrough 1990. It's very hard to get a handle on what is happening inthe aggregate from the stories about these [unintelligible] onunadjusted earnings and so on. But we think it is weak at this point.MS. SEGER. I know you don't like me to look at quarterlynumbers, but I'm going to do it anyway. It seems to me on a couple ofthese quarters looking ahead that you actually show a slight increasein profits--for example, in the fourth quarter of this year. I don'tmean as a share of GNP; I'm just looking at the corporate profits withIBA and CCA adjustment.MR. PRELL. I'd rather not look at the quarter-by-quarternumbers that closely.MS. SEGER. Yes, I knew that.MR. PRELL. As I look at it, the fourth-quarter number is upless than $1 billion.MS. SEGER. Right.MR. PRELL. Right off the top of my head I'm hard pressed toidentify all of the factors here that explain that. But I think thatis too fine a reading of these numbers.MS. SEGER. In the third quarter of next year, also, you havethe decline stopping and a bit of a rebound--or more of a rebound thanin the fourth quarter of this year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's right; the fourth quarter is upbecause unit labor costs are down.MR. PRELL. Yes. Gyrations from quarter-to-quarter in therate of output growth in productivity feeding through here can lead tosome bounces. But I think the real story here is that we areprojecting a rather weak profits picture. It may be that privateanalysts have come around more to this view than previously. We feltwe were much more pessimistic than most private forecasterspreviously. I think there is a greater sense now that, in terms ofeconomic profits, there's something going on from the effects of the1986 tax law on depreciation allowances--that operating economicprofits are going to be relatively weak as one looks ahead.-18-8/22/89MS. SEGER. Don't you think, though, that this profits storyis tied into the inflation numbers? Many of these higher costs--whether they're wage costs or something else--because of thecompetitive environment are having to be eaten by the organization.And where it's coming from is out of profits.MR. PRELL. Indeed.MS. SEGER. In addition to just the cycle [phase].MR. PRELL. [Unintelligible].MS. SEGER. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Just a couple of things: First, you mentionedthat you thought demand was going to be rather buoyant, and I'm havinga little trouble with that. I see it picks up somewhat in the secondhalf of the year and I think some of that is auto related--certainly,the third quarter is. Then you have it coming off in durables in thefourth quarter, but nondurables are much stronger relative to thepast. What's causing that nondurable consumption [growth]? It hasbeen trending down and all of a sudden it leaps up in the second half.MR. PRELL. In the very near term I think it is much affectedby the revised retail sales data, which puts it on a distinctlydifferent path than we were on earlier.MR. JOHNSON. But that's a level adjustment. You weretalking earlier about unchanged growth rates, and I'm wondering whythat would affect the growth rate.MR. PRELL. It affects the growth rate of consumption in thethird quarter because of the level [unintelligible] path and so on.MR. JOHNSON. Okay, I see it.MR. PRELL. We're at a much higher level and relative--MR. JOHNSON. It's jumping all over the place.MR. PRELL. In a sense. But beyond that, a month ago when wewere looking at this before the GNP revision we were looking at a verysteep drop in nondurables in the second quarter. I think I suggestedat the time that that looked really peculiar and that we wouldn't besurprised to see a revision. When the GNP numbers came out theyeliminated some of that decline; I think it went from minus 6 fornondurables to minus 4. Now, those numbers are going to go up stillfurther. There is still going to be a pattern of about three quarterswhere we're running at rather weak nondurables expenditures. Historysuggests, statistically, that this sometimes occurs in the gasolinearea when we've had a big run-up in gasoline prices and then you get areversal as gasoline prices fall. It may be merely a statisticalmeasurement problem. Be that as it may, the trend there just looks tobe weaker than one would anticipate over time; so in the second halfwe do have, in effect, a bit of a catch up. But looking at next yearwe only have a 1-1/2 percent nondurables increase; this year as a-19-8/22/89whole we only have something in that vicinity, after the revisions forthe second quarter. So, the outlook is for a very modest growth ofnondurables.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, thanks.MR. SYRON. I thought some of the decline in nondurables wasaccounted for by food.MR. PRELL. [Unintelligible] be at something in excess of 3percent. So this is a fairly buoyant, as we characterized it, demandpicture. And it's only in small part an automobile story because,while we get a burst from the third quarter, in the fourth quarterwe're expecting a pay-back. So on net over that span it isn't an autostory. In fact, in the GNP forecast the automobile assemblies aretaking a fraction off of GNP growth in the third and fourth quarters.MR. JOHNSON. Now, let me ask: What is the difference betweengross domestic purchases and just the private domestic finalpurchases? Is that taking out imports?MR. PRELL. You take out the government. Then, with theprivate domestic final purchases you're getting down to justconsumption, residential investment, and business fixed investment.MR. JOHNSON. Okay. Another question I had was on yourmention of housing starts and some potential pickup. There have beensome really marginal upticks in [starts], but permits have continuedto trend down. Even with the Board staff's adjustment, they're stillsomewhat below starts. I just wondered, with permits continuing onthat trend, whether starts would show a turnaround. I know they areboth sort of contemporaneous indicators but I would think that startswould adjust to permits, not vice versa.MR. PRELL. Well, for the single-family sector, the timedifferential between the permit and the start is very short.Statistically you cannot find any lead-lag relationship in that data.I think our permits tend to be less volatile from month-to-month.MR. JOHNSON. That's what I meant to say, statistics.MR. PRELL. Statistically, [permits] in level terms [don'ttend] to be all that far different from the starts story.MR. JOHNSON. No, except that they haven't shown anyturnaround.MR. PRELL. Indeed. But I think if you look at the new homeand existing home sales in June, the housing starts for the lastcouple of months, the single-family number in July, and the anecdotalevidence in the press and elsewhere regarding builders' attitudes andconsumer attitudes, all of these things point to some upturn. And wehave a modest upturn in residential construction beginning in thisquarter and continuing into the fourth quarter.MR. JOHNSON. Well, that's sort of what I wanted to follow upon, Mike. I can understand what you're saying, looking at the permittrends and realizing that you've got a turnaround in starts and-20-8/22/89housing investment, but in the broader picture on total investment--even when you take into account some of the revisions on orders--theorders data are very weak. And when you look at the fact that long-term interest rates have been down for quite some time now and havebeen trending down over a fairly long period--I guess they peaked outlast August, about a year ago--MR. KOHN. There wasn't much change until this March.MR. PRELL. There wasn't much change, and they may not havedeclined much in real terms if you think there was some diminution inlong-run inflation expectations.MR. JOHNSON. Right. But there certainly has been noexpectation of long rates rising more than expected. They had beentrending down gradually, and then more recently declined more, Iguess. Yet there is no sign of a pickup in orders or anything thatlooks like that's having [an effect], forward looking, on investmentdemand.MR. PRELL. Well, I think I differ on that. One, on thestructure side, we really have discounted this. If you just wanted tolook at the data literally, there has been a considerable upturn inconstruction contracts in the last several months. We think that'sjust a sporadic movement that is not likely to be sustained, butactually it has strengthened. On the orders side it depends on howyou want to look at the zigs and zags from month-to-month. You canlook at the zigs and zags for the past half year or so and say that--MR. JOHNSON. The level is about the same.MR. PRELL. --for computers it's no better than flat, andmaybe has edged off some. But remember, that nominal dollars there--given the price declines--translate into a sizable real increase inexpenditures. So one needs to keep that in mind. If you look outsideof computers at the non-aircraft, non-computer component, either wehave had a persistently strong uptrend or, looking at the zigs andzags in the least optimistic view, one would say it has been ratherflat. Somewhere in between is where we come out in interpreting this,particularly in light of the backlogs in that area. So we think thereis some further growth ahead.MR. JOHNSON. Regardless of the zigs and zags, if you justlook at the current level--even taking today's numbers into account--Iremember that the level looked about the same as it was 8 months ago.There has been some volatility month-to-month, but the fact is thatthe level is roughly unchanged over a half a year.MR. PRELL. I don't want to get into a long debate, but letme refer you to the middle panel of the chart on page 16 of Part II ofthe Greenbook. That is the chart to which I was alluding; that'sother nondefense capital goods and the solid line is orders. Lastfall it looked like things were falling out of bed. That ordersfigure turned down. What we've had in the first half of this year isa tremendous increase in producers durable equipment outlays andpretty strong exports of equipment as well. As you can see, theshipments just continued to rise. In the first half of this year wezig-zagged on a flat path. But one could easily do an optical-21-8/22/89regression here and draw a trend line right through 1987-88 to thecurrent numbers and say the trend is still intact. It's a judgment--MR. JOHNSON. Yes, well--MR. PRELL. As I said, the recent evidence has been rathermixed. The anecdotal evidence--the reports that we are hearing fromsome of the producers of capital goods--doesn't sound all that great.So, I don't want to make the case that this sector is unambiguouslyrobust at this point.MR. JOHNSON. Yes. If you look at it over a long period oftime, I think you can run a regression right through the turningpoints and get a nice upward slope. But the point is that we have toworry about the [turning] points.MR. PRELL. Indeed, but I think the history also tells usthat one needs to be very careful.MR. JOHNSON. True; and I don't disagree with that. Now, Ihave one other question, for Ted. You talked about the widening ofthe current account later on, and that leaves some of the reason forthe dollar depreciation assumptions out. With the revisions, thecurrent account and the trade numbers are dramatically down with thedeficit. I just wondered: Why doesn't that really work in the oppositedirection and support a stronger dollar over the horizon?MR. TRUMAN. Well, presumably, the relatively good tradenumbers and the current account revisions certainly have been factors--I would say largely the factors--that underlie the strength of thedollar we have seen so far this year. It's certainly positive in thatdirection. One might argue that if you want equilibrium, whatever youthought the current account had to get to, the revisions suggest thatyou need less exchange rate change ultimately to get there. I wouldaccept that. But most of the models have this characteristic, andthey may be wrong, that at unchanged exchange rates with approximatelya slightly lower growth here [than] abroad you're going to have awidening of the current account. I think the only issue is how much.The models differ and actually ours is modest, I think, by thestandards of most of them. And we have goosed up, if you want to putit that way, the thing considerably.MR. JOHNSON. All I'm saying is, if you take that seriously,that we would have hoped the models were predicting 110 on the yen ayear ago or so.MR. TRUMAN. I'm quite modest about the nature of theunderlying projection of the dollar, and that's one of the reasons whyin our presentation Mike and I agreed that we should give you somesense of what difference it makes. I certainly don't mean to suggestit's a sure thing that this degree of deterioration is going togenerate that much decline or that adding $15 billion more to it isgoing to mean that the end is near. I can't give you any assurance.We have the feeling that ultimately maybe it's like the budgetdeficit: ultimately a somewhat lower percentage of GNP is going tohave to be imported. What the time pattern of that will be and howmuch of it takes the form of pure exchange rate adjustment and otherfactors as it gets there is up for grabs.-22-8/22/89MR. CROSS. Certainly that number, when it was reported, wasnoted in the exchange market. And at least during that day it wascertainly a supporting factor. They did pay some attention to that.MR. JOHNSON. Yes. But I would say that the perceptionscreated by numbers like that [are one of] the reasons why interestdifferentials have worked one way and the dollar is going the otherway to some extent. It's surprising. I think everybody has beengrasping for reasons why the dollar has continued to hold up this welland even strengthened when interest differentials were working againstit. And I would venture to say that improvements on the currentaccount both in actuality and prospectively may be a major factor inthat; rather than working against the dollar it may be one of thethings supporting it.MR. TRUMAN. Well, the fact of the matter is that we knewthese [revisions] would come. In fact, the Federal Reserve[unintelligible] instigated this with Commerce Department five yearsago to start looking at some of these things. As far as I know therearen't any more in the pipeline. So it's found money and it doeschange the base, as I said earlier; but I don't think there's any realchance that we're going to revise away a $100 billion current accountdeficit.MR. JOHNSON. No, all I'm saying is that you may be at apoint where people say: Hey, this thing is ultimately financeable now.How the financial burden, if we proceed--MR. TRUMAN. If you put these numbers together, it'sfinanceable but the problem is the level of our debt. You're worriedabout the base in all these numbers but it comes to something like 40percent of GNP. That's where the steady state is. And that is a bignumber. It is as big as any major industrial country has had [except]Australia and Canada. And Australia and Canada have the advantage, Ithink, basically that their capital intensive exploitation of--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry, what's 40 percent of GNP?MR. JOHNSON. The current account deficit.MR. TRUMAN. If you play it out, the $100 billion currentaccount deficit as a percent of GNP would, assuming a steady state andmaking all kinds of assumptions about the growth rates and so forthand so on, you get something like 40 percent of GNP.MR. SYRON. The debt or--MR. TRUMAN. Net external debt as a percent of GNP. Now ifyou're worried about the base--and that's a big number--my feeling issomehow that probably we're not going to get there.MR. SYRON. Something can change in the meantime.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the crucial issue was thefinancing of that.MR. TRUMAN. That's right.8/22/89MR. JOHNSON. Yes, that's what I was alluding to.MR. TRUMAN. [Unintelligible.]MR. JOHNSON. However big it is, Ted, it's a lot smaller thanwhat people thought it was earlier, I think.MR. TRUMAN. No, I don't think it's very much smaller.MR. JOHNSON. Well, it's smaller. So what I'm saying is thatthe market people see the financing requirements as less than they didbefore.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In my judgment, if we have externaldebt of 40 percent of GNP we're in real trouble.MR. JOHNSON. Well, if you play that scenario out you come upwith all kinds of [unintelligible]. But I think it matters what it'sbeing used for, what you're doing with it. There are plenty ofcountries that finance that quite easily as long as it's going forsustainable private-sector investment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. $2 trillion and the interest cost ofthat--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's transferred.MR. JOHNSON. But it's all relative to the return on theinvestment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We haven't invested--MR. SYRON. Well, that's the progress plan--from here toAustralia.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for ourcolleagues? If not, who would like to start the Committee discussion?MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The economy in theTwelfth District continues to grow, although at a slower pace thanearlier in the year. Some areas are enjoying robust growth. Forexample, the state of Washington is experiencing a sharp escalation inhousing prices, booming construction, and rapid in-migration. Alaskais recovering at a rate of growth in employment that is twice thatexpected prior to [unintelligible] growth. District retailerscharacterize sales as satisfactory and inventories at desired levels.But other areas of the District are exhibiting weaker growth. Arizonaremains weak, with construction slumping and defense-relatedmanufacturing facing cutbacks. A rather new development is thatgrowth has slowed in California, with declines in manufacturing andconstruction employment noted in the last several months.Turning to the national economy, stronger growth now seems tobe more likely than it did at our last meeting. Lower interest ratesand declines in food and energy prices should produce a pickup inconsumption. Moreover, it appears as though the downside risks toinventory accumulations have lessened because of the recent revisionof national income statistics. We expect the economy to remain above-24-8/22/89its high employment level through 1990. Thus, similar to theGreenbook, we expect some further modest increases in wage inflation.And in the absence of any policy changes, we would expect the momentumof the current inflation rate to persist into next year. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The signs ofdeceleration in the Sixth District that I've been reporting recentlyare now very clearly visible in the economy. Growth seems to be a bitweaker in the District than in the nation as a whole, and this comesafter several years of much stronger than national growth and evenstronger than sustainable growth. However, many business people,including directors that I've spoken to in recent weeks, report thatthis deceleration is in line with their expectations; and most reportthat they don't anticipate further softening. Interestingly, a numberof these people--those on the manufacturing and commercial side--alsoreport that they basically are not changing their business plans,particularly their capital investment plans. We may have a littleexception in the banking community where their view is tempered by thefact that their loan demand has been very soft over the summer, ascontrasted with the rest of the country. The weakness that we areseeing in the District pretty much mirrors what is going on in therest of the country, and that is that the weakness is in retail sales,automobile sales, and home and office construction. Retailers arereporting poor demand for durables such as appliances and electronics;and the demand for furniture, as you might expect, has moderatedsignificantly because of the slowdown in housing activities.Automobile inventories remain far higher than desired across theDistrict. Auto sales in the Southeast have been far stronger than inthe nation for several years. So the slow pace this year--in fact thealmost depressed state of that industry--seems to have taken thedealers by surprise. On the production side in autos, GM and Fordhave announced that they will idle or reduce production at additionalassembly lines in several weeks ahead. The weakness in housingconstruction and autos has spilled over into the transportationindustry where freight volume is down significantly, especially fortrucking, and further declines are anticipated.But even in this weaker climate we do have some sources ofstrength, and that I suppose gives rise to this optimism on the partof people that the deceleration won't go any further. Industrialconstruction remains quite robust and plant expansions are occurringin the chemical and plastics industry where world demand remains quitestrong. Firms that manufacture the equipment used to automateproduction also report strong orders. However, the outlook for farmincome is not very good at all in the District. Heavy rains haveaffected most crops, with the exception of citrus. And aside fromcotton, prices for many crops grown in the region have softened sothat farmers in the Southeast are finding themselves marketing reducedoutput at lower prices. In the energy sector, activity in the oilindustry remains at a low level although natural gas exploration iscontinuing very robust, particularly in the Mobile, Alabama area.Once again, we've paid a lot of attention with our contacts to thewage and price and labor situation. And with very few exceptions theyare reporting very moderate wage increases. The demand for labor isnot particularly [strong] except at entry levels in some businesseslike the fast food market. And prices seem to be moderating at every-25-8/22/89level. So, it's a mixed situation in the District, as I indicated;there is softening but apparently, according to the contacts, we areat the bottom.Our outlook for the national economy is very close to the oneshown in the Greenbook for the rest of the year and also into 1990.However, we show more improvement--although it's slight--in the tradedeficit, in part because the dollar in recent months has not been asstrong against the currencies of the NICs and Canada as it has beenagainst the European and Japanese currencies. We also have raised ourestimates of the unemployment rate a bit higher, although they are alittle lower than in the Greenbook. Our forecast for inflation issomewhat higher than the Greenbook's as well. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, Mr. Chairman, there's really little new toreport on the District economy at this point. It seems to beperforming much like the national economy, as best as I can judge;that is, it's performing reasonably well but it is not uniformlystrong at this point. We have had some reports that things in thelabor market have changed a bit in the sense that it's a little easierto find and retain workers. On the other hand, there are some signsof growing labor militancy, although in general wages or even broadercompensation matters are not the issues; it's really other thingshaving to do with union shops and so forth. I have had a couple ofbusiness people mention to me--I presume tongue in cheek--that theywould like to see the unemployment rate go up.As far as the national economy is concerned, I think thechanges to the Greenbook forecast relative to the view of the lastmeeting are in the right direction, but they are probably too modest.My own view is that we're going to get somewhat more real growth andsomewhat lower inflation than the Greenbook suggested this time. Imust admit I've been struck by what I've been hearing about thecontinued lack of build-up in wage and compensation pressures and bywhat I've been hearing about materials prices. Clearly, a lot ofbusiness people have reported that materials prices have leveled offor have been declining and aren't the problem they were earlier. So,allowing for the possibility, of course, that further data revisionsmay change what is rather a nice picture, it seems to me that thingsare going almost unbelievably well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me in a nationalcontext that the economy, as Gary has just said, is moving along justabout on the track that we might have expected. I think themoderating growth trends are there; there are many industries that arecertainly operating at lower levels than was the case earlier. Someof the interim data may be coming in a little stronger than we mighthave expected, or certainly than we expected the last time we met.That may be particularly true on the personal consumption side. But Ithink, basically, the situation is largely unchanged.In a District context the news is a bit mixed but on balanceshowing signs of moderation. The steel business, for example, hasbeen weaker but there were some seasonal issues there. Last year the-26-8/22/89steel industry and most of the major customers operated throughout thesummer without taking the normal seasonal shutdowns. This year,though, they have been operating with somewhat normal shutdowns and Ithink this is having an effect on the numbers. Looking ahead a bit,the auto industry, as Bob [Forrestal] has suggested, [is planning] avery significant production cutback in the fourth quarter. Thatcertainly is going to have a big impact on their numbers as well asthose of their suppliers. The heavy truck business is much softer nowand some of their main manufacturing suppliers were also schedulinglayoffs. The Chicago purchasing managers' report for July reflected apattern very similar to that in the national report. Alternativelythough, I find that the construction business has been surprisinglystrong, particularly for commercial and public works. There is a lotof activity going on there. Our numbers in that category are strongerthan the national numbers, and I think to a lesser extent the same istrue for residential construction. In the agricultural sector, thenews is certainly much better now than it was earlier in the summer.We've had reasonably good rainfalls pretty much throughout theDistrict. Production is going to be good. Farm land values arecontinuing to go up a little more modestly this year than they weregoing up last year. And in the improved environment, the agriculturalpicture is much better. Products are moving off the dealers' lots ata pretty good rate. I think the price picture is also good. Pricesof some basic materials, which over the last couple of years had shownbig increases, are now down. There are some chemical products--zincand lead--that I think are examples of that; and others are showingsmaller increases. The competitive factors remain pretty intense, sofinished prices are remaining in pretty good check.So at this point, I think the economy is developing very muchin line with our expectations, at least. But I will say our forecasthas been a little [unintelligible] than the Board staff's forecast hasbeen. Some of the data are coming in on the positive side but I thinkthe underlying risks are about the same as they have been. Onmonetary policy some things are working out just about as we'd like tohave them.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, as far as thenational economy goes, I think in many ways it couldn't be muchbetter. But there has been talk about New England and the phrasecomes to mind that "this too shall pass." I hope it doesn't.MS. SEGER. It hasn't yet?MR. SYRON. It has in New England.MS. SEGER. Oh.MR. SYRON. In the First District, I think it's fair to saythat overall economic conditions are quite soft and likely to getsofter. The unemployment rate is up nearly a percentage point, or alittle less, over about 4 months. There have been significantdeclines in employment, particularly in the high-tech and computerindustries and in construction, which is at this point where one mightexpect.-27-8/22/89 -28-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What's the unemployment rate in theDistrict now?MR. SYRON. It's about 4-1/2 percent--still significantlybelow the national average, but that is up 0.8.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I understand.MR. SYRON. There is only one state in the District which[unintelligible] population, which is Massachusetts; its low point wasaround 3 percent and it's now 4-1/2 percent. And that's the onlysignificant jump--a monthly jump of around 0.4 of a percentage point.The thrift industry, largely the savings banks, has very serious assetquality problems which are now spreading to commercial banks.Unfortunately, more than one of our larger super regionals hassubstantially large [non]performing assets and is getting quite badmarks in terms of their asset quality--Bob Boykin is smiling here--which is going to be a problem for us in the future. There is someevidence, particularly in some of the northern states that theproblems that people have had in the real estate market are makinglenders more cautious now than in other markets, which is starting tohave some cumulative effect. This accumulation of bad news, [alongwith] a rather substantial number of layoffs and a very bad fiscalsituation in Massachusetts, has impacted somewhat. I don't know howmuch value one wants to put on these data, but a survey I saw breakingdown consumer confidence by region showed consumer confidence in NewEngland off 22 percent. And that's certainly had an impact on retailsales, which is corroborated by our state sales tax revenues. As onemight expect, this has had a favorable effect on wage demands,particularly at the middle and upper levels. But at the entry levelswe still have the McDonald's thing--a great deal of money.In talking to manufacturers in the District, I find a reallystriking divergence in their views and their experience within andoutside of New England. There are problems in the computer industry,which you referred to earlier, on a nationwide basis. Some of ourfirms are dramatically [unintelligible] industries--which is on thefront page of The Wall Street Journal--and have experienced theproblems much more so. These really are firm-specific, product-cycle,kinds of problems. Even our successful companies, likeare suffering with the nation. But othermanufacturers report that they are doing reasonably well nationallycompared to their really cautious expectations; and they really haveexpected a fairly soft year. None of the ones that we have talked toexpect a recession. They expect a continuation of slow growth, asreferred to earlier. Suppliers of commercial aircraft are doingreasonably well and capital goods producers are arguing that theirorders are holding up quite well. We look at the volume of exportsout of Logan Airport because most of what we produce for export isshipped by air rather than by water, and that has shown a fairlystriking decline in the level of exports. But some of that problem ismixed with this product-cycle thing. I think we realize in NewEngland at the intellectual level--but it's a little more difficult ata visceral level--that this is coming off a high but unsustainablelevel. I may be stretching it a point, but I think there may be alittle lesson from the region; the mechanisms are different from thenational economy as far as what has happened in New England where wewere substantially overheated for some period of time. Unfortunately,8/22/89we haven't had the experience in New England that we are havingnationally, where we seem to be going into a soft landing.It looks to me, as far as the national economy goes, thatit's right about where we want it to be. Looking at the data thathave come in, we don't see the kinds of imbalances that would lead toa recession. As other people mentioned earlier, the Greenbook revisedup growth in GNP in every quarter, I think, compared with the lastGreenbook. And employment growth, particularly, is revised up. Usingthe model that we have, employment is close to the upper end of whatwe think is consistent with maintaining the current inflation ratesand would have no [unintelligible] making substantial progress towardimprovement. The Greenbook does have a slight upward movement of theunemployment rate over the next year, but very little really. Thiscould be revised away; things could easily change. We know that theinflation outlook is quite good. Like Gary, I think the informationwe have would lead us to believe that maybe it will be a littlebetter. But when you exclude food and energy, it doesn't seem to methat we would make an enormous amount of progress. I think we've beenquite fortunate on the wage front, given the tight labor markets thatwe have. There is some concern on the national level about how longthis luck is going to hold. It seems to me that policy has workedvery successfully so far; we rather like what has been done so far andwould be concerned about changing very much from that--I'm gettinginto the next part. Given the relative tightness in the labor marketnationally, one would have to be concerned over the longer haul thatsurprises might well be more on the up side than on the down side.Thank you, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, you think the surprises are morelikely to be on the up side than the down side. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At the District level,things have not changed greatly. We are still in a growth mode; to besure it is at somewhat less than the national level, but consideringwhere we started that is still a pretty optimistic report. Farmconditions in the District continue to improve, largely as a result ofsome crop prices, which had strengthened following the recentlyreleased agricultural report that the rebound in crop production thisyear would not be as large as had been expected. In the energy area,the District's oil drilling activity increased this summer but stillremained below year-ago levels due to the continued uncertainty as toprice for both natural gas and drilling. Manufacturing in theDistrict is going full out, largely as a result of the aircraftmanufacturing--both commercial as well as private aircraft.Manufacturing activity is at a very high level. Auto assemblage isback to being fairly fully employed, in the sense that there had beena shutdown of the GM plant as a result of retooling and some supplyconstraints but they are back running and are running at fullcapacity. Construction activity in the District weakened slightly inJune and into July; but it is still stronger than it was in the firsthalf of 1989 and is stronger than it was a year ago.On the national level, our forecast is not greatly differentthan the Greenbook forecast; we feel that the upward revisions areappropriate but may not be enough. Similar to what Gary Sternmentioned earlier, we think that the risk of recession is not great.Indeed, instead of a soft landing, we may be executing a touch and go;-29-8/22/89we think the last half of this year will be stronger than theGreenbook forecast. As a result, the outlook for inflation asrevealed in the Greenbook--certainly through 1990--shows noimprovement. And yes indeed, we do read some of [the data to mean]that the rate in the last half of the year could worsen. I understandthe comments about constraints on wage increases. I think we can befooled. We can watch it for a while and all at once it can be out ofbalance. I sense a greater militancy among the unions, although theyare a smaller part of the work force. But they seem to be morewilling to go on strike and stay out without compensation. I thinkthe outlook for the latter half of 1989 is stronger than the Greenbookforecast and the outlook for an improvement in prices isn't anybetter, if as great.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, our District economy continues tounderperform the nation. We are now estimating that we're doing abouttwo-thirds as well; we had been doing about half as well. Thisimprovement, though, is primarily because of the slowdown in thegrowth at the national level; on a [regional] level we're doing aboutthe same. Geographically, the mix of growth seems to be a littledifferent. Texas now appears to be growing more slowly than eitherLouisiana or New Mexico. Within Texas, Houston of course continues tobe the bright spot. Having been down there recently, listening to theanecdotal information coming out of Houston, the mood is totallydifferent. One large developer in home building said it was quiterefreshing to worry about drainage ditches as opposed to other typesof drainage. In the District, manufacturing activity has remained ourstrongest sector; employment has been growing in that area while ithas been declining nationally. Textiles, apparel, plastics, rubber,and wood products have been doing particularly well. Most durablegoods products have been sluggish; electronic components have beenparticularly soft and transportation equipment is a bit of a concernfrom our standpoint. Our GM plant in Arlington, Texas is going to bedown for a while. We wonder about the GM truck assembly plant over inShreveport. Bell Helicopter remains somewhat in doubt. And of coursewith the B-2 bomber, General Dynamics as well as LTV have someconcerns. Construction remains the softest sector and is showingsigns of bottoming out. Agriculture has been hurt by moistureconditions; we either had too much or too little moisture. I'd sayall-in-all, our sluggish growth continues from a very low base. Andoutside of Houston and a few border towns on the Rio Grande Valleythere is little or no sense of optimism. Of course, on the financialscene, we have had all of our major bank holding companies with theirproblems addressed in various fashions. Something good always comesout of something bad; we've had an opportunity to widen ouracquaintanceships considerably. We've spent a lot of time meetingfolks out of the Cleveland District and out of New York and out ofRichmond and out of San Francisco.MR. HOSKINS. Thanks, Bob.MS. SEGER. Are you talking about cops?MR. BOYKIN. On the national economy, basically we wouldn'thave a great deal of difference on the forecast. If we would differit is that for some reason we have a hard time being quite as8/22/89optimistic on the national picture. Our guess would be that if we'regoing to err, it's probably that we are not going to get quite asstrong a performance as projected. Of course, the inflation side isstill worrisome; indeed [we don't see a] significant improvement forthe next year and a half on the inflation front.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I would characterize the Middle Atlantic statesas being flat to down a touch. Retail sales are running about evenwith a year ago; manufacturing is down some. The most seriousproblems developing are in real estate. And there, I think New Jerseyhas the biggest problems; they are showing up in the loan portfoliosof banks. I think that we have just begun that cycle--[which will]run for a period in the Middle Atlantic region--where we're going tosee increasing real estate loan difficulties. On the positive side,in the Delaware banks, which are very large in consumer credit throughcredit cards, I think the portfolios are better than they were a yearago. The banks there have been quite responsive to regulators'cautions and they do look better. Despite the slower growth rate inthe region and the nation, labor markets remain very tight--particularly at the lower end. Our Bank, for example, has made muchgreater use of temporary help this summer and we are almost gratefulthat we've been able to get them. That, I think, has as much to dowith demand as a shrinking labor force, particularly in the 18-24 yearold area. And I think that's going to continue well out into the'90s.As far as the national economy, I think we are doing about aswell as we could hope to do. We are achieving the subpar growth witha reasonable risk of recession. It seems to me that that risk, ifanything, is a touch less than it was the last time we met. Theimbalances that normally lead to recession are not there. On theinflation side, I think that what we have done is to contain thegrowth of inflation. If you look at the basic rate, I don't think wehave rolled it back. Maybe that's all we can hope to achieve withthis subpar growth strategy. Whether we can actually reduce the rateremains to be seen. I think our challenge today is to gather upenough strength that we'll leave well enough alone.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I think it's appropriate that we be somewhatpleased with the outcome of policy over the past few years. I'm sureit is no surprise to many of you that I had some strong disagreementsin the first half of 1987 concerning monetary policy; but since thattime it seems to me we have really put it together about as well as wemight have expected, or better than we might have expected. On thatmatter [we've met] our highest expectations. Now, I've had a runningfriendly disagreement with some of our staff over some elements in thecomposition [of the forecast], but I don't disagree with the majorimpact of the real output numbers as forecast. I would say, Sam, thatI probably should apologize to you for trying to bring you into theargument so to speak. But it seems to me that we should think more interms of the global economy. And monetary policy, it seems to me,works primarily in the global economy in that perspective. I just donot believe that being the best Phillips curver does you much good inanalyzing the global economy, with more flexibility in wages and-31-8/22/89prices than we would have otherwise. In that context, it seems to methat when Mike Prell said that he expects to bring in the inflationforecast lower for 1991 because he believes that's what we want, Ithink you're exactly right, Mike. That is what we want. But the wayto get lower inflation is not to have the dollar depreciate. And Imust admit that even though Ted has been wrong for two years in regardto the exchange rate forecast, I've also been wrong on the foreignexchange rate forecast for two years running. I've been wrong just asTed has been wrong in forecasting a declining one.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How do you know that Ted has been wrong?I can't get it out of him what his forecast is!MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that if we truly want to have astable price level the way to get there is not to get into a period ofdollar depreciation. I don't understand how we can have a period ofinterest rate stability and have a dollar depreciation in theforecast. That means, then, that I do expect domestic demand to besomewhat weaker on the consumer side. I believe we have turned thecorner on the household saving rate; I believe there is a differencethere. But it seems to me that we have to be aware that even thoughthings are working out very well that there is a vulnerability. Ithink the vulnerable areas in our economy that will tend to show upwill be in the problem area of housing. That is, if housing stays atits present rate then it seems to me that the soft landing scenario isfairly accurate. But I think there is some possibility that we may beentering a period in which housing prices nationally are in a muchsofter position than we realized; and if we have a period of declininghousing values, that will show through on consumer spending more thanthe stock market showed though. So, even though things seem justabout right now, we ought to be aware of that vulnerability. I'm verypleased with the staff's understanding of our wanting [lower]inflation. My goodness, 3 percent is not good. But I don'tunderstand why we continue to believe that we can get there with adepreciating dollar scenario.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I guess I start out where alot of other people do but I'm not sure I end up where others do.Certainly, I would agree that if one could take a snapshot of thefirst half of this year, especially after the revisions are all in,one would be very tempted to declare a victory and go home. One mighteven be tempted to do that looking at the staff forecast. Obviously,most forecasts that are being talked about are within strikingdistance of that one. But that forecast is for real GNP growth of 2percent or so stretching out as far as the eye can see and anunderlying inflation forecast of 5 percent or so stretching out as faras the eye can see. Even when Mike gets around to [forecasting] 1991,I think we'll probably still have something that looks like that.When I think about that kind of an outlook I have to say that it'sprobably as good as we can do. So it doesn't trouble me. But on theother hand, I say to myself: Well, how reasonable is it to think thatthings can just roll on in that fashion in perpetuity? I guess that'swhere I get into trouble. I just don't think we can either be thatgood or that lucky. Indeed, even right now I would say that the risksin the forecast are reasonably well balanced to the symmetric, but Idon't draw as much comfort from that as I think some do. There is one-32-8/22/89risk that could be quite transitory but quite troubling and that isthat we might get a spurt in consumer spending in the second half ofthe year over and above the little spurt that Mike has. I don't thinkthat's at all beyond the realm of possibility. But if that didhappen, I think it could really throw some other things out of kilter.On the other side, I can at this point see signs of potentialweakness in the economy that are more troubling to me. We've talkedabout exports a lot. Another area is construction. In part, thecloser we are to the reality of the thrift industry liquidations andthe tremendous overhang that will produce in real estate markets--notjust in the Southeast or Southwest, but nationally--that seems to memore of a concern than it has been in the past. I hear commentsaround the table and I see in New York City commercial constructiongoing ahead pell mell in a context in which vacancy rates, at least inManhattan, are now higher than they have been in 25 years. I suspect,Si, that Chicago must be about in the same position by this point,though maybe not quite that bad. In the Northeast, housing pricesstill are rising like gangbusters. But the stock of unsold new andused homes is rising very rapidly too. And those two things are justobviously incompatible with one another. The irony of it is that inthis construction area--whether it's commercial, the thrift overhang,or even residential in the Northeast--the problem ultimately is notthat interest rates have been too high; if anything, the problem isthat they have been too low. A lot of this construction really isexcessive overbuilding, speculation--all the seeds of real problemsdown the road. Martha, I think, mentioned this corporate cash flowproblem. If you look at the profile of corporate cash flow out tolate 1990 into early 1991 there is a profound change there in terms ofthe relative capacity of the corporate sector to finance itselfinternally versus externally. My hunch is that even the numbers wehave don't really yet take account of all the implications of thesehighly leveraged transactions, which are starting to look worse too.There again, the problem is excesses rather than interest rates beingin any sense too high. So, there are a lot of things that bother mein terms of the real economy, even though on balance I would regardthe risks as reasonably well balanced in the context of that steady-state 2 percent--except that I don't think it's going to happen.Now, on inflation--and this is where I guess I differ with alot of the views around the table--I don't see the light at the end ofthe tunnel. I would agree that the data through the first half of theyear are compatible with the notion that the inflation rate probablyhas stopped rising. But I'm not even sure of that. When I look atthe inflation outlook I tend to focus very heavily on the[unintelligible] compensation, the productivity mixes, and what can gowrong there. I think the risks are quite asymmetric there; the riskis that, if anything, the compensation numbers may tend to be on thehigh side and the productivity numbers on the low side, in a contextin which the staff forecast continues to have a negative spreadbetween unit labor costs and the GNP deflator. On wages, just as oneexample: If you look at the data on collective bargaining agreementswhere there have been either freezes or declines in wages in the firstyear or concessions on COLAs and other fringe benefits, there is ahuge, huge change in terms of what we've seen in the first half ofthis year versus what we were seeing in the mid-1980s. In the mid-1980s up through 1987 the percentage of workers that either had frozenwages, declining wages, or givebacks of one kind or another were-33-8/22/89running [unintelligible]. Based on the first half of this year theyare running somewhere in the range of 6 to 10 percent. Now, that toomay turn out to be an aberration; but it does say to me that it ispremature to declare victory in terms of the wage and compensationsituation. So, I'm really in an uncomfortable position, despite thefact that I think the first half looks terrific and the forecast looksgreat. I think the probabilities are rising that we're not going toget that nice, neat outcome. And it's easier for me today to see somethings that might develop--whether it's next year or even 1991--thatare quite troubling. But right at this precise moment it looks great.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Let me start off with the District. The picturethere is still a tad weak. We have had nonagricultural employmentdeclines in the most recent quarter of about 1-1/2 percent. That alsospreads to manufacturing, which relatively isn't as weak; but still,there was a decline of almost 1 percent. There was particularweakness in the construction employment area and, on the manufacturingside, in textiles and apparel. I just want to pass on a couple ofanecdotal comments. One thing that has surprised me with the generalweakness in the District and nationally is that when I talk tobusiness people I have not yet, until recently, run into anybody whois terribly alarmed. Yes, things are slower; but generally they arenot terribly concerned about recession and that sort of thing.a major manufacturer of consumer durables and forthe first time about a week and a half ago he laid out a somewhatdifferent scenario. Of course, demand there has been quite weak forsome time. He said the initial response of people was to try to selltheir way out of it, in effect, and maybe cut back hours a little.Basically, he doesn't really see that working and he thinks that we'renow going to get into a phase of perhaps more layoffs, curtailment ofcapital expenditures, and so forth, as the difficulties of sellingone's way out of it begin to sink in. The other observation he made,which really runs to some extent to this real estate discussion Jerrywas describing, is that they have two major [sales] channels:homebuilders, which have really been soft for a while, and thenretailers. They are noting particular weakness in both; and in theretailing area, considerably more credit problems are surfacing. Andthat, of course, will spill back into the shopping centers, which Ithink is one commercial area that has been notably overbuilt. Anotherpiece of anecdotal information on the homebuilding side: the reportswe get would tend to indicate that some of the pickup that's evidentin the broader numbers is being seen in the trenches in our area aswell. The second quarter was better than the first and July isshowing continuing improvement.On the national picture, I would align myself with those whogenerally are pleased with what's going on in the short run. In thatconnection, I would not be inclined to overreact to one month's dataof somewhat stronger real numbers. I still think, as Jerry pointedout, that we have one heck of a challenge in front of us in terms ofbringing inflation down; I don't know exactly how that's going tohappen but I do think it's going to take some time. To pick up onanother thing that you were saying, Jerry--your observation that youare skeptical as to whether this forecast through 1990 will actuallywork out--it just seems to me that this slow growth will, in time,begin to wring out some of the excesses that you described. In other-34-8/22/89words, the pressure is there but it's building up much more slowlythan people expect. What I hear from people I talk to is anexpectation that we've reached an inflection point, that policy isgoing to ease, and that somehow the floor is going to be pulled outfrom under rates and people are going to be looking at rates 100 basispoints or more lower than where they are now. I just don't thinkthat's going to happen; and I don't think people have adjusted tothat. These pressures are going to build up over time. And I thinkthe challenge we're going to face is one of not overreacting to theprocess of wringing out some of these excesses, which are going to bereflected in bad credits and the like because of the longer-runinflationary challenge that we still face.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. First Vice President Monhollon.MR. MONHOLLON. The upward revisions in real GNP growth inthe Greenbook seem very reasonable to us in view of the recentstrength in some of the economic indicators. Also, as has beenmentioned, it seems like an almost ideal outcome. The July Greenbookpredicted a soft landing and this one predicts even a softer landing;hopefully, it won't turn into a touch and go. As we assess the risksof the situation we think the risk is probably on the down sidedespite the apparent strength in some sectors of the economy. Thereare a couple of reasons for this: first, our directors and some of ourother business contacts in the District have become more bearish inthe last couple of months than they've been for a long time; second,and probably more importantly, monetary policy has been tightenedsignificantly on net over the last 2-1/2 years, even taking intoaccount the recent easing. The funds rate is still about 3 percentagepoints higher than it was in late 1986 and there has been a sharpreduction in the trend rate of growth in the aggregates. We probablyhaven't yet seen the full impact of this slower growth in theaggregates on real economic activity. So, while we think that theGreenbook forecast for real GNP is quite reasonable, we think the riskof error is skewed slightly to the down side assuming, as theGreenbook does, no further changes in monetary policy.As far as the inflation picture is concerned, we were ofcourse disappointed that the projections didn't show any significantdecline in the net rate of inflation over the forecast period. Wethink that also is a reasonable forecast. But we think that there isa possibility of a lagged effect of the overall tightening in monetarypolicy since early 1987, and that it may show up more strongly than isgenerally expected in the period ahead. Consequently, we think thatthe quarterly rate of inflation may be slightly lower than theGreenbook has forecast. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think we have hadour usual excellent comments around the table this morning. I havevery little to add to those. But it might be useful to take just aminute or two to look at the larger scene, if I may. My sense is thatthere are a number of very important and very major issues that are ator reaching the stage where there could be some major breakthroughs ormajor breakdowns, whichever that may turn out to be. The condition ofthe United States economy is a very, very important factor in everyone of them and something that this Committee might well consider when-35-8/22/89it looks at policy. I will just run through a few of them in nospecial order. On the domestic side, we now have a bill in the thriftarea and we're moving into the resolution stage. We all know it'sgoing to cost an awful lot of money at the best. But it seems to methat the cost could just go completely out of sight if we get into arecession scenario, particularly given some of the other real estateconditions that have been alluded to here this morning. I think weall would probably agree that the fiscal budget deficit requiresresolution, and it seems to me that somehow or another we are managingto approach a breakthrough there. I hope it's going to happen; therehas been some progress, and it's in the balance right now. But onething is certain, it seems to me, and that is that if we fall into arecession any resolution in the near term on the fiscal budget justgoes into a cocked hat completely. I'm not sure that much has beenmentioned here before on this war on drugs. But I think it has nowgotten to the point where it has become a national economic issue.Indeed, I think it's tearing into the whole social [fabric] of thecountry. We're groping for a way to deal with that, but it's going totake money. And that's going to be all new money; it has to come fromsomewhere. Perhaps even more importantly, it needs to have the focusof our population and of our political leadership. If we get into arecession scenario, that will probably pre-empt almost everything elseand the war on drugs might well go onto the back burner--and in theprocess get worse for however long it takes to get it back on thefront burner again. And I think that would be devastating.Internationally, we have the great agony of the situation ofthe LDC debt. We have managed, hopefully, to get a solution inMexico--and very quickly I should extend my congratulations to allconcerned. But on the situation in the Philippines there's a long wayto go. If we fall into a recession scenario I wonder if the banksaren't going to turn out to be even more difficult to deal with thanthey already have been in those further negotiations. On an evenbroader conceptual basis, it seems to me that it's fairly clear aroundthe world now that everyone agrees that communism has failed andcapitalism is the way to go. We are past the stage where that had toplayed out but we're entering a new stage that may be even trickier.And that is: How do those communist countries get from where they'vebeen to where they want to go? This country is a model for that and Ithink that we're going to be called upon to be of some help in variousways. Poland is probably in the lead right now, but there are anynumber of others trying to get on that track. And I think that it'simportant that we be able to demonstrate a steadfast strength in oureconomy as that begins to play out. A bit more specifically, it seemsto me that there's an opportunity now at long last to have a reallyserious disarmament situation develop. We have made some progress onthat; conditions seem to be right. But I think that we ought torealize that the USSR is still the same type of country it was before;and if they perceive weakness on the part of the United States,economically or otherwise, or some divergence of our attention, theywould be as [unintelligible] as they ever have been. And we mightwell find ourselves in a situation where excessive defense spendinghas to keep on rolling. So, for all these reasons I think that wehave to be very careful as we assess this economy and try to calibrateit, to the extent that we can do that. We have to be very carefulthat we don't push our luck too hard because there is a great deal atstake in this era that we're entering into right now. Thank you.-36-8/22/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. In terms of the District economy, there is nota lot new to present here. It is still operating at a very high levelof economic activity but there are definite signs of some slowdown.Let me give you just a couple of indications of what I mean byslowdown. LTV, for example, now has many fewer flat roll products onallocation and lead times are much shorter. There is a stainlesssteel [company], Timken, which had all its products on allocationduring the spring and just about now has fewer of them and, in fact,is talking about potential layoffs later in the year if demandcontinues to go in the direction it's going. I would add, however,that they have a contract that expires on September 30. So, I suspectthat's a position rather than reality. Westinghouse has very strongdemands for the rest of the year for its electric utility industry.There is a small motor company up there that sees decreases in demand.I don't know how you sort this out. Overall, the economy is reallyquite robust yet, but there are some signs of slowing. The employmentrate in Ohio is 5.4 percent; Pennsylvania is, I think, about 4.5percent. So it's still pretty strong and there are very, very fewsigns of weakness in any particular sector of the District.In terms of the national economy, we don't have muchdisagreement with the Greenbook. The only thing that I find a littledisturbing is the focus on our short-term outlook for GNP. I continueto be concerned that if we fail to lift our eyes from that focus wewill not see our price objectives through it. In fact, we will alwaysmove those objectives back in order to assure that we keep the economygoing. So, my only concern is that we have no progress on theinflation front in terms of [unintelligible].MR. JOHNSON. The recent revisions of some elements of thelagging data suggest that things certainly have been decelerating asmuch as would have appeared earlier. I'm comforted by that; it mademy vacation a little easier knowing that the situation looked a littlebetter than I had expected. But even taking that into account, allthe forward looking data still are pointing toward a furtherdecelerating situation--not that I think it's decelerating at anaccelerating rate. As a matter of fact, I think it may even haveslowed its pace of decline. But my view is that the forward-lookingdata still show [a deceleration] except for maybe the growth numbersin M2 recently, which have shown some turnaround. I think that isinteresting and positive, yet the reserve aggregates and the basedon't really show that kind of turnaround; there's some uptick but notvery much at all. So I just wonder how much noise there is in termsof shuffling of accounts in the M2 numbers and the response to thechange in opportunity costs from the recent decline in the funds rate.But I am generally encouraged by the situation. We have beenseeking moderation in the pace of domestic demand and I think we areseeing that. It's what we want, and I think that over the longer runwe're going to see the inflation results. I'm more optimistic thatwe're going to see that in the intermediate term and not have to waitquite as long as in the Greenbook forecast. But if we're going to seethat we're going to have to remain in a fairly restrained monetarypolicy posture. My major concern, though, is that we still may be intoo restrained a posture. The yield curve is still inverted; thecommodity prices are starting to shift sides and breaking on the down-37-8/22/89side; the dollar is continuing to show strength. My basic concern isthat as long as the funds rate is the highest rate in town we're goingto continue to run into weakness on the expansion side as we continueto absorb money and credit, at least in base terms. Credit aggregatesare continuing to decelerate. As I said earlier in my questions, Istill don't see any real signs of a pickup in investment on thehorizon. I don't see signs of a turnaround; there may be a temporarypause and some slowing of the deceleration. My worry is that thatwill continue on. I guess the good news is that we have more time tothink about that than we did in the past. But we still have to bevigilant on that front.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I'll warn you that my views were colored byconversations with my brother last week who happens to be in theconstruction business. I asked him how things were going and he saidpretty good. The latest big project he had signed on for was a newbankruptcy court in southern Arizona! Anyway, that aside, I do agreewith the comments around the table about the deceleration that isshowing; certainly, the Beigebook referred to it and the Presidentshere have alluded to it, and a number of individuals I've spoken withsuggest the same thing. I have a little difference of opinion aboutwhere we're going. I think we are going to see more slowdown, despitethe fact that there have been some upward revisions and some surprisesin certain of the statistics for the last month. I don't think thatestablishes a new trend by itself. A couple of things concern megreatly and one is in the housing arena. Again, I realize that startshave shown some uptick the last two months but the real estate marketsin more and more parts of the country are weakening. Builder friendstell me that eventually that does show through to new construction.It certainly impacts the attitudes of developers and builders. Also,I'm sorry to be unduly cynical, but I have an awful feeling that whenthe RTC gets rolling they are not going to make this any better. Themarkets are already having problems and I think the RTC is going toturn it into a worse disaster and probably create new problems wherethere weren't problems.MR. HOSKINS. Well, we have a strong oversight over that.MS. SEGER. Well, okay. In the auto area, once these new1990 models come in, if any people can be pulled off the streets intothe showrooms to look at the cars, I think they're going to fall flaton the floor when they see the stickers. I understand the adjustmentsthat were made in trying to price the comparable options andaccessories. I understand all that technical stuff, but for theaverage person who walks in all they know is that the bottom line isthat they are going to have to write a bigger check to get a car--whether they want air bags or not they get them. And I think thatwill discourage numerous people. Also, there have been a lot of carssold in the last 5 or 6 years and there doesn't seem to be any realdemand stacked up that has been unfilled. When I read that sales oflight trucks are now starting to show some weakness, that gave me someconcern because they have been extremely strong. We had some plantclosings announced in the area of heavy trucks--Si Keehn alluded tothat. One of the major producers of heavy trucks, had apretty negative report out on what they were experiencing. And Ipersonally believe we're going to see some more of that looking ahead.-38-8/22/89Even using our own statistics on exports, it looks as if they are notgoing to be exceptionally strong. I believe we're going to see lessstrength there because I'm not convinced by Ted that the dollar isgoing to perform as he thinks. Even though we have the trade deficitreaching its low point in the second quarter of this year and thengetting worse, I think it will probably get even worse than what we'reshowing. Putting this all together, and also adding to it theconcerns that Mike Kelley mentioned about the impact of a recession onmany of our other problems, I certainly think we ought to be very,very sensitive to what's happening and to balancing these risksbetween inflation and recession--particularly when the inflationnumbers do seem to be looking better. I really believe that therehave been some major behavioral changes out there in the real worldthat are going to help to make the inflation numbers come in evenbetter than we're now talking about. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare, do you want to comment?MR. LAWARE. Yes, I've been sitting here trying to figure outhow I could get through this without having to say anything, becauseof the sense of--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Just say you agree with everybody!MR. LAWARE. Well, that's about right too. There is a senseof frustration that one gets having sat here now for a year in thesemeetings. We have done so well on so much of this, yet we are stilllooking at inflation levels which are unacceptable, I think, and thatis the principal thing that frustrates me and makes me feel kind ofhelpless in this process. At the same time, I am convinced that ifthe only way to really knock inflation down is to have a recession,that's a very unwelcomed alternative option. We talk about a softlanding, but this kind of landing looks more to me like being stuck inthe mud. I question whether the very low rate of growth and therelatively high rate of inflation create the kind of environment thatencourages the investment in the economy that we need to get out ofour trade deficit problems and to generate the kind of growth that weall are anxious to have, with improvement in productivity and soforth. So, I'm at a loss to make that fatal decision as to which arethe more important considerations and where the greater risk lies. Onbalance, I'm more concerned that the risk is greater on the down sidethan it is on the up side. So, I'm more worried at the moment aboutan acceleration in the decline of the rate of growth than I am aboutstimulating further inflationary pressures. But in the context of allthat, I am concerned that we can't make any progress on the inflationfront, at least during the time horizon that we are looking at here inthe Greenbook.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think what you're expressing is thefact that monetary policy can't do everything.MR. LAWARE. No, we need some help.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we break here and return aftercoffee.[Coffee break]8/22/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Like the rest of you, I guess, I'mlooking forward to the final word from Don Kohn.MR. KOHN. I hope you have had enough coffee to keepyourselves awake! [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, Don. I suspect that if weweren't at a meeting today we wouldn't think there was any need to doanything, particularly because when one looks at the data what'sclearly obvious is that the economy is stuck in the mud or that it hasfallen to sleep--I don't know which is the better description. Thereis a remarkable stability in this system, which has both pluses andminuses, I think. As I see it, at least, on the upward side I thinkwe are running into a saving rate that was going up in the context ofrising real income and now is flattening out; and I think we'regetting some pickup coming in the consumption area. If there is afollow-through in the housing area--that is, if mortgage rates are lowenough to really start to move even marginally any of the housingdata--then I think it is clear there is strengthening going on, whichis independent of the underlying structure of orders and prices andvalues. The odds at this stage, as I see them, are probablymarginally plus that that will happen rather than not happen. Butwhen you begin to look at the underlying structure of themanufacturing area and the crucial area of capital investment, theevidence is quite mixed. I think we were getting a significantdeterioration in the order structure and in the economy when we metlast. That has stalled. The pretty much day-by-day evaluation oforder books in trying to get a notion of business sentiment withrespect to capital appropriations and the like suggests that, afterhaving come down, we have stabilized in recent weeks at a subduedlevel. But it is showing very little evidence of either moving upwardor downward. I don't think it's actually clear at this stage--and itmay not be for a number of weeks--whether or not the momentum is goingto start up or down. I find it very hard to believe, as I think Jerryhas said, that one has a credible forecast of 2 percent real growth,inflation at 5 percent, and everything freezes indefinitely in thefuture. That is not an equilibrium forecast. Something breaks inthat environment; it either accelerates or decelerates.Having gotten the money supply pretty much on track, in anodd way I think policy is probably as good as we can have it at thisparticular moment. My basic impression is that we are at "B" andshould be there for a while. I'm torn myself between whether or notwe should consider being symmetric or asymmetric toward ease at thispoint--not that I think it is going to matter as far as what weactually do, because if we get any type of acceleration ordeceleration, this Committee will be meeting on the telephone to makesome key decisions. How we write the directive, frankly, I don'tthink matters all that much as far as actuality is concerned. Sincewe are currently, at least technically, in a symmetric mode I would bemarginally in favor of staying in that direction. But I can'thonestly say to you that I feel very strongly about that. I do thinkwe have to be careful about this basic softness--and it is soft--inthe orders picture; I think it's soft enough that it could start tounwind on the down side. There is no evidence of that; almost anybodyI speak to is complaining about the level of orders but nobody iscomplaining that their businesses are tilting over in a way that isreminiscent of the feedback one gets during a recession.-40-8/22/89So, I am inclined to stay with "B" at this point; and justfor technical reasons, I am perhaps supportive of symmetric languagebut, frankly, I don't think it means all that much. I do think morethan any other time in the recent past we are going to have to watchthe orders business awfully closely to get a judgment as to which waythat is going to evolve. I just don't see any way it can stay whereit is. This is just not the type of balance that persistsindefinitely in an economy--with inventories in balance and backlogsbarely doing anything; inflation at a steady rate but too high; and astock market which, until the last couple of days, was getting alittle speculative. I must say to you that the one thing that reallybothers me and has not been discussed in the material here is whetheror not we're going to end up with a tranquil economy which the stockmarket thinks is terrific and then the stock market does us in. Upuntil a couple of days ago that had been a scenario which I would haveput a higher probability on than I would have liked. In any event, Iwould go for "B" with symmetric language; but if there is any concernabout whether it should be asymmetric toward ease, I could supportasymmetric. I would prefer to keep stable in our position and have"B" symmetric. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I agree in that "B" would be mypreference but I feel a bit more strongly than you do with respect toasymmetric language toward ease. I would oppose asymmetric towardease. That view simply is based upon some of the comments that I madeearlier: that I see the economy a bit stronger than others, perhaps,in the third and fourth quarters. To me, a change in the language nowwould mean something to the markets and mislead them.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the argument.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm sorry, Roger, I didn't hear thebeginning. Where did you come out on the symmetry?MR. GUFFEY. I favor symmetrical and would strongly oppose anasymmetrical directive toward easing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. I find myself in great sympathy with what theChairman said. Given the uncertainties that we face, I just don't seea reason to change at this point in time. I also would prefersymmetric language because of concern about the potential marketreaction and how the markets would read a change in the language. Idon't feel as strongly as President Guffey does about that. Sincethings aren't going to stay this way forever, and maybe we're going toneed something to help us, we should face the issue of where we aregoing over the longer run, because there's general agreement and a lotof frustration that the inflation rate is at an undesirably highlevel. Where do we want to go?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I would favor "B" as well and I also wouldstrongly favor the symmetric language. It seems to me that relativeto the previous meeting there are fewer downside risks than we saw atthat time. We have had a recent robust growth of the broadaggregates, so I think one can make the case that the risks are-41-8/22/89symmetrical. I certainly would not prefer asymmetric toward the sideof ease.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your recommendationand your statement. I have a mini preference for asymmetric languagebecause, as we see it, the moderating trends are likely to continue.But I don't feel particularly strongly about it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I agree entirely with yourprescription. And I, too, would favor symmetrical language. I wouldlike to make two brief comments. There has been a lot of discussionby people around the table this morning about the vulnerabilities inthe economy, and I certainly am concerned about those vulnerabilities.But as you pointed out very well, monetary policy certainly can't doeverything. I think the way to avoid a recession is to have a periodof subdued growth over time. In that way I think we will avoid arecession over the long run. If we were to stimulate the economy atthis time, I'm afraid we would not only be sending the wrong signal tothe marketplace but we would be having to take action later on againstinflation that would be at a much higher level. So, I think we haveto be very careful about what kind of message we send to the markets.At this point the credibility of the central bank is even moreimportant than it ordinarily is. So, I strongly recommend the statusquo, which is alternative B with symmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm glad you said that. I think we allare in agreement with the general thought that you put forth, but ithas never been stated this morning. I think it's important torecognize that the solution to a recession problem is not necessarilyeasy money. If we were to ease and were to run into an unexpectedacceleration in inventory accumulation, at that point I think we wouldbe through. I don't know what we would do at that point, because themoment we try to tighten and prevent special forces from going on,there's just no way to prevent the economy from going sharply lowerand really unwinding. It's not self evident at this point thatresisting recession presupposes bringing rates down sharply. If anyof us believed that, I think we would have heard a lot of "Let's floodthe market" comments. And I haven't heard any of that around thistable. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I totally agree with that and my sentiments onpolicy directly relate to that. The biggest mistake we could make isto get ourselves into a situation where we are over-stimulative withmonetary policy and end up aggressively easing. But, I have a slightpreference--well, I shouldn't say slight--I have a preference forasymmetric policy toward ease. I agree that alternative B is theright stance for now. I base that mainly on the notion that I stillsee our policy as relatively tight. The funds rate is still wellabove other rates. If you look at the movement of other market ratesthat react to expectations of future funds rates, as Don and Peter andothers reported, the market is still anticipating some easing ofpolicy based on the existing data that they have seen, including therecent revisions. Now, those expectations have been postponed, Ithink, from the immediate future out to one or two months ahead. But-42-8/22/89those expectations still clearly fall in the intermeeting period. So,my concern is that the market is still poised for some easing ratherthan a neutral policy. And I think it's basing those expectations onthe data [market participants] have seen on the economy and what theythink appropriate policy would be. Not that that's always right;obviously, the markets are wrong from time-to-time. But I do thinkthat the markets, including the stock market, are poised for what theyexpect to be lower future funds rates; and as Don pointed out I think,they are expecting to see that some time during the intermeetingperiod. We could easily cause the markets to back off. If the datacome out suggesting that that's the appropriate policy, that's okay.But I think the stock market and the bond market would be somewhatvulnerable if those expectations are frustrated with no change in thetrend in the daily [unintelligible].So, my concern is that the economy is still gradually windingdown and that that requires an asymmetry. There are some slightdownside risks and we need to be prepared to be flexible during theintermeeting period, in my opinion, to lean toward an easier policy.By all means I want to stress that I don't think we should beaggressive in that. I think we are not running a neutral policy now,but a relatively tight policy, and that's still going to have laggedeffects on the economy. I would like to get us to a neutral position,one where we're not stimulative but we're certainly not restrainingthe economy at these levels. What we see now looks very good, but Ithink the trend is still headed down. So, my preference is asymmetry;but if the consensus is for symmetry I certainly wouldn't vote againstthat.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Alternative B; I prefer symmetry, but could livewith asymmetry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I would prefer asymmetry toward ease just inrecognition that not to ease at all during the intermeeting periodwould at some point in time mean a rollback to somewhat higherinterest rates. I would be somewhat concerned that in that scenariowe might very well end up with a housing market that would beadversely affected by those developments. I also think we need to bealert to the fact that M2 growth needs to stay within that cone. Thatis, we are expecting M2 growth to be within one of those--whether it'sA, B, or C--between now and September. I would certainly not want tosee that fall out of bed and I have no reason to believe that it will.I also think that the foreign exchange value of the dollar could quitelikely come under upward pressure and that exchange rate interventionmight not by itself be sufficient to hold that back. I believe itwould be undesirable to have another serious leg up on theappreciation of the dollar and go through some of the marks we wentthrough before. That taking place in a period accompanied by fallingcommodity prices I think would call for ease. Objectively looking atthe situation, I think that we're more apt to ease than not; and Idon't see any harm in having asymmetric language toward ease, Mr.Chairman, because we're not going to do it unless something woulddevelop that would cause us to want to [ease].8/22/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I strongly support "B" and I would preferasymmetric language toward ease because I think if we need flexibilityduring this period it's probably going to be in that direction. So,why not build it into the directive?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I too support "B." It seems to me at this pointthat the risks are evenly and rather finely balanced. It wouldn'tsurprise me if things went awry in one direction or the other, but I'dbe hard pressed at this point to express a conviction about which waythey might go. Given that, I favor symmetric language. I also favorit for another reason: it seems to me that the modest growth in M2 inrecent years, coupled with the performance of the dollar, has servedus well. That's the reason why I'm a bit more optimistic about theinflation outlook than some; and I wouldn't want to compromise that atthis point. For that reason as well I would favor symmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I favor "B" with asymmetriclanguage. I think we're much more likely in the intermeeting periodto desire to ease than to tighten and I think the directive shouldreflect that. Furthermore, even if one assesses the risks assymmetric or close to symmetric, I think the consequences of an erroron the down side are far more [severe] than on the up side. So, forboth of those reasons I would prefer asymmetric language; but I couldsupport symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I favor "B" with symmetric language. And Iinterpret "B" to mean 9 to 9-1/8 percent on the [funds rate]. Is thatcorrect?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I can support "B" if it has asymmetric languagewith the tilt toward some slight ease between meetings, because I dothink that the economy is going to move in one direction or the otherfrom where it is now and is slightly [more likely] to go toward theweaker side rather than the stronger. Also, I'm convinced that wedon't want the dollar to strengthen a lot more, even though it mightproduce good inflation consequences. It would be very bad for ourexport industries and our ability to cut our trade deficit.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Let me say first that I think monetary policythat always attempts to pre-empt recessions is going to end up biasingtoward inflation and lower output over time. I'm afraid that our viewaround the table often expresses this focus on short-term GNP, whichleads us in that direction. Our ability to forecast real GNP onequarter out has an error of plus or minus 2 percentage points, whichmeans that we are already walking on the edge of a recession as it is.Our ability to forecast the inflation rate 18 months out has error-44-8/22/89terms that are not much different and I think that's where we ought toput our focus. So, I'm comfortable with "B," and I think it should besymmetric. The comfort comes from the slowdown in the rates of growthof the aggregates over the last couple of years, but I have someconcerns about their growth rates in the second half. Last Februarythe consensus that I, at least, drew from around this table was thatwe were supposed to come in at the bottom half of the range eventhough we didn't explicitly write that down. So, I'll be nervousgoing forward if we see the aggregates coming in much above fourth-quarter-over-fourth-quarter rates of 3 to 4 percent. One otherquestion for Don Kohn, a side question: If seasonal borrowing is aproblem and causes us to change, why don't we think about eithereliminating seasonal or at least pricing it instead of subsidizing it?MR. KOHN. That would be a policy issue for the Board tohandle along with the Reserve Banks. We could bring that up. I knowthere's at least one Governor who has suggested that before.MR. ANGELL. Oh yes, so do I!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Don says they will have a report prettysoon. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. "B" and I would stay symmetric. Although myopinion is that if there's any change it would be toward ease, I'm notso convinced of that that I would want to put it in the directive atthis point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. First Vice President Monhollon.MR. MONHOLLON. I prefer "B" with symmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I prefer "B" symmetric, as well,although I accept the fact that we will do what we have to do in anyevent. I'm not terribly worried about that. But I guess I'm just notas confident as the majority of the Committee seems to be about thevery near-term outlook. I think there is a possibility--not alikelihood but a possibility--that over the next couple of months theeconomy could be stronger rather than weaker. And what I really worryabout is that therein lies the problem for 1990. That's really why Iwould prefer to be symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It doesn't matter whether we'resymmetric or asymmetric.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I accept that. But of all theugly things that we could think about that one gets pretty ugly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is the worst scenario that we couldface, because I think at that point monetary policy becomes impotent.And then we would need other factors working and I'm not sure we wouldget them.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As I say, I don't think it's thelikely case.-45-8/22/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, but it's enough of a worry.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It worries me.MR. ANGELL. But it seems to me, Mr. Chairman, that if wedecided to tighten before the policy announcement came out that peoplewould see that we had changed our mind.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh sure.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I can accept that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's exactly--MR. ANGELL. Frankly, I would never vote "no" over thequestion of symmetry. That means all we do can be done either way.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. I collected the votes and come outexactly as I expected, marginally asymmetric. So, let's read it as"B," asymmetric.MR. BERNARD. It would read: In the implementation of policyfor the immediate future the Committee seeks to maintain the existingdegree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking account ofindications of inflationary pressures, the strength of the businessexpansion, the behavior of the monetary aggregates, and developmentsin foreign exchange and domestic financial markets, somewhat greaterreserve restraint might or somewhat lesser reserve restraint would beacceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserveconditions are expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 overthe period from June to September at annual rates of about 9 percentand 6-3/4 percent, respectively. The Chairman may call for Committeeconsultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations thatreserve conditions during the period before the next meeting arelikely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outsidea range of 7 to 11 percent.MR. LAWARE. Question: Which is bigger, "somewhat" or"slightly"?MR. BERNARD. "Somewhat" is bigger.MR. ANGELL. But that's an historical question.MR. LAWARE. "Somewhat" is bigger. Okay then, do we reallywant to use "somewhat" or do we want to use "slightly"?MR. BERNARD. "Slightly greater reserve restraint"?MR. LAWARE. And "slightly lesser reserve restraint" on theother side.MR. KELLEY. The way we're going--MR. BERNARD. "Slightly" in both cases?MR. LAWARE. No, asymmetric.-46-8/22/89MR. BERNARD. [That is conveyed by] "might" being associatedwith greater reserve restraint and "would" being associated withlesser.MR. LAWARE. Yes.MR. PARRY. That's a double asymmetric.MR. STERN. Double "A."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anyone have any objections to that?MR. LAWARE. Probably.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is one issue, however, that weought to clarify and that's the positioning. We had a discussion thelast time on the positioning of the various different variables and itwas inconclusive, with the exception of the phraseology with respectto the use of the words "progress toward price stability" as asubstitute for "indications of inflationary pressures." That was theonly one that I thought should be raised at this meeting to get ajudgment as to how the Committee felt about the choice of words. Whydon't we just take a very simple quick vote? Those Committee memberswho would prefer staying where we are with indications of inflationarypressures please raise your hand. One, two, three, four, five.MR. GUFFEY. Will there be a vote on the other language withrespect to progress?MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I'd like to hear the language one moretime.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, I'm sorry. Norm, why don't you--we're using "slightly" presently.MR. JOHNSON. No, the progress toward--MR. BERNARD. Taking account of indications of--MR. ANGELL. That's what we're talking about; that's whatwe're voting for.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I know. I wanted to hear it just one moretime.MR. BERNARD. The current language is "Taking account ofindications of inflationary pressures" and for that the substitutewould be "Taking account of progress toward price stability."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay?MR. JOHNSON. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. All the members in favor of "progresstoward price stability"? I think I counted seven, which has to be amajority. Well, can we call the roll?-47-8/22/89MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, can I make one further suggestion?We had 6-3/4 percent for M3, which sounds excessively precise to me.Can we change that to 7 percent so it's a nice round number?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.MR. KELLEY. I would appreciate having Norm run through therest of that sentence, if he would.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure, go ahead.MR. BERNARD. It would read: "Taking account of progresstoward price stability, the strength of the business expansion, thebehavior of the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreignexchange and domestic financial markets, slightly greater reserverestraint might or slightly lesser reserve restraint would beacceptable in the intermeeting period."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You can call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Guffey NoGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesPresident Melzer YesGovernor Seger YesPresident Syron YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next meeting is October 3rd. Wewill break for lunch.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's a long way off.END OF MEETING-48-