Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 14, 1989A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, November 14, 1989, at 2:30 p.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellGuffeyJohnsonKeehnKelleyLaWareMelzerSegerSyronMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, Hoskins,Members of the Federal Openand Stern, AlternateMarket CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal and Parry, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, andSan Francisco, respectivelyKohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey,Ms. Munnell, Messrs. Promisel, Scheld, Siegman,Simpson, and Slifman, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account-2-Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Broaddus, J. Davis, Rolnick, and Ms. Tschinkel,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofRichmond, Cleveland, Minneapolis, and Atlanta,respectivelyMessrs. Judd, Meyer, and O'Driscoll, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Philadelphia,and Dallas, respectivelyMs. Krieger, Manager, Open Market Operations, FederalFederal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofNovember 14, 1989CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move the minutesof October 3rd?SPEAKER(?). Moved.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We need a motion toaccept the Report of Examination of the System Open Market Account,which I believe was distributed a few days ago.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Cross, would youstart us off?MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Cross? Lee.MR. HOSKINS. I have a couple of questions. Did we intervenein support of sterling?MR. CROSS. No.MR. HOSKINS. We did not. That was [incorrectly] reported?MR. TRUMAN. The Desk did operate [in sterling], but--MR. CROSS. Well, I was talking about for our account. Wedid operate for the Bank of England in our market.MR. HOSKINS. As an agent?MR. CROSS. With their funds, as an agent. We do that quiteoften for any number of central banks.MR. HOSKINS. Is the Treasury involved?MR. CROSS. No, this was a Bank of England operation; all wedid was to undertake it in New York.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I remember that the press was assumingthat we were acting on our own account at that point.MR. CROSS. We haven't intervened in sterling for our ownaccount for as long as I've been in the job.MR. HOSKINS. This question may not be appropriate for you.Did we disburse any of our funds on the Mexican bridge loan? Becauseit's being [unintelligible]--MR. TRUMAN. That was before the last meeting, in early--11/14/89MR. HOSKINS. It was already done.MR. CROSS. That was disbursed and reported at the previousmeeting.MR. HOSKINS. Okay.MR. CROSS. In fact, there has been a modest repayment sincethen. So that's [not] all fully outstanding.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Mr. Cross? Tom.MR. MELZER. Sam, when did we last have short-term interestdifferentials as narrow as we have now?MR. CROSS. Well, they are not only narrow; the Desk wastelling me this morning that German interest rates throughout therange beyond six months are now higher than ours. And this is thefirst time, I suppose, in a decade--maybe [more].SPEAKER(?). Maybe back in the '70s.MR. CROSS. I don't know how long, but certainly it has beenmany years.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sam, with a tremendous narrowing--andnow you're saying a reversal of spreads--that essentially implies astable or firming dollar. What happens when the spreads are no longernarrowing or are going against us? In other words, does one assumethat, adjusted for that process, there's a much stronger dollarunderneath the system?MR. CROSS. Well, I think people can come to differentconclusions on this. But certainly the reasons for investing in thedollar or in the mark are affected by a large number of things inaddition to these interest rate changes. The events in Germany in thepast few days have been raising concerns about the stability of thepolitical situation there. And that can be a deterrent to investmentin the mark, certainly under these circumstances, even though it'sgenerally felt that over the longer pull--if there tends to bemovement of more workers into West Germany--that this is very positivefor the West German economy. It tends to lead to still higherinterest rates because it is going to lead to expansion and pressureon resources, which again may tend to--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The question I'm asking--and maybe it'smore appropriate to ask both you and Ted later because this may bepremature--is whether, adjusted for interest rate differentials to theextent that one can do that, the dollar has been very substantiallystronger. I see a very significant uptrend, and this flat trend ismerely offsetting these other positive elements against the negativesof contracting yield spreads.MR. CROSS. It's interesting to me at least that, with theinterest differentials having declined and in this medium to long-termrange totally disappeared, the dollar is still as strong as it is.11/14/89MR. TRUMAN. Yes. I think that's one of the factors, as yousaid, underlying its remarkable resilience in some sense, despite thefact that we've had this [move in the differentials]. So, I thinkit's fair to say that the last couple of days' movement in the Germaninterest rates has been more a German phenomenon, perhaps associatedwith a market interpretation of what's going to happen to Bundesbankpolicy three to six months out in light of all this. This is prettymuch what's going on with real interest rates in that context--although there is a bit of a difference between nominal and realinterest rates in this process. If you think in the short run thatthere's going to be some inflationary impact from this--and I thinkmost people would--even given the longer-run positive aspects, youcould then say that eventually the Bundesbank will lean against this,at least in nominal terms though maybe not in real terms. We may justbe seeing that; and that's a slightly different phenomenon than whatmight just be driving their--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What you're saying I think has to betrue.MR. TRUMAN. Yes, it has to be true.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The only question is: What is the orderof magnitude? In other words, it really gets to the question of howsignificant the yield spreads on--MR. TRUMAN. Well, Sam went through it. They have gone [up]by 350 basis points since April and the dollar is stronger than it wasthen. So, you've got to say that something has changed in terms ofexpectations for the future. The qualification that Sam put in there[relates to] how people also think they can get out if they need to.MR. CROSS. Short-term differentials vis-a-vis the mark havedeclined 363 basis points since April; and against the yen they havedeclined 400 basis points.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I haven't heard from Mr. Mulfordrecently; without looking at any of the numbers, I knew it had to besomething like that.MR. ANGELL. The Europeans by and large are forecasting thattheir inflation rates will not peak until sometime in 1990. I wassurprised that believe that theirs will move to percentbefore it turns down on a year-over-year basis. So there is someanticipation there that they have quite a stimulus going.MR. CROSS. As for the real impact, how much attention theseinvestors pay to inflation-adjusted interest rates is a big question.But it's by no means [clear] that if they think the exchange rate isgoing to be stable they don't pay too much attention to thesedifferences in inflation rates. If you take the inflation rates intoaccount, Germany's inflation is probably almost a couple of percentagepoints below ours. And in the real sense, the yield on their longer-term bonds is very high relative to ours. It is a good question as towhy they are--11/14/89MR. JOHNSON. But a year ago, Sam, their producer prices wererunning minus 5 to 10 percent; now they're running plus 3 or 4percent.MR. CROSS. They're now running around 3 percent, but theydid have some one-time changes in taxes and all, which affected--MR. JOHNSON. Did that improve?MR. TRUMAN. Well, the dollar's depreciation relative to oilprices [is a factor]. Its impact over the last year on our producerprices--and recently it has gone the other way--has been magnified bythe fact that the price of oil has gone up more rapidly than dollarprices have gone up. [Unintelligible] came through into the producerprices.MR. CROSS. It's very possible over time, as investors beginto pay more attention to this, that they will tend to switch more.But my little story was attempting to say that the interesting thingis the extent to which the investment still is moving into dollarassets in light of these circumstances.MR. HOSKINS. Sam, does the FOMC still review the ForeignCurrency Authorization and Foreign Currency Directive in March?MR. CROSS. Yes.MR. HOSKINS. Would it make any sense, since we have changedthe rotation of Presidents' [terms on the FOMC] to January to do thatreview then?MR. CROSS. It depends on the Committee.MR. TRUMAN. Well, the Committee may want to take it--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The February meeting.MR. HOSKINS. We will do it in February?MR. BERNARD. Yes.MR. TRUMAN. Presidents [may] argue against it, but it istrue that the task force was targeted to finish its work by the end ofMarch. [If you wait] a month we'll have more--MR. HOSKINS. No, we have [unintelligible].MR. TRUMAN. There is much work [to be done]; it's partly aresult of that, but--MR. CROSS. We have been aiming at March in trying to preparethis work that we were going to submit to the Committee.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mr. Cross? Ifnot, can I first have a motion to ratify the transactions since theOctober meeting?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So moved.11/14/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Also, Sam requesteda vote for a one-year extension of the swap line agreements. Motion?MR. MELZER. So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Second?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions on Peter's report? Ifthere are no questions, do you want to discuss the leeway issue?MR. STERNLIGHT. Fine. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any questions on the leewayissue? If not, can I have first a motion to ratify the Desk's actionssince the October meeting?SPEAKER(?). So move.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. And similarly, onthe leeway request.SPEAKER(?). Move it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Prell and Mr. Truman.MR. PRELL. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for either gentleman?MR. JOHNSON. I graciously point out that your forecast wasaccurate, but under a different interest rate scenario. And since Iask this every time, to the extent that I follow them: What reasonswould you give as to why the forecast will stay on course with a muchdifferent interest rate path? What would you say are the majorfactors?MR. PRELL. Well, for one thing, we actually did haveinterest rates rising through the first half of this year. Thesurprise on the interest rate path has been essentially since thespring. With the lags, one wouldn't have expected a very largedeviation over the recent period. As we look forward into the firstpart of 1990, we get the offsetting influence then of the lagged11/14/89effects of the dollar firmness on net exports. Those are at least twothings that come immediately to mind on how one might be able toexplain this.MR. JOHNSON. By rising rates do you mean the funds rate?MR. PRELL. Right, particularly [the funds rate].MR. JOHNSON. But long rates didn't rise, really; theybounced around a little but they generally trended down, I think.MR. PRELL. They never rose very much; that's clear.MR. JOHNSON. Yes. So, it was the dollar mainly. And whatwas the other one?MR. PRELL. As we look into early 1990 I think these are thetwo offsetting considerations affecting GNP growth in the first partof 1990: we have lower rates than we anticipated but we have a muchhigher dollar than we anticipated.MR. TRUMAN. The dollar forecast error offset the interestrate forecast error.SPEAKER(?). Right.MR. JOHNSON. That's what I thought.MR. TRUMAN. That's the first approximation.MR. JOHNSON. One other point I'd like to raise is aboutprofits. Corporate profits, of course, have been reported as weak. Iwas wondering: How closely does the profits picture compare this timeto, say, 1984--I don't know if you have this at your fingertips--whenI remember we had a similar sort of picture developing in that we hada weakening situation occurring in manufacturing, and I think profitswere weaker in that same period; a similar type of squeeze occurred.The funds rate had been raised up until mid-1984, or something likethat, and then eased off.MR. PRELL. I don't think there's any comparison. Looking atthe chart that we had in our pre-FOMC briefing yesterday, totalnonfinancial corporate profits basically shot up in the early recoveryphase and didn't really move much one way or the other through 1984.They began to give way toward the end of that year and have eased offsince then almost continuously. But there has been a very sharp droprecently. Now, there are some rather peculiar things in the numbersbecause of the disasters; they eliminated some profits in the thirdquarter and we presume that BEA also will recognize the losses ininsurance companies and so on in the fourth quarter. So, that'sgiving us some one-time shocks. But I don't think there's anycomparison to that earlier period with what we're seeing now.MR. JOHNSON. So you'd characterize this as a much weakerprofit situation?11/14/89MR. PRELL. I think we've had a very marked decline and we'regetting to historically low levels of profitability relative to thescale of business.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Ted, I was a little surprised by the severity ofthe decline in net exports in the third quarter. I just didn't sensethe things that you [noted]. Does that seem to be a reasonable figureto you or is that one that we might--MR. TRUMAN. Of course, it was done without the Septembernumbers and our guess is that the September numbers will move itsomewhat in the other direction but not a lot. One of the factors isthe oil [developments] that I mentioned. There is a big bulge in non-oil imports; and remember, this is the opposite--like a barrel of oilis valued in 1982 dollars. So it has a big impact on the GNPaccounts. Cutting through those two factors, I think it is--MR. PARRY. Factor income was a big--MR. TRUMAN. Well, on the factor income side I would say wehave no information. That was not up [in] our forecast. And westubbornly think that they probably overdid it--or underdid it, if youwant to put it that way. I say that with some trepidation, since theydo make up the numbers--MR. BLACK. Self-glorified numbers.MR. TRUMAN. Well--MR. PARRY. There was such a dramatic change in [factorincome] and what they based that on. Why did they come up with--?MR. TRUMAN. We don't have a good story. Periodically, wetry to discuss that with them and we have not gotten a very good storyout of it.MR. PARRY. So that may be it.MR. TRUMAN. It could conceivably have something to do withthe loan loss reserves that were taken by banks and that kind ofthing. Conceivably, they may have attributed some of that--. I don'tknow how they treat that.MR. PARRY. [Unintelligible.]MR. TRUMAN. Or something like that. Conceivably, that's oneof the factors. That has been one of the factors before but theyhaven't [told us]. They push these things around, so that may be oneof the areas where they have done that. They also have tendedsometimes to fudge, but one factor in particular for the third quarterthat we tried to take account of is the fact that developing countriesmay stop [servicing their debt], but there weren't any particularfactors of that sort in this period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob, are you [unintelligible]?11/14/89MR. PARRY. No.MR. GUFFEY. Just as a matter of interest, Mr. Chairman,there have been some comments about trying to project what this Germansituation may mean for their economy and our economy. I have heard afew comments with respect to the demand that will be generated bythese 200,000 or 250,000 immigrants [from East Germany] that arehopefully skilled and will go to work and produce. They will be in aposition of demanding the [unintelligible] if nothing else.SPEAKER(?). Housing.MR. GUFFEY. Beyond housing.MR. TRUMAN. Yes.MR. GUFFEY. What does that imply for their economy and oureconomy or for interest rates in that market?MR. TRUMAN. As I said, first of all, we had some of thisbuilt into our forecast for Germany because there already had been inthe early part of the year a marked increase in the flow of migrationto West Germany. So, some of this is built in on both sides. Butobviously, in the last couple of weeks (a) things have gotten more soand (b) things have gotten fuzzier in terms of the total overallmagnitude. But it is clear that there is going to be more demand inthe economy in the short run--by that I mean in 1990 and 1991--than weotherwise would have had. And that will tend to put short-run upwardpressure on prices and so forth and so on. Germany is an importantmarket and, of course, it has multiplier effects in Europe. But[East] Germany's exports are 4 percent of total German exports. Soit's not big; it's not West Germany, in any case. And as I said,presumably that pressure, given the current state of the Germaneconomy, will be met to some extent by Bundesbank policy, at least Ithink, in terms of the dollar [being] somewhat higher than itotherwise would be. Again, there is some question about what happensto real rates assuming that we [unintelligible] for them. The otheraspect is that it has not been decided yet what they are going to doon the fiscal side. I understand that there is at least talk inGermany about having a special tax to finance this sort of thing. So,a lot of these expenditures are transfer payments--for transportation,or publicly subsidized construction in the housing area, and so forth.It's a little hard to shape the whole macroeconomic situation untilone is more certain about the overall dimensions and the overallthrust of macropolicy. I think that's one of the reasons why theBundesbank itself is not going to rule [that] out ahead of time--because they don't know to what extent there will be fiscal policyoffsets to this situation.MR. PARRY. Mike, I have a question. We have had relativelystrong growth in real disposable income in the past two years. If youhad the traditional relationship between changes in real disposableincome and consumption, how much greater strength would we have inconsumption in 1990 than shown in the Greenbook, particularly in thenondurables and services areas?MR. PRELL. I guess I'm not clear how you're connecting thepast two years with 1990.11/14/89MR. PARRY. Well, typically the [equations] show currentconsumption as a function of current and lagged values of realdisposable income. I think the Greenbook goes into some specialfactors that may be causing consumption not to be responding asrapidly to changes in real disposable income. So I'm asking: If therelationship were traditional, how much more strength would you get?MR. PRELL. I don't think we're anticipating anything that isreally extraordinary in that relationship. We have personalconsumption expenditures next year growing roughly in line withdisposable income. One might argue, looking at the rise in thewealth-to-income ratio that we have seen over the past year or morenow, that you might tend to get a little stronger consumption growththan income. We haven't put a great deal of weight on that argument.But I don't think we have anything extraordinary, given our incomepath and that background on the wealth effects. Looking at thegyrations and relationships over the past couple of years, one needsto be mindful of the short-run effects of increases or decreases infarm income--which probably don't feed through to consumptionexpenditures--and various other special features of the incomecomposition. But looking forward, I think we have a pretty steadyrelationship here between income and consumption.MR. PARRY. A lot of the weakness in the economy, if you'relooking at the dollar source of weakness, is focused in nondurables;that's down to 1.1 percent, which is very small. And perhaps evenmore remarkable is services, which got down to 2.6 percent. They havebeen down that far, but that's not typical.MR. PRELL. We're expecting rates of growth in those itemsthat would look low by the standards of this expansion. If yousomehow felt that everything else was right about this forecast--particularly looking into 1991 when, in our forecast, import pricesbecome a significant factor in creating something of a wedge here indepressing growth of disposable income relative to growth of activity--then you get into questions about whether people are viewing theseas transitory terms of trade changes or something more permanent. Ineffect, we've assumed that people will take the permanent view andthat they will reduce their consumption expenditures in line with thatweaker disposable income growth. If they persisted, then you wouldhave a tension here, which I think is sort of in the vein of yourquestion.MR. PARRY. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. First of all, Mike, I've been meaning toask you about these very substantial differences in our seasonalsversus BEA's on the 10-day auto numbers. I assume that you use theirdata because that's what the GNP is made up of. But why are theirnumbers so different? I don't remember [the difference] being largerthan it was in the first 10 days of November.MR. PRELL. This is a striking gap. Larry [Slifman] canspeak with expertise on this subject. We have been around on this anumber of times in the past and have argued with them about it; ourraw judgment is that they don't really take a very careful view of the10-day seasonals. We have tried to, but that still leaves last monthwith a considerable gap between the monthly numbers.11/14/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Your seasonally adjusted data aresmoother than theirs. What do they require for conviction?MR. PRELL. Given the recent numbers, I think we ought to goback and haggle with them about this some more.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I say, it's a very big difference.MR. PRELL. The product you get differs considerably.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would sense that what [they] aresaying is that the market is falling apart. You're saying it'sasleep.MR. PRELL. Looking at assembly schedules on our seasonalversus [theirs], on our seasonals you don't have this appearance of asignificant gap. Basically with [unintelligible] vendors impliedsignificant inventory accumulation going on. So it's an importantquestion. And this recent 10-day figure just amplifies this again.We'll talk to them some more, but we've had many conversations withthem and thought maybe--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. While you're doing that, could you alsofind out why it is, which I gather is the case for Boskin, that BEA'sestimate of the Boeing effect is minus .4 versus our minus .6 percent.MR. PRELL. I might say that in the past one of the things wehave wrestled with BEA over is their willingness to adjust for thetiming of model changeovers. We have been a bit more flexible andadaptive on this than they have and that has created, in a number ofyears, some significant differences in pattern. I don't know whetherthat's a continuing problem this year, where once again things werenot necessarily perfectly aligned with the historical norms.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions?MR. ANGELL. Yes. Mike, in Q1 1990 you have producersdurable equipment leading business fixed investment up and then it'sback down again in the second quarter. What gives rise to that?MR. PRELL. That is the Boeing gyration. It's depressing PDEin this quarter and increasing it in the next quarter; then you'reback onto the trend of growth.MR. ANGELL. But that's assuming this strike ends when?MR. PRELL. Indeed, this is all assuming that the strike endsat the end of this month and then that production gradually gears upto full [speed] by the first of the year. So, obviously, there isroom for some significant short-run deviation.MR. PARRY. There are offsets in inventory, right?MR. PRELL. Offsets? At this point, since it appears thatthe suppliers are still providing materials and components to dealers,those are piling up. You're not getting the value added of theassembly. But that could change, too. If the strike went on beyondour assumption, we would expect that to become a factor.-10-11/14/89MR. SLIFMAN. Governor Angell, let me just say in answer toyour question that once we take account of our assumption about Boeingthen we would have, in fact, a rather smooth deceleration in PDEgrowth over the near term.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. I have two questions, which I think are probablyrelated to special factors as well. One that you have alluded toalready is the rebuilding effect of the national disasters. It seemsthat that occurs very quickly and then tapers off. I just wonderabout that--with no better information on my part than watching whatwe see being reported--because it seems that it would require moreover a longer period of time.MR. PRELL. We have a higher level gradually diminishing aswe go out through 1990. But it is--MR. SYRON. It comes on pretty quickly.MR. PRELL. What we've got built in is not as much as thenumbers that one hears--$5 billion or $8 billion that we're looking atin terms of damage and so on. You don't know how much of that reallywill be replaced; you don't know in the short run how much will besqueezed out by that effort, to the extent that factors of productionare reasonably totally utilized in an area. The possibility of doingthe repair work and still maintaining the other activity that wouldhave occurred becomes a question. So, I think there is some upsidepotential here from our forecast on the rebuilding.MR. SYRON. That was one question I had. The other questionhas to do with the output figures in 1990. I'm just wondering ifthere were some special factors contributing to the pattern in outputper hour compared to the growth rate in GNP?MR. PRELL. In productivity?MR. SYRON. Yes, because you have productivity increasing asGNP is decreasing.MR. PRELL. Basically, we have the stronger effect as theeconomy is decelerating. And that's what one normally sees. As laboris adjusted to lower levels of production, you get some bottoming outin the growth and some tendency toward slight acceleration--you movecloser to the longer-run trend of productivity expansion.MR. SYRON. And your longer-run trend is?MR. PRELL. Something over 1-1/4 percent, maybe.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for the twogentlemen? If not, it's time for us to do our round robin or tour detable. Who would like to start? Mr. Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, in the Eleventh District there isnot very much new to report. I think it's fair to say that theexpansion--what little we have had--has slowed. Private nonfarm andfarm [income] was basically unchanged between July and September. The-11-11/14/89Texas index of leading indicators has fallen for four consecutivemonths. The declines have been moderate, suggesting continued weakgrowth rather than a recession. The declines have been led by durablegoods manufacturing; nondurable goods manufacturing is holding up alittle better. Services have been strong, with growth in businessservices especially strong. The construction sector does appear tohave bottomed out finally. I guess the best words we are hearing arearound the Houston and Gulf Coast area, although those words are notquite as good as we were hearing several months ago.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Conditions in the District seem quite consistentwith the national trend of moderation, but the moderation is perhaps abit more apparent in the District because of our very significantcommitment to manufacturing and also the importance of the autocompanies and export-related activity. And because of that, I thinkmanufacturing may be showing something more of a downturn in our areathan is true in the rest of the country. Just to add a word or two tothe automotive comments that we've already heard: clearly, sales aredown from the higher levels that were recorded this summer. Mycontacts in Detroit suggest that November and December levels willcontinue to be under--and I think quite considerably under--theaverage for the year as a whole. Even though the fourth-quarterproduction schedules for the domestics are down, nonetheless theyanticipate that they are going to go through the end of the year withpretty high inventories at the dealer level. As a consequence, atleast one manufacturer has a preliminary forecast of these variablesand what strikes me is the size of the decline in production for thefirst quarter: down 18 percent compared to last year. Otherautomotive-related businesses obviously are showing signs of weakness.Heavy trucks are down significantly and diesel engine orders for onemanufacturer are down 40 percent in September. Given all of this, theunemployment levels in the District are showing signs of increase. InIllinois, for example, unemployment went from 6.2 percent in Septemberto 6.8 percent in October; in Michigan it went from 8.1 to 8.2percent. If you look at the District as a whole, unemployment numbersare clearly over the national average.But offsetting that trend there is, I think, some good newsin the District. First, the steel business--and it surprises me--hasbeen quite good. The industry has been working off some pretty highinventory positions in a variety of products. They seem to be aboutthrough that. So there is an expectation that for some productsproduction is going to pick up. For 1989 shipments are forecast atabout 83 million tons; for 1990 the number is lower--from 80 to 81million tons--but still hardly a [unintelligible]. Farm equipment hasbeen particularly good, given that the production of crops has beencompleted. Farm income, of course, is good and expected to remaingood. Large tractor sales in the third quarter were 15 percent overlast year; combine sales were 86 percent over last year's. Clearly,that's a part of the industry that is doing much better. Productionis higher but they are going to be very careful not to build up toohigh an inventory position. Construction activity in the District,particularly on the commercial side, remains surprisingly strong. For[unintelligible], for example, we have about 13 million square feetavailable for lease and another 9 million under construction. So,we're heading toward a vacancy rate that's going to be in the 15-12-11/14/89percent area, which for us is pretty high. Despite that, new buildingseems to be coming on.On the inflation side, by and large the current developmentsare consistent with some moderation built in over a long period oftime. Marketplace conditions for farm products seem to be very tight,with not as much latitude there as people would like. In fact, someprices are coming down. In the steel business, for example, the steelplate--[load] bearing or structural--prices really are coming down.And in agriculture, despite this significant improvement in business,they expect price increases next year of about 3 percent--not as muchas they would like and certainly very low levels. On the wage front,wage rates are going up but I don't sense any particular big breakouton the up side. And in the manufacturing sector, at least among thosethat I talk to, people have overcome the [wage] increases withproductivity improvements so that costs are remaining in line. So,things are working out about as we expected. I think the fourth-quarter numbers, as more of them begin to emerge, are going toevidence considerably more weakness than we saw in the third quarter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the economy in the West continuesto expand at a healthy pace despite the destructions associated withthe Boeing strike and the earthquake. Employment in the TwelfthDistrict grew 3.3 percent over the past year, which is considerablystronger than the 2.7 percent we experienced nationally. Discussionswith our directors and other business people in the area indicate thatbusiness activity remains robust. But I think there's a generallyshared expectation that [it will be] slowing. The Boeing strike showsno sign of a settlement and is beginning to affect the Puget Soundeconomy which, of course, was the strongest economy in our District.We estimate that personal income has been falling by about $25 to $30million each week of the strike. Even assuming some generousmultipliers, I think that probably translates into less of an effectthan is included in the Greenbook, but I'm really not sure about that.If the strike were to continue to the third or fourth month, it isanticipated that the direct income losses would be on the order ofabout $60 million; but of course there would be secondary effects thatwould multiply that rather significantly. The negative effects fromthe quake are likely to outweigh the positive effects during thecurrent quarter. I don't know how much rebuilding refers to the quakeand how much actually applies to [hurricane] Hugo, but we feel that isoffset by businesses that have slowed significantly due to actualbusiness closures, the loss of tourists, and the interruption ofnormal traffic patterns. The number of unemployment claims, forexample, has skyrocketed in hard-hit areas such as San Francisco wherethey are up 60 percent. If you get out to the Santa Cruz area, in oneof the smaller towns there, Mutsenville, they are up 200 percent. Atthe present time, recovery efforts are limited to utility repairs,structural inspections, and demolitions--although I know demolitionsadd to GNP! With a few notable exceptions--the exception being theBay Bridge, which will be opening Friday--in general there's not muchgoing on in terms of repair and rebuilding for the simple reason thatthe earth is still shifting and people are unwilling to do anythinguntil that shifting stops. And that typically [lasts for] a 3- to 6-month period.-13-11/14/89At the national level, we expect growth to be stronger thanthat in the Greenbook. We feel that consumption spending shouldbenefit from the lagged effect of the strong growth of disposableincome in the past two years. Moreover, strong investment in businessequipment is expected to result from backlogs of orders for aircraft;also, the continued reduction in the relative price of informationprocessing equipment should be a positive development and a source ofstrength for business spending for equipment. In our view, if theeconomy expands as fast as I think it could, which is around 2percent, then unemployment will rise only modestly and I think upwardpressures on the underlying inflation rate are likely to persistthrough the end of next year. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Conditions in the Sixth District haven'tchanged very much over the last couple of meeting periods, Mr.Chairman. We're chugging along at somewhat below the nationalaverage. Unlike the San Francisco District, though, we are gettingsome kick or boost from rebuilding resulting from the Hugo hurricaneeven though the worst effects were in Bob Black's District. Thedemand for building supplies and construction materials is coming notonly from the Southeast but from the Caribbean as well, and that'sgiving a good push to transportation as well as to port activity.Beyond that, we're getting pretty good export experience withchemicals and grains as well. But the weaknesses in the Southeast andin the Sixth District economy are kind of overwhelming those positivethings and we're seeing a rising unemployment rate--we are at about6.2 percent in the District as a whole. Some of that is skewed, ofcourse, by Louisiana; but we are seeing unemployment creeping upgenerally in other states. We have weakness in textiles because of adrop in domestic demand. That is something they have been afraid offor a while; they have been sustained to some extent by foreigndemand. But the domestic demand now is beginning to fall off andwe're getting corresponding weaknesses in apparel, carpets--carpeting,obviously, is related to the housing shortage--paper, and autos, ofcourse. In construction, even though we have a lot of overbuilding inresidential and in office buildings, the financing is available andthe construction continues to go on. That's particularly true inAtlanta where we're getting a movement from a lot of class B buildingsto class A. The buildings keep going up and I just think we're goingto have a pretty bad vacancy problem down the road. Also, we'reseeing a buildup in retail inventories and the contacts that I've beentalking to don't forecast a very good Christmas season. Prices andlabor conditions seem to be okay. We're not getting a lot of pricepressures--consistent with the weakness in the economy, I suppose--andlabor shortages are not significant.With respect to the national economy, we think that theeconomy will be somewhat stronger in the near term than the Greenbookforecast. That's basically because of our forecast for net exports,which we think will be a little higher. I'm not sure whether I havementioned this before--I think perhaps I have--but I continue to beimpressed by the number of people who initiate conversations with meabout the softness in the economy. From the auto people andconstruction people you can expect that, but pretty much across theboard I'm getting telephone calls and people stop me on the street andthey talk to me at parties about how terrible things are. I think-14-11/14/89some of this is exaggerated but I'm really paying attention to this.I don't remember that happening before. I think back particularly to1986 or 1984 when we had some weak quarters and I didn't get this kindof outpouring of emotion about it. I don't know what that tells me inreal terms but it's something that clearly gives me some concern. Inour forecast we also see unemployment being a little flatter than theGreenbook, but basically we're in accord with the Greenbook. Therisk, in my view, is clearly on the down side at this point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. [Conditions are] somewhat better than I havereported earlier. Although things generally haven't changed much,this is the first time in three FOMC meetings that we've had anincrease in nonagricultural employment in the most recent three-monthperiod. We still have some weakness in manufacturing employment--somewhat less than I've talked about the prior two times--but the weakareas are food processing, electrical equipment, and transportationequipment. The electrical sector we've talked about; I think that'slargely appliances. The auto area has been mentioned. We've had someshutdowns: a week at the medium and heavy truck plant in Louisvilleand about a month at one of the two Ford plants there. Chrysler hasin [unintelligible] and they have announced that that plant will beclosed indefinitely after the first of the year--or actually, one ofthe shifts will be laid off after the first of the year. It involvessomewhere between 1600 and 1900 workers. Interestingly enough, attheir other plant, which manufactures minivans, they would like to adda third shift. They made a proposal to the unions for three 10-hour aweek shifts and the unions turned it down. So, they could be puttingsome of those idle workers back to work if they can't get it done.One other comment, which I think confirms what Mike said in theGreenbook in terms of other consumer expenditures ex-autos: Werecently had a luncheon with chief financial officers, and twoindividuals--one with a very large national retailer and another witha smaller retailer--confirmed that they view this environment as idealfor their business. Things are going well and they are quitecomfortable with how things are going; that was a bit surprising tome. That's really all I have.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. In an overall sense, I think we ought to begenerally pleased. We're trying to steer the economy through a narrowchannel and we're doing that. However, I must say that when you arein that narrow channel it looks even narrower than it did before yougot there. What I'm sensing is that the risks are more on the sidethat the economy is going to grow too slowly rather than faster. AndI think the Greenbook numbers are too bullish; I think we will seeslower growth over the next six months. I'm not running into the sameemotion that Bob [Forrestal] is running into. But the sentimentclearly runs between one of concern to bearishness. Real estatepeople are very bearish; construction--in the residential area--isdown and we're going to run into some bankruptcies there. We areheaded toward some over capacity in terms of nonresidentialconstruction and I think it's going to take us several years to workthrough that. Manufacturing is softer in the Third District than itis in the nation as a whole. The retailers feel reasonably good aboutChristmas, but I don't think their expectations are all that high. So-15-11/14/89I [wouldn't describe] the retail area as much more than flat. I makethese comments in the overall context that this is what we set out toachieve in terms of steering the economy. But nonetheless, I havemore concern that we're going to overdo it on the soft side ratherthan underdo it. And that will have some effect on my policyprescription in the next part of this meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Well, I'd say the First District economy is mixedto slow. Previously, the declines have been confined to the high-techarea, the real estate area, and generally in construction. But nowthey are broadening out to the economy as a whole. We actually hadtotal employment over the last three months fall by 1 percent, pacedby a 4-1/2 percent decline in manufacturing employment, withnonmanufacturing employment staying pretty flat. Previously,financial services had grown at some pace but that has leveled outnow, and many banks particularly are taking steps to reduce costsbecause of their [unintelligible] problems. We've seen very slightincreases in the trade sector. Housing permits are down 30 percentover a year ago and 60 percent from their peak level. And we arebeginning to see some decline in house prices, by I'd say 10 to 15percent, which is different. There's a substantially increased numberof auctions as some developers do go bankrupt. Needless to say, loandemand is not terribly strong in this situation. Among themanufacturers that we surveyed that are active nationally, there isactually an amazing degree of almost unanimity in that they arereporting slow growth--not strong growth, but still things are notfalling off the edge of the cliff. They're seeing increases in growthof about 6 to 7 percent, and that's because of a wide range ofproducts from telecommunications equipment, milling equipment, andmaybe personal care products, with some people saying they have[unintelligible] and greater strength overseas. An exception to this,of course, is suppliers in the auto industry and the computercompanies. Computer companies in New England, because of particularproduct mix issues, just have not benefited from what's happeningelsewhere. Actually, that's a lot of the source of the weakness inmanufacturing employment. Despite this, inventories generally havenot been a problem, although in a few particular cases they have builtup. Retailers are not anticipating a good Christmas, which is to beexpected in these circumstances; and as you also would expect, theyhave kept their inventories quite lean in this situation. Pricesgenerally have been very well behaved. There has been some mention ofan increase in prices of specialized metals such as tungsten. Labormarkets have softened in line with the increase in unemployment thatwe've seen. And now for the first time--though we've seen this acrossmany skilled classes before--no obviously exorbitant rates are beingoffered to starting labor at fast food chains.As far as the national economy goes, we don't have any realdisagreement with the Greenbook, which we believe does not show a badprofile for the intermediate term given what we want to accomplish. Ithink Ed is right: we're steering down a relatively narrow channelhere; I'm not quite so sure that I agree that we're listing to oneside or the other. The more important question that we're going todiscuss is what we want to accomplish over the longer run. I thinkthere's fairly broad agreement within this group that we do want toget to a greater degree of price stability over time. I know at the-16-11/14/89next meeting we will talk at some length about what the cost of thatwould be. I would note that the Greenbook assumes that policy remainsessentially the same through the middle of next year and then tightenssomewhat after that. Even in that circumstance we really don't seeany improvement in inflation, as measured by the CPI ex-energy through1991.On the labor front, we have seen pretty well behavedsettlements. I thought I might just mention the Nynex settlementbecause I happened to talk last night at some length to one of themediators in that case. There are two unions involved--the IBEW andthe New England Communications Workers of America in New York. Thiswas but it's the same settlement in both places.Sadly, the settlement is not as favorable to management as issuggested in the press releases but it still is not disastrous.Basically, it probably comes down to about a 12 percent settlementover 3 years depending upon what one thinks is going to happen tomedical costs. That was the big issue in this strike--virtually allmedical costs continuing to be borne by the employer--and that's whatpeople stayed out on. Ultimately, Nynex gave in on that. In terms ofwages themselves, the contract provides for 3 percent the first year,1-1/2 percent in the second year, and 1-1/2 percent in the third yearbut with a COLA in the second and third year that is equivalent to theCPI minus 2 percent--60 percent of the CPI over 2 percent is a betterway of putting it. It is interesting that the inflation assumptionthat was used or agreed on by both the union and the company was a CPIof 4.7 percent the second year and 4.8 percent the [third year]. Themedical cost--and I think this may be on the low side--is estimated atabout 2 percent of the cost with regard to the agreement proposal overthe life of the contract.In terms of the relevance of all of this, I believe that wedo have to think about this price stability business. One thing thatstruck me in the Greenbook was that we have two sets of leadingindicators and both of them--I think for some time now--have beentrending down and showing the probability of a recession. I don'tknow whether that's [unintelligible], whether we're seeing asymmetrical risk in either direction. So, I'm not really terriblyworried about that. I do think we've staked a good deal ofcredibility and have a lot of credibility right now. That was broughthome, and I'll finish on this, by a conversation we had with the chiefplanner at --and this is kind of anironic result. He said he was expecting a recession next year becausehe thought the Fed really wanted to get inflation down and the basicunderlying rate of inflation was around 5 percent and that was toohigh and thus we were going to tighten. Now, this was in a call thatwas made by one of our economists. But a lot of people are payingattention to what we say and I am concerned that we maintain thecredibility that we do have. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, comparing the District economy to thenational economy, it looks to me like the District economy continuesto do a bit better than the national economy. Agriculture has had apretty good year; residential construction has picked up a littlerecently; and mining and forest products and paper industries are alldoing well--there's expansion underway in those, certainly in the-17-11/14/89mining and the paper areas. Tourism had a good year thus far andwe're expecting a good winter season; employment gains have been smallbut the unemployment rates remain low pretty much throughout theDistrict. At the retail level, at least among the major retailers,they have had a good year and they're anticipating a good holidayseason and are quite optimistic. Where there has been softnessrecently is where we've seen it nationally, it seems to me, and that'sin manufacturing. One of the questions I've been asking myself is:What are the implications of what we've been seeing in manufacturingnationwide? How much weight ought to be given to what's happening inthe manufacturing sector? I think what we're seeing is at least a bitreminiscent of what happened in 1985 and 1986. In going back andlooking at that period, manufacturing employment nationwide declinedover those two years by about 600,000 workers. For a period of time,at least, new orders for nondefense capital equipment were flat andpurchasing managers' surveys showed some weakness. While all that wasgoing on the economy really turned in a pretty respectableperformance. Having said that, though, it was also a period wheninterest rates were coming down and money growth was accelerating.But it seems to me that it tends to emphasize a couple of things ofwhich we're always aware. One is the uncertainty in looking at theoutlook. And the second is the caution required, because coming outof the 1985-86 period the real growth continued--if anything probablymore strongly than many had expected--and there was some clear uptickin inflation and inflationary pressures at the same time. So myreading of recent economic history suggests that the economy probablycan weather some heavy seas at least in manufacturing. It may requirea response but it seems to me that we want to be cautious about thedegree of that response.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, the Greenbook projections haven'tchanged very much since last time and neither have ours. We continueto believe that if there is risk, the risk is probably that theeconomy will be a little weaker than the staff have been projecting.That feeling has been heightened by recent anecdotal information thatwe've been picking up. I got a particularly interesting piece thismorning. A president of one of the small investment firms in Richmondsent me a collection of articles published by a guru he's beenfollowing for some 30 years and he said that the problem with theeconomy was that the Reserve Bank Presidents had recently startedattending the Open Market Committee meetings and they were bullyingyou into accepting tighter monetary policy, which he thought wascorrect! But more important than that, our directors at their lastmeeting were decidedly less optimistic about the economy than they hadbeen. They reported weakness in commercial construction andautomobile sales a good deal weaker, with several dealerships introuble. They said manufacturing activity appeared to be softeningand loan demand was flat at some of the large commercial banks. Butthey went ahead to stress that despite all this, they didn't think[the economy] was really falling out of bed. And labor was still verytight. But in view of this indication that we've gotten from varioussources, the Fifth District is probably slowing to some extent. Sincethis area has been one of the stronger parts of the national economy,we think that the national economy, if it isn't right on target withthe Greenbook's projection, will perhaps be somewhat weaker than that.At the same time, we're a bit more optimistic--the Richmond Fed staff-18-11/14/89has been assuming no change in monetary policy--on the inflation side.Given the amount of tightening that we had in '88 and in '89, we thinkwe're going to begin to see some dividends from that. I think thereis some evidence of that in the squeeze in profit margins now; despiterising labor costs, firms are not able to pass that on to pricesbecause there's more resistance to those prices. So, we are hopingthat we'll do a little better on the inflation front than the staff isprojecting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Well, some of the things I wanted to say havebeen said. But I'll say a couple of things. I made that point aboutthe forecast because a couple of things still trouble me about it eventhough I think the Greenbook forecast has been on track pretty well.In terms of the overall [picture] I don't think it's just the dollarthat's the difference; if that were true, I think you'd expect to seemost of the weakness in the exchange rate sensitive sectors. In fact,even though interest rates have been much lower than the scenario thatwe've been forecasting, interest sensitive sectors of the economy arethe ones that are quite weak. Housing is down; automobiles are weak.Generally, the domestic interest sensitive sectors are part of theweak sectors in the economy. So I don't think it's just the fact thatthe dollar is strong; as a matter of fact if the dollar was thatstrong you'd expect more import demand than we're seeing as well, withthe interest rates as low, and we're not seeing that either. So Ithink real interest rates at least are high enough to be causing ageneral slowing and that is feeding through to the inflation rate. Iknow it's not dramatic progress, but if you look at the core inflationrate changes, the CPI excluding food and energy was 4.7 percent in1988 and it's running about 4 percent this year. The PPI ex-food andenergy was about 4.8 percent last year and it's running about 4-1/2percent so far this year. Intermediate prices ex-food and energy were7.2 percent last year and are down to 1.7 percent so far. Crudematerials are about the same. Those are all positives. I think thequestion is really how much risk we want to take. It's true thatlabor costs have not done as well as some of the improvement on theoverall inflation rate. Labor costs seem to be running at about thesame pace as last year. When I look at total compensation in nonfarmbusiness or in the whole private sector area, that is running close towhat it was last year both in the goods producing and the servicescomponents. But that's what's causing the profit squeeze and, as waspointed out, profits are falling significantly. And I think that'spart of the process that has to work to hold the line on prices andactually get the benefit on inflation that we want. Again, I thinkthe key question is really how much risk we want to take and what kindof timing we want for the improvement. We could get it all at once,but I'm not sure that's a risk we really want to take.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. The Fourth District is one of those Districtsthat has no natural disasters to report, although I know some of youbelieve that Cleveland is a continuing national--I mean natural--disaster.MR. KELLEY. Did you say national disaster?-19-11/14/89MR. HOSKINS. No, natural disaster. [That was a Freudian]slip. Not a lot has changed. We hear some of the same sentimentsthat you all have expressed around the table--namely, that there seemsto be more caution expressed by business people but they can't find alot of trouble right now in terms of their own businesses. They arestill making commitments and making some investments. It's true thatthere is slowing in the growth rates of the order books, particularlyon the capital goods side. Just one piece of anecdotal informationthat came out of the who has a majorcontract RV type of business, [unintelligible] retail, and he hadattended a group meeting of these guys that do a lot of this sort ofstuff and they said that the year, in terms of dollar volume, is goingto be up significantly. So RVs seem to be continuing to move along,at least according to him. It is true that our unemployment rate isup about a full percentage point--from under 5 to about 6 percent inOhio. Most of that, though not all of it, is just a slowing in thegrowth rate because we've had a very strong economy. But there is no[sense of] falling off the cliff that we could find as we searchedaround out there. People are pretty comfortable with inventoriesright now.In terms of the national outlook, we have no disagreementwith Mike's forecast. Now, I presume it's an unbiased forecast, whichmeans to me that the errors could be equal on either side. Mike cansay it better than I can--and that is that given the current forecast,the error one quarter out on real GNP could leave us either at thestart of a recession or could leave us in what we would call a boom.So I guess I have some concerns that we're torturing our ability toforecast with this fine-tuning that we are doing currently. Withrespect to Ed's channel, I think we must have made a mistake becausewe've gone through the wrong channel. The channel that I thought wewere after was one that was aimed at reducing the rate of inflation.The channel we're in here, according to the Greenbook forecast, is oneof continuing inflation at about the current rate. So, I hope we canfind our way to a new channel soon before we end up finding out thatthe inflation rate is actually accelerating.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As far as the forecast, our bankstaff forecast is still slightly stronger than Mike's forecast, as ithas been for some time, but the differences are hardly statisticallysignificant. And again, as it has been for some time, our inflationforecast is slightly higher. Leaving aside the technicalities of theforecast it does seem to me that the two major areas of uncertaintyare capital goods and exports. And, of course, they're both related;they both get right to these questions that have been raised about themanufacturing sector. The point that Gary Stern made about keepingthat in some perspective is very valid. I am a little more agnosticthan some are in terms of trying to explain to my own satisfactionwhat is going on in the manufacturing sector and its possibleimplications for the economy at large. For example, I have a very,very hard time accepting the view that anything along the lines of thecurrent level of either nominal or real interest rates should becapable of triggering a significant cumulative decline in the economy.Indeed, I'm not even sure myself--and I have not been for some time--how much of the slowing in the so-called interest sensitive sectors ofthe economy is really due to interest rates anyway, especially in a11/14/89context in which the underlying prices of things like cars and housesand so on have been going up rather sharply, at least until recently.I'm also a little perplexed by the exchange rate arguments.Certainly, as Mike or Ted said earlier, it's true that the exchangerate we are seeing is one that is a good deal stronger than was builtinto the forecast going back, say, nine months ago or something likethat. But there too it seems to me that at least part of thatstronger exchange rate is being offset by a stronger growth abroadthan was being thought about early in this year. It seems to me thatin the context of this uncertainty about net exports, and exports inparticular, the current exchange rate in the face of the growthpatterns that we're seeing in the rest of the industrialized worldshould be compatible with continued quite respectable growth inexports. Indeed, I'm beginning to worry that if that's not the casethen something may be more seriously wrong than we think in terms ofcompetitiveness or something. I can't quite bring myself to the viewthat even the current exchange rate, in the face of the very stronggrowth abroad, should not yield quite a respectable continued growthin net exports.Now, the inflation situation I see as a Catch-22 in that Ifind it difficult to get too caught up in the inflationary prospectsso long as the broad measures of wages and compensation are behavingthe way they are. Indeed, if you look at our forecast and the Boardstaff's forecast, both now have unit labor costs growing faster thanthe deflator in a context in which, as Governor Johnson has pointedout, this profit squeeze is already very sharp. I don't see how youget any relief from that until you see the wage and compensation coststurn down. One of the worries I have is that if you build from wherewe are in terms of profits and profits as a share of GNP, what aperiod of four or five or six or seven quarters with a negative spreadbetween unit labor costs and the deflator implies for profits raisessome pretty serious questions in my mind about the implications forstock prices. The last point I would make, which is germane to theseissues about manufacturing and the profits squeeze and exports, isthat for the first three quarters of this year--if I remember thestatistics right--the rate of net private investment for the economyas a whole is now down to 4.7 percent of GNP. And that is a very,very low number. And how we're going to get out from underneath avariety of these problems and get the productivity kicks that canreally help us with this inflation problem with an investment rate of4.7 percent of GNP is a real question.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's called fiscal policy.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I know that's what it's called.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Roger Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There hasn't been agreat deal of change in the Tenth District since the last meeting.There are two or three things that I'd like to comment upon, however.One of them is an analysis of our third-quarter farm credit surveythat we do on a quarterly basis. That clearly is showing that arecovery in the agricultural sector is continuing, as evidenced by thefact that this was the 11th consecutive quarter where farmland valueshave increased; they are currently about 8 percent above year-ago-21-11/14/89levels and roughly 23 percent above year-end levels of 1986. One ofthe other things that's rather striking is that the loan-to-depositsratio in agricultural banks, as opposed to all District banks, is only51.4 percent, and that happens to be a high for the last three or fouryears. They are looking for loans and there is some takedown ofcredit within the farm area. However, agriculture has had a bumperyear, notwithstanding the two years of drought, largely becauseproduct prices together with red meat prices--particularly cattle, anduntil recent times, pork--have been very high and sustained. Retailsales District-wide are roughly flat. However, in talking with themajor retailers, they think their inventories are in line; they arelooking for a normal or usual Christmas selling season and they feelvery good about the positions they now occupy. With regard tomanufacturing, it has steadily increased. There is the problem ofBoeing--with Wichita being fairly heavily dominated by Boeing--andtheir being out on strike. On the other hand, the auto assemblyplants that we have are still going full tilt, meaning two fullshifts. The exception to that is a GM plant in Kansas City that isnow on a two-week shutdown and I'm told that they anticipate anadditional two weeks at or near year-end. They are cutting back theirproduction to meet the forecast of auto sales on a national level.With regard to prices, we don't have any clear evidence that there isany strong pressure on prices. The real problem that is beginning toshow through on the wages is the cost of fringe benefits and that willbe amplified a bit in the first quarter with the additional socialsecurity requirement.With regard to the national forecast, we have no quarrel withthe projections that are contained in the Greenbook. For the fourthquarter we might be a couple of tenths weaker than the Greenbook wouldshow. That simply tells me that if our primary objective is to slowthe economy below its natural rate, then we're on track; I don't thinkwe should panic. As a result, hopefully, we will get some indicationof lower inflation rates. However, this forecast doesn't reveal thatas far as I'm concerned. The Vice Chairman of the Board made somecomments about evidence of lower prices; he reads the numbersdifferently than I do, I guess. Regional management differs--MR. JOHNSON. I was just quoting the numbers ex-food andenergy. If you look at the totals it's not quite as clear.MR. GUFFEY. I understand. The last thing I would note isthat unemployment in the Tenth District in all four of the majorcities in which the Bank operates is below the national rate ofunemployment. Some of that may be as a result of out-migration thattook place in the more difficult times; but there is potential forsome price/wage increases as a result of our labor shortage. That'sall I have, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Wayne Angell.MR. ANGELL. I have the same question. My hunch is that thefourth and first quarters are going to be somewhat weak, as forecast.But if you look at the more forward-looking items such as moneygrowth, we have had M2 back on a fairly decent pace for about fivemonths now and I've been surprised that commodity prices haven'tcontinued to move down. I know they have moved down in certain of theindustrial measures, but it seems to me a pretty isolated group of-22-11/14/89commodity prices that are continuing to move down. And they haven'tmoved down very much in comparison to how much they moved up in the1987-1988 period. So, it seems to me that we have a ways to go inregard to restraint on those commodity prices. We had a seriousdrought, which took farm commodity prices up a great deal. We havenot had what you would call a normal movement of commodity pricesdown, which you would typically get; that is, going back over the postWorld War II drought periods, ordinarily you would get more movementdown of commodity prices than we have had. I'm somewhat [stymied] inmy view concerning where we are because commodity price behaviorhasn't been what I thought it was going to be. I guess that's one ofthe problems you have when you begin to target something; perhaps youought not to look at what you think it's going to say. I think thereare times when you [unintelligible] not see as much; it does not giveme the sense of an economic slowdown that I felt in 1985 and 1986. Itjust isn't there. And I think it's crucial that it get there becausethe wage sector is no longer lagging as much as we would like. It'skind of upon us and we probably have some tough periods ahead.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I think one of the times when youhave to be careful is when you get what you want, which is pretty muchwhat has happened here. It's a time to be careful because you have todevelop a pretty careful view of what it is that you want to do next.We have the slowing that we looked for and that does leave us with thequestions that Governor Johnson raised a little while ago: How slow isit going to get? How slow do we want it to get? And a more practicalquestion is: What are the best ways to influence the process properly?To me, this quest for price stability that we're all on and believe inis playing itself out against the background of some pretty powerfuland large forces. The inflationary forces we pretty well understand.We have an overemployed and overconsuming economy and all that thatrepresents. But I'm haunted by what seem to be some underlyingdisinflationary forces that I wish I understood better than I do.They seem to me to be having a powerful influence, perhaps, on thefavorable results we've been getting over the last year on inflation.Given the very full economy that we've got, inflation did not take ona life of its own to the extent that we might have expected it to ayear ago. It seemed to stop what upward momentum it had before therewas really much of an apparent slowdown in the economy. I wonder whatunderlies that? The major force that I can see is that there seems tobe a tremendous amount of very low cost capacity in a wide variety ofindustries and commodities around the world. And capital is doing avery efficient job of seeking that out and exploiting it and holdingcosts down. I think the downsizing of GNP that you've spoken of veryeloquently, Mr. Chairman, is a factor. It seems to me that we may beentering an era where we're servicing debt more than creating debt,which is deflationary. I don't know what all those forces are, if Ican use that word, but they seem to be manifested in this profitsqueeze that we have going on now--with costs being pushed up and theinability to pass that on through prices. That would be inflationary.But it can't go on forever; something has got to give. I certainlyhope it's on the cost side. But maybe a key conceptual approach froma policy standpoint is that we really don't want either side to wintoo terribly conclusively. If inflation becomes dominant, we knowwhat that scenario would be and that's unacceptable. In the slowdownscenario that we have here, it may be time to begin to think a bit-23-11/14/89about the power of those underlying deflationary forces--I guess Ishould say disinflationary at this point; they could becomedeflationary and lead us into some really serious problems that mightbe avoidable. I don't know that that's something that we have to dealwith right now but I think it's something that we should keep in theback of our minds and strive to understand or get a better grasp on--at least better than I have. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I just have a couple of comments. I think thisquarter and the next two are probably going to be quite weak, possiblyeven turning in some red ink performance. I believe the weakness willbe centered in manufacturing--because we already have seen that--andalso in construction to some extent. Some of my contacts inmanufacturing indicate that in their view manufacturing is already ina recession or within a gnat's eyebrow of being there. To use autosas a specific example, I have been talking to people in the last fewdays in that industry and they are the most negative I've seen--notsince 1985 or 1986 but since 1982. That is probably becauseproduction is running about what it was in 1982. While they expecteda payback from the sales spurt in August and early September, which ofcourse was a result of the very generous incentives, they didn'texpect this much of a payback. The very weak October and earlyNovember sales performance has come as an unpleasant surprise, atleast to my contacts. There were a couple of things I heard mentionedfor the first time from these folks. One was the complications comingfrom the weak financial condition of a number of the automobiledealers, including very large dealers. The statistic given to me wasthat about half of the auto dealers in this country are losing moneyin 1989. We're not just talking about a small marginal group but avery major group. And that tends to lead to an unwillingness to carrythe same size inventories as previously because the dealers just don'thave the wherewithal to fund it. Therefore, at the moment you'reseeing a very poor flow of orders to the producers from the dealers.It's a combination of the weak consumer demand for cars and also theefforts of the dealers to cut back their existing inventory levels.There are still apparently quite a few carryover 1989 [models] thatthey would like to dispose of but haven't been able to.Another interesting thing came up in the comments ofHe said a number of the dealers weretelling him that some of their would-be buyers of Cadillacs are sayingthat they are knocked out of the market at the moment because theirARM mortages had adjusted upwards and, even though they're "in thebucks" so to speak, they are finding their monthly payment going up--these are people who don't live in shacks like I do--by $400, $425, or$450 and apparently that's just enough to discourage some of them fromgoing ahead and buying a new automobile at the same time. That's thefirst time I heard that comment. Also, this unpleasant surprise isforcing a basic analysis of how much manufacturing capacity theyreally need. Chrysler is looking at this and so is GM. I think GMhas four plants, although they haven't identified the exact four orfive, that are going to be shuttered for good. Believe it or not,we've been concerned about capacity constraints; well, on autos we'vehad excess capacity and new capacity coming on stream all the time.So there are going to be these more permanent adjustments takingplace--not in Roger's District; he's very lucky. But the assembly-24-11/14/89plant down the street from my old apartment in Detroit is getting itFebruary 2nd. So, I would change places with you if your business istoo strong down there. Also, I heard mentioned [by my contacts in theauto industry] concern over the strong dollar and what that is doingin the high-priced end of the market, particularly because expensiveGerman cars are now coming into this country at sort of bargainprices. And this is making it more difficult for the Americanmanufacturers to compete with them. Also, the rather feeble effortsof Chrysler to do some exporting of cars is now being impeded by thestronger dollar this year.Finally, I'd like to mention just a couple of things I'vebeen picking up about construction and housing. One is the sad impactof the FIRREA legislation on the ability of builders to get loansbecause S&Ls apparently haven't had the kinds of lending limits onindividual loan size that banks have had. Now with FIRREA they do;it's 15 percent of their capital. So, a number of developers arehaving a hard time getting loans of the size they need to do thesedevelopments. Also, the HUD parade of homes march is on and thecompetition from the foreclosed homes, at least in some parts of thecountry, is very significant. And that is tending to keep discouragedbuilders from putting up new homes. So, my personal feeling is thatwe're going to see further problems in both the manufacturing arenaand in construction. I hope I'm wrong. We'll find out by fourth ofJuly next year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I must say that Ican't find any fault with the Greenbook projection except that it'snot what I'd like to see.MR. HOSKINS. Don't let that stop you!MR. LAWARE. It's particularly discouraging to see aprojection of further significant deterioration in the employmentnumbers coupled with no projected improvement in the inflation rate,at least as measured by the CPI. We have in the Greenbook here a two-year look toward the near nirvana of stable prices that we havesubscribed to, with no progress toward that end. And that means thatwe're 40 percent of the way there without having gotten there yet. Itmakes one wonder, given the lackluster economy that's projected here,if the only way to see less inflation is recession. And I don't likethat. At the same time, that's coupled with information aboutcorporate profits that, even adjusted for the losses of the banks inthe third quarter due to [loan loss] provisioning, are certainly notvery robust. And when corporate profits are being constrained bynarrower margins [unintelligible]--and these are not just confined tothe automobile industry, they are widespread across American industrytoday--then you have to start hacking away at the costs. And thefirst place you start that is with employment. We're seeing it incomputers; we're seeing it in autos; we're seeing it in banks; andwe're beginning to see some evidence of it, I think, in the defenseindustry. If we haven't already, it certainly looks like it's comingdown the trail. At the same time, we have a number of fragilitiesthat remain out there: the banks; the overhang in the real estatemarkets with the RTC situation; and even some other areas which havelooked until very recently to be a lot healthier. And then of course-25-11/14/89you have the punk-junk market, which I think is balanced on a verythin knife's edge. Recession to my way of thinking is a decidedlydangerous alternative because I think the bulwarks by which we try toinsulate ourselves or our industries against external shock are verythin. And if the economy in fact is any softer underneath than theGreenbook would seem to indicate, then we may be closer to the edge ofthe abyss than was indicated. And with that, I'm sure you can hear mydove-like wings flapping on the bridges.MR. KELLEY. Along with mine.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. With that, I think it probably would bedesirable to break for coffee.[Coffee break]MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, I'll be brief--well, not too brief.[Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Kohn?MR. MELZER. Don, this is unrelated to the presentation thatyou just made, but I wanted to ask you what you thought the frictionallevel of borrowing was. If it were necessary to inject more reserves,would you view it as a problem if the funds rate actually droppedbelow the discount rate?MR. KOHN. Well, even under alternative A [the funds rate]would still be a point above the discount rate. The difficulty, Iguess, is that we're obviously looking at close to frictionalborrowing levels. If the Committee were to decide to ease, forexample, I do think that Mr. Sternlight could inject some morenonborrowed reserves, attain a funds rate that wasn't somehow out ofcontrol in relation to the discount rate, and borrowing would decline.Now, we said that under alternative A you would get a $100 million[decline in borrowing] for the 50 basis point [decline in the fundsrate]. I wonder whether it wouldn't be less than that, given where weare on what's probably a very steep portion of the borrowing functionright now--whether it would take a very small change in borrowing toaccomplish that easing in policy. I think it's possibly quitefeasible. I don't think we're in a situation where we're in danger ofsomehow letting the funds rate/discount rate relationship get out ofwhack or losing control over where it's running now.MR. HOSKINS. I'd like you to talk a little about why wedon't have an alternative C. It surprises me that the risks ofrecession clearly dominate the staff thinking relative to the risks ofinflation. Another way to say that is that to me it looks likeFederal Reserve policy is designed to prevent the inflation rate fromfalling.MR. KOHN. I gave this some thought. There were two majorfactors weighing in my mind for not having an alternative C. One wasthat not having it in the Bluebook didn't mean the Committee couldn'tvote on it at the meeting if it wanted to. But the other factor wasthat policy had just eased and thinking about reversing that actionafter it had just been taken seemed so strange. And, we are justtalking about policy between now and [the next meeting]--December 17th-26-11/14/89or 18th or whenever it is. So, I made a judgment that alternative Cwas so unlikely to be chosen that I didn't put it in the Bluebook.MR. HOSKINS. Let me just follow up with a question aboutwhen you might bring it back in. What are the odds that money growthwill go to 9 percent rather than 7 percent? Or if it stays at 7-1/2percent through the year-end are we going to look at "C"?MR. KOHN. Well, we expect it to stay at something close tothe 7 percent range through year-end; and at the current level ofinterest rates we'd expect to see it growing about like that in thefirst quarter of next year. I certainly have no problem putting in analternative C for those who are bothered by that level of moneygrowth. As I said, we thought about it this time and didn't do it;but most of the time we have it in.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Alternative C will show up if anybody onthe Committee wants alternative C to come back. Any other questionsfor Don? Let me get started on our last round robin. I think whatwe've been listening to today is really what our fundamental dilemmais--namely, that there is no viable clear-cut path that gets us towhere we would like to be without some assistance from the fiscalside. I've made this point to the President and his associates andtried to explain, in effect, that there is a downside limit to how farshort-term interest rates can go without retriggering inflationaryexpectations and a significant recession on the other side of that.There may be some dispute as to whether or not that level is 8-1/2percent on the funds rate, or 8 percent, or if it was really 9 percentor even higher. But what I think is reasonably certain fromeverything we've been looking at and discussing today is that theflexibility that we have to achieve the dual goals of declininginflation and still sustainable growth clearly is a window--which mayin fact not be there. In other words, I am talking in terms of EdBoehne's and Lee Hoskins' various channels. Neither one of them maybe opened in a practical way for us to drive through without someassistance on the fiscal side. I don't know to what extent that isgoing to be driven [unintelligible] but there is some clear indicationfrom the White House at this stage that they may be getting serious.The business of letting the sequester stand is not altogether a sham.There are some fundamental discussions going on in private in thatarea. It looks to me as though what is likely to emerge is a partialsequester--that is, a sequester which will be permanent for threemonths, followed by some reconciliation bill which hopefully will getthe type of [fiscal policy] that the Greenbook presupposes. But shortof that, I'm not sure that we have a viable window.I also would like to point out that we have some verypeculiar values out there. Jerry Corrigan strikes a very importantchord when he raises the issue that unit labor costs at this stage areseemingly locked in at an unacceptably high range and improvement onthe inflation side presupposes the necessity of declining profitmargins. And declining profit margins, in the context of where I readthe real expected rate of return on American securities and Americanstocks, suggest to me that we are now in a bear market. If the bearmarket is rather soft and cuddly, that's fine; but if it decides tomove rather fast then I think we will get some of the wealth effectsin the GNP accounts and the economy will tilt over. I must say,however, that the data on orders suggest to me that they are still11/14/89weak but they are not deteriorating; we're not getting any evidence atthis stage, of which I'm aware, that suggests that we are on aslippery slope. I think orders are soft and backlogs are stilleroding. I do think it is surprising that steel orders have flattenedeven though backlogs are down. Aluminum orders still continue quiteweak. The respective commodity prices, I might add, are following theorder patterns rather surprisingly well, which is suggestive of thefact that commodity prices are now sort of a new ordering indicatorrather than an inflation [indicator] per se.I think it's a very sensitive period for us and I'm not surehow we will come out. But I think we have to grope our way along.While not losing sight of our long-term goals, which I think arecrucial, we also have to be careful not to fumble into a severerecession. That will make the capability of our achieving the long-terms goals politically unavailable to us. So, it's not going to bean easy next six months. In some of the most recent orders data Ithink there is at least some suggestion that we may well make it; butit's going to be close. I come out after all of that not knowing verymuch more to recommend than alternative B, asymmetric for no otherreason than that's where we are at the moment. Wayne.MR. ANGELL. Well, it seems to me that we're at a juncturehere where it's time for us to pause and see what happens. The fourthquarter and the first quarter are the consequences of the monetarypolicy that we implemented in the second quarter and the thirdquarter. We are already past [influencing] those. Whatever thesequarters turn out to be, it would be most unfortunate for us to have aslowdown--or a slowdown near to zero if it's that slow, which I don'tthink it is--and then not to capture the price level opportunity thatyou get from being there. It would just be such a waste to step up tothat point and then not to capture the benefits. So, I think it'simperative that we not be too caught up in tuning in on the employmentand output numbers that we're going to be seeing. I think we have toremain forward-looking. Most important, it seems to me that thedollar exchange rate is out there. And it seems to me that we cannotgo through a period of substantial dollar weakness in foreign exchangemarkets without absolutely upsetting all the financial markets. Theonly way that I can see us not going through such a period is for usto make some gains on the trade balance in this window [ofopportunity]. I am more encouraged from talking with central bankersin Europe and Japan concerning their growth prospects. We have anopportunity now for them to grow faster than we're going to grow and Iguess I'm going to be on the optimistic side, as the Vice Chairmanwas, in regard to exports. It seems to me that our policy ought to bedesigned to keep nominal GNP in the 4 to 5 percent range and hope thatwe get a fantastic real GNP out of those numbers. If we hold to thatkind of a pattern, then I think there's ample opportunity to [get] theexports we need to do or [get] the crowding out of imports. I thinkwe're now moving in the period where that has to take place. So, Mr.Chairman, I also favor "B;" but frankly, I'm more of the symmetricmind in the sense that I would like us to be in a position that we notmake another move in the near future without having a real concerteddiscussion of the FOMC concerning that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.-28-11/14/89MR. MELZER. I would favor "B" symmetric as well. I couldlive with "B" asymmetric, as you suggested. I have thoughts that Ithink are quite similar to those Wayne expressed. First of all--and Imentioned this on the "Call"--we've got to be careful in the short runabout not overreacting to the current data. We've been on the movefor some months now with policy. And if we made a mistake with policyI don't think we're making it now; we probably made it last winter orearly spring. But we certainly have taken the steps over the lastfive or six months, as I view it, to put policy back on an appropriatelonger-term course. The second point I would make relates to thislonger-term view of what we've achieved over not quite a three-yearperiod. If you go back to early '87, we were looking at 12 quartersof trend growth of money that was almost 12 percent and we broughtthat down over this period of time to a little less than 5 percent.That's reflected in the P* model. It's very consistent with ourlonger-term goals and I would just hate to see us trade all thatprogress away by overreacting.My final point is that, to some extent, I think we have to becareful about how we characterize what we are doing. Even though weall believe in it and understand the benefits of zero inflation,however defined, I'm not so sure how broadly supported that would be.I've heard comments--not today, but around this table--aboutbusinessmen thinking the environment we have been in is just fine andwhy not just continue that, with inflation running 4 to 5 percent. SoI think it's important [to recognize] as we look at what's going onhere that there are some forces operating that are much bigger than weare in this sense. Now, it's not totally unrelated to monetarypolicy, but we've got this external imbalance situation that we'reliving with and that's imposing certain things on the economy. If wedon't run the type of policy we've been running, which is consistentwith that, there will be a much more drastic adjustment imposed on theeconomy. I suppose people could come up with a longer list, but tocite another example: we also have an adjustment going on to theunsustainable credit growth that we have observed, really, throughoutthis recovery. There are a lot of situations where people have gearedtheir plans toward an economy growing much more rapidly thanpotential. To the extent that we can lay out a broader set of issues--that it's not just the Fed single-mindedly pursuing this pricestability objective and ignoring all else--I think it would be to ourbenefit. I'm not sure how to do that. But I think that's a risk ofwhere we are right now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I would go along with "B" withasymmetric language. I recognize that we've done quite a bit ofeasing in recent weeks and that M2 is growing pretty strongly.Clearly, at some point, as Tom expressed it so well on the "Call" theother day--and Governor Angell has made the same point--we're going tohave to start paying more attention to the aggregates and less tothese short-term indicators of real economic activity or else we'regoing to be headed for a lot of trouble. I don't think we've reachedthat point just yet, but that's clearly a judgment call. Having saidthat, I think it is very essential that we keep our eyes firmly on ourlonger-term goal of bringing down inflation. Accordingly, I think anyfurther easing, even that little amount permitted by the proviso,should be approached very, very cautiously.-29-11/14/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I agree with the Chairman's proposal for "B"with asymmetric language. I think that's really where we are. Therisk is clearly on the down side and I don't mean just on the realeconomy. If I didn't personally think that we weren't going to makebetter progress than the Greenbook has indicated on inflation, Iwouldn't want to tilt that way. As the Chairman said, we're at thestage where we have to be very cautious and not risk tipping theeconomy into a major recession because I don't believe the generalpublic is going to understand our causing a major disruption to get apercentage point or two out of the inflation rate when we're alreadyaround the 4 percent range. So, I'm a gradualist in that sense and Iwear that band pretty proudly. I think we ought to be very carefuland try to make gains in a sensible way. I don't think we have muchmore easing to do; I agree with Governor Angell on that point. Whatwe're seeing in the economy now is the result of policy months ago andI think we're getting closer to where we ultimately want to be.Clearly, when the funds rate got down close to 6 percent in late '86or early '87 it was too low. I think a lot of us thought oil priceswere going to stay down better than they did. So I don't think wewant to return to those types of interest rates. But at 8-1/2 percenton the funds rate we've still got a ways to go; and the markets arecertainly anticipating that we have a ways to go, but not a lotthough. And I think that's the point. The longer we wait, if theeconomy deteriorates on us, the more we're going to have to move. Andthat's something we ought to try to avoid. [We ought to be] seekingout where we ultimately want to be, getting there early enough, andthen letting the lags work their way through. I think we're close tothat stage but we ought to be positioned to make another modest movebecause I don't think there is any upside risk to that. I thinkthat's where we should be.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I agree with alternative B and the asymmetricaldirective. It comes down to risks--and I think the risks are on thedown side--and how much you're willing to take a chance on the economygoing down to get some gains on inflation. I think we have to viewinflation in this current sensitive context in a longer-term view.So, I support where you come out, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I support alternative B as well. Ihave a preference for symmetric language as a result of my concernsabout inflation and the inflation rate incorporated in the forecast.I must admit that I'm not quite sure I fully understand the initialpart of your statement about how, if we don't get help from the fiscalside, it may make it impossible I think you said to reach ourobjectives with regard to inflation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I don't know if it's impossiblebut I think it will be very difficult to do so without breaking theback of the economy.MR. PARRY. I would hope that one thing we can look at inthis study that is being done for next month is how the burden on the-30-11/14/89economy is affected by different assumptions about fiscal policy;because it's not obvious to me how the total burden on the economychanges with combinations of fiscal versus monetary policy. But Iknow how the burden on us changes. Okay?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. I agree with your suggestion basically becauseit's no change. Given what we did last week, I don't think we havemuch choice right now. I think we're in a very difficult situation.As Ed Boehne said, it is a question of risks; and I agree with TomMelzer's point that some reality testing has to be done out there andI'm not quite sure how we get that to occur. But given the lagsinvolved and what we've already done, I just don't think it makes anysense to make any changes at this time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So you're "B" asymmetric?MR. SYRON. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your assessment. Itseems to me that in a broad sense we are accomplishing what we set outto do and that it's coming out about as we would have expected. I dothink the discussion around the table indicates that the economy isfar different this time than was the case the last time. Having saidthat, I think we've done quite a bit over the last month or two andthis is an appropriate time to simply stand back and see how thingswork out. I'd be in favor of alternative B. I don't feel stronglyabout the language, but would have a slight preference for asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I would support your recommendation, Mr.Chairman, of alternative B with asymmetric language. There are only[a few] thoughts I would add to this. Given the uncertainties aboutthe near-term economic outlook, this may be a time to pay at least abit more attention to the aggregates, to M2. Analytically that makessense; also, M2 has responded in recent months more or less asexpected and I think we can get some help there. If I fully believedthe staff's inflation forecast for 1990 and 1991, I would be verydiscouraged about what we're facing. But the one thing I do concludewith that forecast is that I would be very worried about declines inthe dollar from here on out.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I would associate myself withthose who say we need to keep our eye on the long-term goal of pricestability. And I certainly wouldn't want to give back the gains thatwe've made over time. However, I think we need to keep in theforefront of our minds that price stability is only one of the goalsof monetary policy; it may be the primary one but I think we can't beseen as recession tolerant. And like you and other speakers earlierin the day, I think the risk of recession is beginning to grow. Ithink what we've done is sufficient for the moment; I would stand backand wait at the moment. But I have a feeling that we may have to ease-31-11/14/89a little more before the end of the year. So, I would favor yourproposal of alternative B with asymmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I favor "B" asymmetric; Iprobably could tilt a little more toward asymmetric than we have inthe past, but I'll leave it the way it is.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Asymmetric prime.MR. LAWARE. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I would agree with alternative B;I have a fairly strong preference for symmetric language. Also, Iagree with those who have already expressed the view that theinflation forecast that we have in the Greenbook doesn't show verymuch progress there. Granted, we have risks on the down side of theeconomy; but on the other hand, I'm not sure that we've had theopportunity to see all of the effects flowing through of what we havedone in terms of ease over the last few months. I guess I'm hopingthat that will keep us from slipping into recession. But I think wewould make a bad mistake if we really didn't keep inflation fairlyhigh in importance.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I hate to be odd man, or woman, out again, but Ifeel fairly strongly that we are running the risk of a recession. Andif we are worried, as I am, about the waning strength of the economygoing into next spring, say, the steps have to be taken now toinfluence it at that time because of the well known lags involved. IfI were convinced by my illustrious colleagues here that throwing usinto the recession tank would solve our inflation problem I probablywould vote differently. But I don't see that a recession is going tooffset the impact of unwise legislation--by our friends under the domedown the street here--that would put upward pressure on businesscosts. I don't think that a recession is going to solve the medicalcare costs and the nursing shortage. Maybe we ought to deal withrecruiting more nurses and getting rid of some of the excess lawyerswho are chasing ambulances and getting big settlements which aredriving up costs and not try to deal with it through a recession.These are the kinds of things that are contributing to inflation. Ihave a hard time seeing at the moment that it's excessively strongdemand and shortages of capacity. So, having stated all that, I wouldprefer alternative A. Actually, when I look at the difference between"A" and "B" as described here by Don Kohn it isn't as if the one isgoing to produce monetary growth double the other. You're talkingabout really rather modest differences but sufficiently great, Ithink, to make a difference come next spring. I would go for "A."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I support your suggestion of "B"asymmetric. I think that weakness is far more apparent than strengthand I think we need to be very careful with it here. "B" is where we-32-11/14/89are now and I would certainly hate to appear, however implicitly andindirectly, to be taking a stronger stance than we presently have. Ithink it's extremely likely that any change that we would make in theintermeeting period would be to the accommodative side and that weshould reflect that in the directive. I also do not think that thatprecludes -:he possibility that we can continue to make some smallprogress on inflation, as we have done in recent months and quarters.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I've been looking forsome time for an opportunity to agree nearly 100 percent with WayneAngell. And I do.MS. SEGER. It must be bonus time!SPEAKER(?). It wouldn't be so bad.MR. BOEHNE. I realize it's getting late.MR. GUFFEY. I think you stated it very well. We have hadeasing over the last four or five months of roughly 1-1/4 or 1-3/8percent, which on a base of something less than 9 percent is asubstantial easing. To be sure, the outlook is for [the expansion] tobe slow in the fourth quarter and into the first quarter; in my view,that's what's needed. I'm not sure that that's enough to get us tothe objective that I think we all would like to achieve--and that issomething closer to price stability, however defined. As a result,given that we sort of preempted this meeting by an easing a week or soago, clearly I'd favor maintaining what we have now with a Balternative. I would still opt for a symmetric directive because Idon't know what an asymmetric directive now means, Mr. Chairman. Wetook two cuts in the intermeeting period which is a little beyond whatI thought even an asymmetric directive meant without a vote.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "B" asymmetric is acceptable to me.But I do want to associate myself with those who are suggesting a needfor great caution at this point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. My only comment on where we are right now hasto do with our experience when we attempt to prolong expansions andthat is: that will induce a recession at some point if we pursue thatpath. I think what Roger Guffey has indicated, and Wayne did before,is right on target: that where we are now is a function of what we didearlier. If we were concerned about a continuing monetary policymistake, then we ought to check the aggregates. If they wereshrinking or not growing then I would say yes, we ought to be easingbecause we're making a monetary policy mistake. But in fact they aregrowing. In terms of the proposal in front of us, I would again agreewith Roger Guffey that given where we are there's not much choice.I'd prefer "B." [Unintelligible] reminds us that there are two sidesto risks in a situation; we ought to be reminded of that and take alook at that on a regular basis. So, I think we ought to go with "B."11/14/89I don't believe in fine-tuning. We've made the move, so let's livewith it for a while.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I read the general inclination here asbeing modestly in favor of "B" asymmetric but--to capture Bob Black'swords--should we move, that we should approach ease very cautiously.I think that's the spirit of what I hear around this table. Let's putthat to a vote.MR. BERNARD. Should I read the--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, please.MR. BERNARD. It would read: "In the implementation ofpolicy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain theexisting degree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking account ofprogress toward price stability, the strength of the businessexpansion, the behavior of the monetary aggregates, and developmentsin foreign exchange and domestic financial markets, slightly greaterreserve restraint might or slightly lesser reserve restraint would beacceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserveconditions are expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 overthe period from September through December at annual rates of about7-1/2 and 4-1/2 percent, respectively. The Chairman may call forCommittee consultation if it appears to the Manager for DomesticOperations that reserve conditions during the period before the nextmeeting are likely to be associated with a federal funds ratepersistently outside a range of 7 to 11 percent."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Guffey YesGovernor Johnson YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesPresident Melzer YesGovernor Seger NoPresident Syron YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next meeting is--MR. BERNARD. December 18-19.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. December 18th and 19th.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What's the timing going to be?MR. PARRY. Are we going to meet Monday afternoon?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think for the sake of the items[on the agenda] we ought to start at 12:30 p.m.; we better startearlier than 3:00 p.m.-34-11/14/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Hold it, everyone. Jerry Corrigan israising a question of whether we ought to start earlier.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Earlier than 3:00 p.m. on Monday.MR. KEEHN. Don't we have a fairly long paper coming up?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's what I mean. It seems to methat we really should be prepared to devote a good solid chunk of timeto these issues. I would suggest starting much earlier than usual; Idon't know about people's travel.SPEAKER(?). How about 1:00 p.m.?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. 1:00 p.m. and have lunch here?SPEAKER(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is that satisfactory to everyone?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, have lunch at 12:00 noon andstart work at 1:00 p.m.SPEAKER(?). That's good.MR. ANGELL. At least 12:30 p.m. for lunch.SPEAKER(?). On the 18th or 19th?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's start lunch at 12:30 p.m. andstart the meeting at 1:00 p.m. Is that satisfactory?MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, the 18th is a Monday; there's aBoard meeting. I don't know what the agenda is to be--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In my judgment, this preempts the Boardmeeting.MR. ANGELL. We can start the Board meeting at 9:30 a.m.SPEAKER(?). It'll be a long day!END OF MEETING-35-