Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeFebruary 7-8, 1989A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, February 7, 1989, at 3:00 p.m. andcontinuing on Wednesday, February 8, 1989, at 9:30 a.m.PRESENT:Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBlackForrestalHellerHoskinsJohnsonKelleyLaWareParrySegerMessrs. Guf fey, Keehn, Melzer, and Syron, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, andMinneapolis, respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Kohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryPatrikis, 1 Deputy General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, R. Davis,Lindsey, Siegman, Simpson, and Ms. Tschinkel,Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1. Attended Wednesday session only.Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Hooper, Madigan, and Stockton, AssistantDirectors, Divisions of International Finance, MonetaryAffairs, and Research and Statistics, respectively,Board of Governors2 3 3Messrs. Brayton, Duca, and Rosine, Economists, Divisions ofResearch and Statistics, Monetary Affairs, and Researchand Statistics, respectively, Board of GovernorsMr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Wajid, Assistant to Governor Heller, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Gillum, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Divisionof Monetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. T. Davis, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum, and Scheld,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofKansas City, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas,and Chicago, respectivelyMessrs. Burger and McNees, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Boston,respectivelyMs. Krieger, Manager, Open Market Operations,Federal Reserve Bank of New York2. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussionof the economic outlook.3. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussionof the economic outlook and its longer-run objectives for monetaryand debt aggregates.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofFebruary 7-8, 1989February 7, 1989--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd like to start by welcoming back DickSyron, who I understand was here during the tranquil days of 1981 and1982. I trust his return is an omen.MR. SYRON. There's no information for forecasting in that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We appreciate that and we thank you.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I guess you can't legally at this stageapprove the minutes. You weren't there; you never heard them.Somebody else try it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll move it.MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We'll start with thereport on foreign currency operations. Mr. Cross.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Mr. Cross? If not,may I have a motion to ratify all transactions undertaken by Mr. Crosssince the last meeting?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So move.MS. SEGER. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We'll move on todomestic open market operations. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Sternlight? If not,may I have a motion to ratify his transactions since the Decembermeeting?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Now we'll move tothe chart presentation of Messrs. Prell and Truman.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You should all have apacket of charts here with a red title on it. [Statement--seeAppendix.]MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, gentlemen. Governor Johnson.2/7-8/89MR. JOHNSON. Just one question: On this first alternativeforecast, what happens in a case where you don't have compensatingmoney growth to try and stay on the base line real GNP forecast andyou have an unchanged dollar?MR. TRUMAN. Well, in that case, of course, you would getmore current account improvement, a better performance of prices, anda little less--about 1/4 percent per year less--GNP growth.MR. JOHNSON. What's the improvement on the price side?MR. TRUMAN. Oh, the difference I think is about 0.2 percenta year for both years, 1989 [and 1990].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. I have a couple of questions. First, you areshowing compensation going up rather rapidly in 1990--plus 6 percent--but then you are showing personal consumption expenditures going uponly 0.9 percent. What's happening there--the saving rate?MR. PRELL. Well, job growth is much slower; thus, you're notgenerating the nominal income fast enough to offset the more rapidincreases in consumer prices.MR. HELLER. The 6 percent?MR. PRELL. I'm not sure what the nominal personal incomeincrease is.MR. HELLER. No, no. From the charts it looks likecompensation is going up 5.7 or 5.8 percent--whatever it is, I don'tknow.MR. PRELL. But we have very slow employment growth.SPEAKER(?). You get zero.MR. STOCKTON. You get about 5 percent consumer priceinflation as well as what's pushing down the overall growth in realdisposable income.MR. HELLER. The second question was: Foreign prices arefalling rather rapidly in the forecast in 1990, and in view of thefact that foreign monetary growth right now is a lot higher than it isin the United States in virtually all countries except Switzerlandwhat's their magic?MR. TRUMAN. I think their magic is that with this slightlyhigher money growth they have had a lower level of [inflation] onaverage to begin with more recently--with a few important exceptionslike the United Kingdom--and we are projecting a tightening ofmonetary policy in those countries. Also, for this two-year period,not including 1990, they get some benefit from the depreciation of thedollar that we're assuming in the forecast relative to their presentunderlying level of inflation. In addition, these, are year-over-yearcomparisons, and they would be coming off these artificial factors2/7-8/89that in 1989 tend to boost the price level up in Germany and Japan.Therefore, the year-over-year comparison exaggerates the decline.MR. PRELL. Governor Heller, just to clarify: those figureswere compensation for hourly wages. We have total nominal disposableincome rising just over 6 percent. If you take off just over 5percent consumer inflation you're down to about 1 percent incomegrowth in real terms.MR. HELLER. Okay. The last question: On chart 18, the nextto the last chart, you have a lot faster growth abroad under theunchanged dollar forecast. Presumably that would mean higher U.S.exports, yet the current account gets a lot worse?MR. TRUMAN. Right, because it [unintelligible] it more thanexports. There's no doubt about that: [faster] growth abroad doesboost the growth of exports in this period. I might add--MR. HELLER. But the two U.S. growth paths are exactly thesame.MR. PRELL. That's right.MR. TRUMAN. That's right, but that's by assumption. To theextent that you get more exports, the easing of monetary policyrequired to keep the U.S. growth path on the same line is less; sothat's part of this compensated--MR. HELLER. No. I'm sorry, I don't get it.MR. TRUMAN. To the extent that's correct--that without thedollar's decline there is more growth abroad--that by itself has apartial effect in that it generates more exports.MR. HELLER. More exports?MR. TRUMAN. Growth [abroad] itself does generate moreexports. To the extent that that produces more demand for U.S. goods,the experiment offsets that by having less monetary expansion in theUnited States to compensate for the exports that would otherwise bethere.MR. HELLER. So imports--SPEAKER(?). Net exports are falling a lot faster than thecurrent account [unintelligible] U.S. GNP is held on track byoffsetting [unintelligible] export increase with the exception ofinvestments due to lower interest rates. But the real[unintelligible] decline of exports [unintelligible] increase offoreign real exports, but raise the GNP level. They measure thisfrom--MR. TRUMAN. Well, in fact, it puts the two factors together,Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. I'm ready to give up.2/7-8/89MR. TRUMAN. The growth of exports is lower in this forecasteven though income abroad is higher because they gain more on theprice side than they lose on the income side.MR. HELLER. It all goes on the price effects?MR. TRUMAN. Yes. Prices are actually washed out. In fact,probably a better way of thinking of it is that the level of realexports is lower in the alternative than in the base line because thatimproved price competitiveness has a greater effect on exports thanthe gain in faster growth abroad.MR. HELLER. Sorry. I thought I heard you say initially thatexports were up.MR. TRUMAN. No.MR. HELLER. Now you're saying exports are [not] up--MR. TRUMAN. A partial effect of higher income is to putexports up. A partial effect of a stronger dollar is to put exportsdown. The net effect is negative for exports.MR. HELLER. Okay.MR. TRUMAN. Sorry for the confusion.MR. HELLER. I find it hard to see, but--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Bob, I think the reason you have trouble withthat is the same reason that I have trouble--because there is a basicinconsistency in the whole process, which makes all the resultsbackwards to me. And that is, the faster money growth that you havethere should be associated with a higher value of the dollar ratherthan the opposite. In other words, what we have here is the use of aconstruct that says in order to keep things the same you grow M2 at afaster rate. And by strange reasoning if you grow M2 at a faster rateyou'll have a lower value dollar.MR. PRELL. If you looked at the exchange rate implications,as I suggested earlier, of that faster money alternative that I have,that showed--SPEAKER(?). If interest rates are fixed.MR. PRELL. You have that dollar depreciation.MR. JOHNSON. That's why I asked that first question.MR. ANGELL. So, that makes everything backwards for those ofus who had seen that relationship as the [unintelligible] one.MR. JOHNSON. That's why I asked my first question about theresult if we didn't compensate on the money side.2/7-8/89MR. PRELL. This is compounding degrees of uncertainty, let'ssay.SPEAKER(?). Yes.MR. HELLER. Well, it certainly succeeded.MR. BLACK. You know, it certainly would help to have this[analysis] sent out a little ahead of time so that we could reflect onit a bit. That's a lot to digest in that short a period of time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob.MR. PARRY. On a somewhat narrower topic: I agree, Mike, thatthe nondefense capital goods orders are really good indicators as faras capital spending is concerned. But would it be better perhaps totry to take some of the lumpiness out of aircraft and parts as opposedto excluding it? Because it is an important factor with regard tocapital spending. I know it's very lumpy but maybe if you averaged acouple of months you'd get a better picture.MR. PRELL. I don't think so, President Parry, because Ithink the value of this indicator is relatively short run. The lagsthat one measures in the relation of orders to shipments tend to be amatter of several months. And in the case of aircraft, with thecurrent situation being what it is, the lead times are so long thatthe placing of orders has no meaningful--MR. PARRY. So it's not a lumpiness.MR. PRELL. That's apart from the fact that there are lots ofintermediate goods in there--parts [for example]--and a lot of thatgoes to exports. It's an even bigger problem there than it is fortranslating the other orders to business fixed investment. So,there's a great deal of slack for that.MR. MELZER. Mike, is the main difference in terms of yourdeficit assumptions--I forget what chart that was on--MR. PRELL. Second chart.MR. MELZER. Second chart. Is that based on the differencein interest rates--primarily that 6.3 percent or whatever the formerAdministration had been using versus what we are projecting?MR. PRELL. That is a good deal of the story. In 1990 thatis worth roughly $25 billion of the difference, all other thingsequal, between the Administration and Greenbook budget assumptions.MR. MELZER. One thing that strikes me in looking at this--and to some extent I agree with Bob Black that it's hard to absorb allthe implications of these alternative forecasts--but you get thefeeling that maybe our economic policy mix is really not what it oughtto be. And that sort of puts you in a fog. I think this is arhetorical question but, is there a way of positioning what we'redoing that puts us in a better posture in that regard? Because thereare a lot of things that come through in this that we could get blamed2/7-8/89for: the [unintelligble] deficits, stalling out of the tradeadjustment, you name it. And the politics become very tricky.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Greatly. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Maybe I'm missing something, but as you gothrough the alternatives is there one that would be comparable to,say, just freezing in place today's policy stance? I don't mean--MR. PRELL. If you mean by that the federal funds rate, thatis the "more money" alternative.MS. SEGER. Yes. But I guess that wasn't quite what I wasthinking of. And maybe I have the wrong view of what holding today'sreserve pressures would do. I sense that that might put a little moreupward pressure on rates. But maybe your "more money" alternative isgoing to be the status quo.MR. PRELL. It was intended to answer the question: What ifshort-term interest rates don't rise?MS. SEGER. Okay, thanks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's all right. I didn't know whetheryou were finished or not. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mike, a question on chart 5 on the consumerdurables: Is the decline in the red line solely attributable to adecline in car sales from, say, 10.6 to 10.2 million units, or in factdoes the slump of that line also imply some pickup in [unintelligible]of consumer durables?MR. PRELL. We have non-motor vehicle durable goodsincreasing 3 percent in 1989 and then flat in 1990.MR. KEEHN. What comprises the end of 1989 number?MR. PRELL. Within the durables? We have not done a greaterlevel of disaggregation on this.MR. KEEHN. I guess the question is: With home starts down,does that fit in it?MR. PRELL. It fits in to some degree. There is somerelationship there, though if you just look historically to the simpleeconometric relation you find it's pretty loose. In 1988 we had 6percent growth of durables other than motor vehicles. So that [1989rate] is a significant slowing. This level of housing activity isstill enough to generate some reasonable demand and then there is allthe replacement demand for appliances and furnishings and so on. Soit wouldn't fall entirely in that type of--MR. JOHNSON. One last question: How much of the base lineforecast for real growth is accounted for by net exports? Do youknow?2/7-8/89MR. PRELL. In 1989 it's a very small part; in dollar termsnet exports improve $22 billion and GNP is improving $122 billion--that's roughly 1/2 percent on GNP. In 1990 net exports are accountingfor roughly 3/4 of that 1 percent growth.MR. TRUMAN. The actual increase is not as much as impliedfor--MR. JOHNSON. I've forgotten: what's the implied dollardepreciation?MR. TRUMAN. Over the entire 8 quarters it's 13 percent innominal terms, 10 percent in real terms.MR. PARRY. Most of it in the second [year]?MR. TRUMAN. Well, a little more in the second year becausethe first quarter is gone.MR. SYRON. Mike, given what Ted has said in here and whatwas said about oil prices in the Greenbook that we got earlier, onealways makes point estimates but what's your view of the symmetry ofthe risks on the inflation side? Particularly, I'm referring to thestaff inflation projection and the forecast for compensation in thefirst and second halves of 1989 given what was [happening] in the lasthalf of 1988.MR. PRELL. I must say that in terms of absolute levels thesemovements in the compensation numbers over 1988 give us some realproblems in judging where the takeoff point is. There was anextraordinarily low increase in compensation per hour in the firstquarter of the year; whether the fairly sizable numbers in the secondhalf were just offsetting a seasonal adjustment problem we can't say.In essence, we are discounting the level at the end of the year, andwe have a very mild acceleration, as we perceive it, in compensationper hour over the forecast period. As I said, we think this is areasonable forecast. I guess I would see the tail of the distributionbeing longer on the up side than on the down side at this point. It'shard for us in this kind of economic environment to see a sizableshortfall from this compensation forecast. But one can see a largerrange of risks, I think, on the up side. As a best estimate, this isour shot.MR. STERN. Mike, with regard to the slowing in auto salesthat you have in here: Is that due principally to a squeeze on incomeor is it the effects of the age of the stock of vehicles on the road?MR. PRELL. Well, a lot of cars have been bought in recentyears but that hasn't brought the average age of the stock down to lowlevels by any means. I'm not sure we totally understand the scrappagerates that we're seeing--whether there really has been an improvementin the quality of automobiles and they last longer or what. I thinkwe have a fairly sizable decline. The automobiles are declining morethan light trucks and vans, which we have not yet incorporated in ourtables and are now almost half as large as the car sales. So that'ssomething worth recalling. The main factors are the slower income andemployment growth. One couldn't point to the interest rate increaseswe have here as having a tremendous effect on automobile sales. It's2/7-8/89more the general atmosphere of confidence and the growth in purchasingpower that is behind this decline.MR. FORRESTAL. Mike, one of the assumptions you made wasthat the weather will cooperate and that crop yields will be normal.In the event that didn't happen and we have a drought situationsimilar to the one we had this year, would 1990's GNP droughtadjustment likely be negative?MR. PRELL. 1990's or 1989's?MR. FORRESTAL. Well, 1989.MR. PRELL. If you had a crop year like 1988 in [1989 or]1990, all other things equal, it would subtract 0.7 of a percent or sofrom output and would get you very close to zero. I think the biggerconcern--one that we just don't know how to cope with in terms ofinserting something in this forecast--is that in many areas, althoughit's spotty, there seems to be a shortage of soil moisture. Thereports about winter wheat are not particularly encouraging. And withinventories of many of these grains and soybeans and so on as low asthey are, we can't afford to have anything like the 1988 crop if we'regoing to stay anywhere near this inflation path. It's likely that wewill see much more sizable food price increases than we saw in 1988.So I think it's something that's hard to cope with in monetary policyterms and economic forecasts here. But it is something that one couldbe concerned about.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, we can supply liquidity!MR. PRELL. That observation seems to have closed down allthe discussion. I want to express my appreciation!SPEAKER(?). You want a second or what?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I no more believe that than you do. Ithink maybe I--MR. ANGELL. Mike, I guess I'm a little surprised at the foodinflation in '89 and '90, given normal crops and normal weather,because with the decrease in set-asides ordinarily food priceinflation in the year after the drought should be lower than in theyear before the drought.MR. PRELL. The rate of increase?MR. ANGELL. I would have thought that somewhere there shouldbe a downward move in food prices--offsetting the '88 upward move--inorder for that historical relationship to hold true.MR. PRELL. Well, as you know, we have about a 3-3/4 percentincrease in food prices this year and next. And we're looking at, forexample,--MR. ANGELL. I'm sorry, I thought it was 4 percent but maybeI'm wrong.2/7-8/89MR. PRELL. I'm splitting it more thinly; it's a little below4 percent. We're talking about consumer prices, excluding energy,rising 5 percent or more. That is a considerable differential and notout of line with that historical pattern to which you referred of therelative movement in these inflation rates. Beside the droughteffects there was already in train some tendency toward reduction incattle herds; and we're likely to see some considerable pressure onmeat prices that offsets the relatively small benefits you can getfrom additional grain supplies, given the very large labor componentin most of those food prices.MR. ANGELL. Well, because of this discussion, I now hopethat the rainfall is normal so we can find out who's right. Butthat's my only reason for wanting normal weather.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put forth the other side of thequestion. New crop [unintelligible] positions in feed grains and infood grains are well above normal. And built into the price structureat this stage is still subnormal soil moisture. What happens to theforecast, including the cattle cycle effect, if in fact from here onin we get above normal moisture and it brings the forward prices down?Does that make much of a dent in the consumer price structure or isthe cattle shortfall already enough to make that a likely occurrence?MR. PRELL. I think that's largely there and that it wouldreally take some tremendous moves in crop prices to move these overallfood price measures around. I think that's evident in what happenedlast year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In other words, what we're reallylooking at is more the unit labor costs in the distribution channelsthan the feed grains that filter into the cattle-meat cycle.MR. PRELL. That's a very large ingredient. I think that'sthe case. We have an authority here on the subject. John Rosine, doyou have anything you want to add?MR. ROSINE. Well, it certainly would not be enough to drivefood price changes down into negative territory. If we had a verygood crop year I think we could possibly have a drop in all grainprices but a CPI food price increase, say, on the order of 1 or 2percent, give or take a little--not enough to affect the overall priceoutlook very significantly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, at most, on your total index it's acouple of tenths?MR. PRELL. A couple of tenths. And that's essentially whatwe got in 1988.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't want to force the conversation,but has everybody completed their questions? If so, we can move on toDon Kohn--if you're prepared, Don.SPEAKER(?). We are [unintelligible]--2/7-8/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. My schedule reads differently from whatI think the Secretary's schedule shows. [We should] go to ourdiscussions on the economy. I thought that came [before] you.MR. KOHN. Well, I'll be happy to get [my report] over with.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, that would probably confuse us. Whowould like to start off? Bob.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the Twelfth District economyremains strong. For example, the District's unemployment rate isbelow the national average. However, Arizona is slumping because ofthe construction downturn, which is likely to extend at least throughthis year. In addition, there are signs of slowing during 1989. Forexample, labor shortages are slowing [output in] a few industries; Iguess the most extreme example of that would be in aircraftmanufacturing. Concern about the lack of rainfall is mounting in ourDistrict, especially in California. Another year of drought wouldreally seriously hurt the District's agriculture. I think we have alittle different situation working in our District. Last year webenefitted from the drought because we had almost all of ouragriculture handled through irrigation. But we have had two years ofdrought and a third would be quite serious because the reservoirlevels are so low at the present time--and we're already halfwaythrough our rain year--that it actually could result in reductions ofwater availability of 25 to 40 percent. So, we're looking ratherclosely at the water situation, at least in the state of California.The national economy, it seems to me, continues at a level ofactivity above its sustainable potential. I believe that the recentemployment reports indicate upward pressures on wages and that theunderlying inflation rate seems likely to continue to build.Moreover, if there is a depreciation of the dollar this year and next,as is incorporated in the Greenbook forecast, that will add toinflationary pressures as well. Our outlook for growth for the two-year period is very similar to that of the Greenbook, although we mayhave somewhat of a difference in the yearly pattern. In any case,this growth and what I would say is a worsening inflation prospectargue strongly, in my view, for continuing our recent strategy ofsteadily tightening policy. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, our projections for 1990 prettyclosely parallel those of the Greenbook. We do expect slightly moregrowth, but not quite enough to put us in the outlier column as hassometimes happened in the past. And we expect a tad more in the wayof an increase in the consumer price index. As Mike Prell suggestedvery well a while ago, more important than the specifics of theforecast are some of the things that underlie it. And as we read theeconomy the pressure on U.S. productive resources looks very, verystrong to us. This is evident, I think, in most recent statisticaldata: real personal consumption expenditures ex-automobiles, forexample, were very strong; the nonagricultural employment figures forJanuary were very strong; and the theme report that we got on businesscapital expenditures, which I found extremely helpful this time,seemed to indicate strength. We're getting the same sort of-10-2/7-8/89grassroots information from our contacts around the District. To us,one particularly interesting thing this time was a comment ofwho has been in the department store businesssays that business is really booming.so it came assomething of a surprise to us. Now, if we have this strong demand, asis apparent to us, that naturally is going to put some upward pressureon real interest rates. And any attempt on our part to resist thatpressure through monetary policy is going to risk getting inflationarypressures. So we've assumed, like the staff, that our monetary policywill not resist these things; rather we predicated our forecast on theassumption that there will be a significant further increase in short-term interest rates, and specifically some increase in the relativelynear future. Now, if we do allow that increase to occur then we thinkthe risks are about equal on both sides. If we don't let thatincrease occur then we think the risks are on the up side of moreinflation than the staff has projected.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Our forecast this time falls within theparameters of the central tendency, which is a little unusual, Ithink, for us in recent years. We're at the low end on real GNP at 2-1/2 percent and at the high end on the CPI at 5 percent. But we'remodestly higher in terms of unemployment at the end of the year.Looking out into 1990, our forecast would be quite similar to whatwe've seen from the Board's staff with maybe somewhat stronger realgrowth--at about 1-1/2 percent--and the CPI continuing to be somewherearound 5 percent. So, no declines. Looking out beyond that, eventhough we didn't do projections, I think we'd expect the CPI to begincoming down. The big difference, however, between our forecast andthe Board staff's forecast is that we've assumed Ml growth ofsomewhere in the 3 to 5 percent area to produce these essentiallysimilar results, whereas the Board staff's forecast I think has Mlgrowth of zero in 1989 and I'm not sure about 1990. Based on that, Ithink I'd have to say that we view the risk in the Board staff'sforecast to be on the down side in terms of real growth. Using ourmethodology, if we drove that kind of assumption through [our model]we would definitely have weaker growth--in fact, a recession.In terms of what's going on in the District itself, we haveseen some growth in nonag employment for the most recent three-monthperiod and for the year. For a long time I was reporting that ouremployment was actually declining, so there has been some pickup. But[our growth rate] is still sluggish--about 1-1/2 percent versus 3 to3-1/2 percent nationally. Manufacturing employment has picked up alittle more strongly but it's still slower than the national[average]. Residential construction has shown some strength recently,as has nonresidential construction, particularly in St. Louiscommercial office building construction. But on a year-to-year basisthat's down quite significantly. Reports on the retailing sideindicate, as expected, when we plot [them versus] a year ago thatnominal gains were about 6 to 7 percent. I guess that's really all Ihave to say.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.2/7-8/89MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, in the Eleventh District Ithink you have to look at the Louisiana portion by itself because itdoes seem that Louisiana is continuing to deteriorate, with theunemployment rate there rising to about 10.4 percent in December. Ifyou shift over to Texas and our part of New Mexico you continue to seesome improvement; it's modest and slower than the rest of the nation,but at least it's going in the right direction. On a sectoral basisthe split is equally pronounced, with the energy and constructionindustries still pretty weak and manufacturing and services continuingto improve. The energy industry is performing as though the expectedprice of oil is in the $15 to $16 range rather than the $17 to $19trading range that we've seen over the last 8 weeks or so. Thedownturn in our construction activity now seems to be centered on thenonresidential construction. As for agriculture, there is somemention of concern about drought. I guess we did not suffer quite asmuch last year but we are beginning to have a little concern. Ourwinter wheat is already hurt and we're hearing fairly pessimisticreports from out in the farm areas. Overall, manufacturing continuesto improve. In the first three quarters of last year, most of thegains were centered on the more trade sensitive industries; we've nowseen that the less trade sensitive product lines are improving.Retail sales have been improving in both autos and other goods.Overall, we're looking for some strengthening of the regional economyin 1989 relative to 1988. So, that does make us feel a little better.On the national scene, about the only place we really haveany difference with what Mike was saying is on inflation. We feelthere certainly is a little more inflationary pressure now and inprospect than the staff is seeing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, with regard to the District, thingsare very much unchanged since my report at the previous meeting andthat in itself may be significant. The outlook certainly continues tobe positive. No one that we talk to in any way thinks that we'relikely to have a recession this year. There are some early commentsabout the possibility of a recession in 1990 but those are the samekinds of comments that we heard last year about 1989. Alternatively,the general attitude is that we will not experience any particularlyrapid acceleration in growth either. I think the inflationary picturecontinues to be very difficult to assess. The common wisdom is thatwe are going to see some escalation, particularly on the wage side;yet the reports I get from companies are not necessarily consistentwith that common wisdom. The labor market continues to tighten. Weare continuing to hear comments about shortages of skilled labor. Butdespite that, I'm surprised by how favorable the contract settlementscontinue to be--[increases in] wages and fringe benefits of 3 to 4percent on an annual basis. And though labor attitudes certainly arehardening, they have at least not yet begun to evidence themselves insignificantly higher settlements. The price side of the picture, Isuppose as always, is quite uneven. Steel prices have now begun tomoderate. At this point many companies report that steel prices areonly now back to the prices that they were paying in 1980 and 1981.So, though we've had a big escalation over the last two years, we'renow getting back to those levels that we experienced earlier in the1980s. But nonferrous prices are now beginning to accelerate again,particularly copper, nickel, and to a somewhat lesser extent,-12-2/7-8/89aluminum. Chemical prices are moderating following the big increasesthat we had over the last year or two, but pulp prices are beginningto escalate pretty rapidly. I don't sense any consistent pattern inthese materials prices. At one company that I talked to--it isn't avery large company but it tracks these things very carefully--theirmaterial price increases for 1988 came in about 2 percent higher than1987. For 1989 they had been forecasting an increase of .4 percent.They very recently increased that from .4 to 1.3 percent, and thatincrease is entirely in the nonferrous area. But despite theincrease, it is still lower than what they had in 1988. Virtuallyeverybody continues to report very competitive conditions in themarketplace. For finished products there are competitive pressuresthat really make it difficult to pass price increases along, so thereseems to be some continuing pressure there.With regard to the national outlook, our forecast is a bitmore modest than the Board staff's but pretty consistent with thecentral tendency. I think our difference with the Board staff'sforecast is partially timing, but a bit of it is also in this nonautodurables area that I asked Mike about. I continue to think that therisks at this point are on the inflation side--continued upwardpressure on prices and, I do expect at some point, on wages. As aconsequence, as we get into the policy deliberation we're going tocontinue to need to exert more pressure to deal with that. But havingsaid that, I also have the feeling that, given what we have done sofar, we are not necessarily behind the curve in dealing with theinflation problem.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, the Sixth District's economicactivity is not very much changed from the last time I reported. Weare still showing strength in industrial production, as we have forsome time, but in addition we now have some strength in the retailsector. The construction area remains pretty subdued and is weak.The chemical, aluminum, and paper producers are operating at very highrates of utilization, in many cases due to strong export orders.We're expecting a new aluminum plant to open in Georgia and that'srather an exception because most of the other producers we're lookingat seem reluctant to add very significantly to capacity. And in somecases, such as in chemicals, they are actually looking for imports tomeet strong domestic demands. Paper producers are fairly substantialpurchasers of modernizing equipment but are not adding significantlyto plant size. While we've seen some price increases announced,particularly for chemicals, paper, and aluminum, it's not clear thatthey are going to stick because there has been some customerreluctance to accept them. So, we may see a rollback of some of thoseprice increases.On the retail side, sales appear to have remained very strongin January after what turned out to be a surprisingly good Christmasseason. Price discounting in the District was less prevalent thanlast year, particularly in the post-holiday period. And inventoriesare now quite lean. While retail demand is good and was good duringthe holiday season, we did have over-expansion in this area and thathas led three chains in the Atlanta market to close during the lastfew months. Office vacancy rates in the District seem to be a littlelower than elsewhere in the nation but on the housing side we are-13-2/7-8/89seeing weakness both in starts and in sales. That's evident inseveral cities around the Southeast but especially in Atlanta.Migration has proceeded at a lower pace than earlier in the expansiondue to strong labor markets elsewhere in the country; and builders whohad been planning for stronger population growth are now having somedifficulty. The weakness in demand for lumber resulting from thehousing weakness has been offset by stronger export sales that havehelped to sustain activity in the lumber industry. We're hearingreports that wage gains are expected to be in the 4 to 6 percent area,and there are going to be some important labor contracts up forrenewal this year. And we hear, as most other people do, that thesharp increase in the cost of benefits is putting quite a bit ofpressure on costs generally. On the agricultural side, we too aregetting very nervous about the water situation. We've had a droughtin the Southeast basically for the last four or five years. And, wehave not had winter rains as we should have had and that is makingfarmers and others extremely nervous. This is anecdotal, but I'vealso heard reports recently about increases in export prices bymanufacturers who seem anxious to take advantage of the profitsituation rather than to seek to expand market share. I think that'ssomewhat disturbing and [would concern me] if that were to become anational trend.On the national scene we have very few differences with theGreenbook forecast. We might have some divergence in 1990 but notvery much. We continue to think that there is momentum in theeconomy, that we are operating above our potential, and that thevulnerability is on the inflation side. So, while our inflationforecast for 1989 is roughly the same as the one shown in theGreenbook, my own personal view is that the economy is vulnerable tohigher prices rather than to lower.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. With regard to the District economy, theexpansion in the District remains very solid at this point in time.The fourth quarter probably turned out better than many people hadexpected. Retail sales--these are [reports] from a major retailer--were distinctly stronger in December and in January than we might haveexpected. And there is, by the way, a major expansion in the paperindustry underway in the District in a variety of locations.Looking at the national economy, if I compare our model'sforecast to the Greenbook I would have to say that our model'sforecast is more favorable in the sense that it has somewhat morerapid economic growth with basically stable rates of inflation--atrecent levels--and stable interest rates. Having said that, I thinkthere is a message there that's similar to the Greenbook message: thatis, that if you want to get the rate of inflation down it's going totake more than prevailing interest rates to accomplish that--or atleast there is a relatively high probability that that's the case. IfI look at the data as the Greenbook does on compensation, producerprices, consumer prices, and so on for the last year I think thereclearly was a deterioration in the cost and price picture. My concernis that that might well continue. I would admit that to date we havehad less inflation than I would have expected, given the growth in theeconomy and pressures as I perceive them on capacity. But having saidthat, we still have more inflation than I would like to see.-14-2/7-8/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. The middle Atlantic states continue to becharacterized by a high level of economic activity. Labor markets aregetting tighter. Even in Pennsylvania the rate of unemployment iswell under the national rate for the first time in a long, long time;New Jersey and Delaware have been there now for several years. Wageincreases tend to be higher than in the nation as a whole,particularly I think at the lower end. The most noticeable area ofsoftening is in the real estate area.As far as the nation is concerned, I think the economy isgrowing too rapidly. It has more of a head of steam than I thought acouple of months ago and perhaps hoped a couple of months ago. As aresult, the vulnerabilities to inflation seem higher to me now thanthey did just a meeting or so ago. I think this kind of a situationdoes require a response from us, but that's the topic of tomorrow. Asfor our forecast, we're within the central tendency although at theupper side of that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that the most noteworthydevelopment in the U.S. economy has been the slow growth of the moneystock--no matter what measure you use--over the last two year's time.Having watched those figures for many, many years it seems ratherunusual to have--if you take the staff's forecast through February,for example--the growth rate [of M2] over a two-year period at anannual rate of about 4.3 percent. The growth rate over the last fullyear was about 4.3 percent and the growth rate over the last half yearwas about 3 percent. I just have never seen such stable money growthof M2 in years of observing it. I recall that in 1986 there wasconsiderable talk about whether or not the fast money growth wasactually going to offset the deflationary experience that we had. Ithink there were quite a few of us who believed that it would. Maybeit took a while to do it but when it did, it did it with a clearimpact upon both exchange rates and commodity prices. This timearound it seems to me that the flow of money growth is being reflectedin exchange rates much more rapidly, of course, than it is beingreflected in commodity prices. It has been a very puzzlingexperience. As Don and Ted very well know, my own view is that if wecontinue with growth of the money stock as we are forecasting, theproblem we may have in that environment--with regard to exchangerates--is too strong a dollar. But I would think that that dollarstrength, in terms of overall economic developments, might provide theslack needed; that might very well be the antidote that is needed.Even though the drought maybe added not so much to the grain pricesbut somewhat more to the vegetable and fruit prices, it seems to methat the impact of the drought on commodity prices has delayed anyturning point signal by commodity prices. It looks to me as if we'renow getting a leading signal in commodity prices in that we're finallygetting a declining rate of change. I don't mean by that that I thinkmonetary policy ought to be adjusted because, indeed, unless commodityprices come down from the level where they now are I think we're quitelikely to build in a much higher rate of inflation in the wagepatterns that prevail. The only way to escape that is probably byhaving some decline in commodity prices. But I guess I'm somewhatencouraged by the trend of substitutes, such as ownership of other-15-2/7-8/89currencies or ownership of gold. Frankly, I would feel still betterif the price of gold reaches $350 an ounce.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. The fourth quarter in the Fourth Districtreally was no surprise at all; it was similar to the rest of the year.It has been a very consistent story throughout the year; our economydidn't slow much during the summer and it didn't slow early in theyear. Much like the situation in the unemployment rate there are[unintelligible] for all of them for the first time in a long time.That means service jobs but some on the manufacturing side. Indiscussions with manufacturers in the District we hear that they areoperating at very high levels but are very reluctant to add newcapacity. They are willing to run with higher inventories becausethey are operating at levels that are going to result in morebreakdowns. But they are not ready to make the investments yet. Theonly weakness in the District is in Cincinnati and that was thefootball team!MS. SEGER. But look at what it did for the economy.MR. HOSKINS. Pardon me?MS. SEGER. Look at what it did for the economy--all the beersales!MR. HOSKINS. We don't have much to say regarding theGreenbook forecast, which is very similar to ours, particularly for1989. In 1990 we have a somewhat lower inflation rate than theGreenbook because we think a change in compensation practices as wellas a continuous clearly announced policy with respect to inflation[unintelligible]. As we look at it now, we think that will have somefavorable impacts in 1990 and going forward [if we] can do what theGreenbook implies when dealing with interest rates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. My general view of the economy, Mr.Chairman, hasn't changed at all from what it has been at recentmeetings in that I still think the risks are distinctly asymmetric onthe side of too much growth and too much inflation. I still don't seeany compelling evidence--as a matter of fact I don't see much evidenceat all, at least at this moment--of the much needed moderation in therate of growth in the domestic economy in particular. In terms of theoutlook for 1989, our forecast is very similar to the Greenbookforecast, even in most of the details, insofar as real GNP growth isconcerned. Our inflation rate is higher and indeed is a tad outsidethe central tendency as listed in the charts. [Our forecast for] 1990is a very different story, which I'll come back to in a minute. Butleaving aside 1990, when I look at the situation right now I guess myanxiety level is up a bit. It is up a bit really for two reasons, andthey both relate to things that one could say about the economy and soon in public and other forums. For example, I got very used tosaying, when asked--and I thought I could say it without my nosegrowing--that the underlying inflation rate was in the 4 to 4-1/2percent range. I don't think I can say that anymore without my nosegrowing. When I look at all of the wage and price data, especially-16-2/7-8/89from the fourth quarter, I think we now have to say that the inflationrate is, at best, in the 4-1/2 percent range. But certainly you'dhave to drop that 4 to 4-1/2 percent out of that statement to have anycredibility, much less--at least by my standards--intellectual honestywith yourself. Indeed, I think the range of the conpensation-typestatistics, again with some emphasis on the fourth quarter, areparticularly [alarming] in that regard. The other thing that I thinkwe all parroted with some frequency in the recent past is a sense ofcomfort with respect to the external adjustment process, both in termsof what has happened and what lies out there in the future. And thisis where 1990 is looming very large in my thinking.I don't consider that there's any such thing as a trueforecast for 1990, with all due respect, Mike. I think we can all gothrough some arithmetic; and I think of it more as arithmetic than aforecast. But if you look at the arithmetic that was done in New Yorkversus the arithmetic that was done here for 1990 you get a very, verydramatic difference. While we have an economy that's growing at asomewhat stronger rate than the Greenbook, we have the trade accountand the current account adjustment process not only stopping butreversing: the trade deficit actually increases and the currentaccount deficit actually increases. Now, in an approximate sense, thearithmetic reasons for that--I emphasize the arithmetic as opposed tothe forecasting--are fundamentally due to two things. Our foreigngrowth assumptions are almost identical. We do have a relativelysmall difference in the exchange rate: we have the real exchange rateunchanged whereas Ted, I think, has something like an 8 percent realdepreciation. But that's not what really drives the thing. The bigdifference is that in Ted's and Mike's numbers for 1990 they have avery significant slowdown in the U.S. economy. When you look at theirnumbers versus our numbers, it's not the exchange rate and it's notthe foreign growth that really makes the decisive difference in termsof whether that external adjustment process can continue with at leastthe right algebraic sign in 1990. That to me raises an even largerquestion, which Tom Melzer touched on a bit when he made reference topolicy. And the question is: With anything roughly resembling thekind of exchange rates that are in either of those sets of arithmetic,can you get material progress over the next several years on anexternal adjustment process without a significant slowing in the rateof growth of the domestic economy? And if you can't, what does thatimply in terms of the risks of a significant accident of one kind oranother developing over that time frame? I really think that thehorns of that dilemma are getting sharper and sharper, because if youthink of it in terms of the exchange rate it's quite clear what itseems to imply. But the implications of that implication can bepretty nasty in their own right in terms of domestic interest ratesand domestic financial market conditions. You can put it in thecontext of financing requirements; even with Mike's and Ted's combined1989-90 current account deficits of $240 billion, we end up 1990 withnet external liabilities in balance sheet terms of something like 13percent of GNP. Those numbers are getting very, very large. So, Mr.Chairman, I don't know the way out of this box but when I think outbeyond 1989 in the context of the kinds of issues that I just raised Imust say that I'm not as optimistic as others about the inflationoutlook. As I said, my anxiety level is getting pretty high.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.-17-2/7-8/89MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On the District level,the District economy has continued to improve but at a slow pace--slower, certainly, than the national average. The recoveries in theagricultural and manufacturing sectors continue and the higher oilprices that have fallen out of the late 1988 OPEC agreement haveprovided some stability to the energy sector. In agriculture we areconcerned about another year of drought; a more immediate concern isthis cold weather. For those livestock producers that rely upon farmponds, for example--since they were not replenished during the pastyear and with the very cold weather those freeze solid--that meansthere is no water. As a result, some livestock will be sent to marketunder those conditions, which will accelerate this drawdown on the redmeat supplies in the future and push up prices perhaps.With regard to the energy sector, while prices have firmedsomewhat, the uncertainty surrounding whether or not OPEC will be ableto fulfill the agreement still scares people away from investingsubstantial sums and putting down new wells or exploring for newreserves. In the manufacturing sector there are two really notabledevelopments. One is in the automobile manufacturing assembly areawhere all of the plants--and Missouri, for example, would be thesecond biggest assembly area in the [country] after Michigan--areoperating at a full two-shift operation. And there appears to be noslowdown in demand. On the other hand, general aviation concluded1988 with significant increases in their billings, generally as aresult of export demand for general aviation products. Theinteresting report on construction in the District is that the valueof nonresidential construction in the District rose rather sharply inDecember and was about 33 percent above the year-earlier level. Onthe other hand, residential construction has fallen slightly and issomewhat below the year-earlier level. By and large the financialeconomic activity within the District is rather good with theexception of those areas such as Oklahoma that have been depressed;they are still sort of on the bottom with respect not only toemployment but also to overhang on nonresidential construction--commercial building, for example. But by and large the District is inpretty good shape and continues to improve.With respect to the outlook for the national economy,adopting the interest rate projections that are used by the staff, wecome out virtually identically, with some minor differences. We haveconsumption a little higher and inventories a bit lower during 1989.But by and large we would be in the middle of the projections for theCommittee members as a whole. There is a concern, at least on mypart, with respect to prices--that is, inflation in the period comingup. In the services sector, for example, the benefits tacked on tootherwise projected wage increases give a strong indication that therisk is for higher prices rather than lower prices. I'd rather beahead of the curve than behind the curve. And the increase ininterest rates that is incorporated in our outlook as well as in theBoard staff's outlook seems to be quite reasonable to me.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. Thank you. I think we should probably look alittle at the longer horizon because we have to set up long-runtargets. In the outlook projected in the Greenbook, about a year fromnow you see a very, very [pronounced] weakening of the economy in-18-2/7-8/89virtually every single sector except exports, which are still holdingup. Growth slows down to the less than 1 percent range, close to azero rate. The simulations that we've run also show that that holdstrue as a pattern even if you hold current policy very much constant.I agree with the comments made earlier that we are not behind thecurve as far as the financial markets are concerned. We have a verystrong dollar; we have some significant commodity prices actuallydropping; we have a yield curve that points to low inflationaryexpectations. So that, combined with the very low monetary growth,which Governor Angell already talked about at great length, makes methink that we're actually looking at a significant slowdown a yearfrom now, or for the horizon that we can still influence--the nextquarter or two being in the bag. I have one other observation andthat relates to foreign concerns, especially in Europe. There's a lotof concern about our tightening probably too much and the dollarbecoming too strong over the immediate period ahead, thereby impairingthe external adjustment process that is important for that. Thanks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I have a perspective similar to GovernorHeller's. I'm just looking at a lot of different things here. First,on the unit labor cost side, I realize we've had some accelerationthis year; but looking at the charts on the handout we're not at therate that existed at the end of 1986. And then there was adeceleration in 1987 with some fairly strong growth in the rate ofunit labor costs. So I don't think there's anything given about anacceleration in unit labor costs. If you look at the pattern, it hasbeen fairly sawtoothed since 1984 on this chart; it doesn't show anysign of any particular direction. Compensation is up because of non-wage compensation but I don't know whether that will continue. Wagesare still in pretty good shape, so I don't think there's anyaccelerating trend on the wage front if non-wage compensation doesn'tcontinue to accelerate.On the employment side, we've had some strong employmentnumbers. But I went back and looked at some of the previous periodsand turning points. The obvious one is in 1984 when growth was verystrong in the first half and then the economy slipped down to 2-1/2percent and then below 2 percent in the second half of the year. Wehad payroll employment growth averaging over 300,000 all the waythrough November, even after we hit the turning point; so I'm not surewe're going to get any leading signals out of the employment numbers.And there is something else interesting: over the two-year period inwhich we averaged about 2-1/2 percent real growth average payrollemployment was about 240,000 per month. Now, that doesn't say a wholelot for productivity growth, I admit; but still, I'm not sure what wecan read out of the employment growth numbers.There are some other signs of slowing that I see even lookingat the charts. We have a much slower pattern of new orders, lookingat the charts in the nondefense capital goods area; I know thatexcludes aircraft, but that's a volatile element we're assuming aside.Vender performance has been improving. Export growth has slowed,thank heaven; it has slowed from a rapid pace, but it certainly hasslowed. Surveys of plant and equipment spending for 1989 are lowerand that's showing in the numbers; from purchasing managers' reportsit certainly looks like things are slowing. And surveys of other-19-2/7-8/89outside forecasts that have been made indicate that they're similar tothe Greenbook's, with some even a little weaker. But the importantthing is that most of them assume lower interest rate patterns evenfrom here. They certainly don't assume the interest rate path that wehave built into the Greenbook. The Bluechip forecast, which is sortof a consensus forecast, has a similar pattern of growth in inflationbut that forecast actually has the funds rate declining later thisyear. So, you get a similar path with a totally different set ofinterest rate assumptions than ours.Other people have pointed out the financial indicators. RealM2 growth and nominal M2 growth are both very modest; real M2 growthis even negative. The yield curve is inverted. Long bonds are quitewell behaved; long-bond rates are well below the funds rate,especially on a coupon basis. There are certainly no signs ofaccelerating inflationary expectations in the financial markets incommodity prices, bonds, or the dollar. One thing that worries me agood bit, too, is the fact that a critical part of the Greenbookforecast is the dollar forecast. That depreciation in the dollar, asI said, [accounts] for three quarters of a percent of the growth ratein 1990 and that's assuming about a 10 or 13 percent dollardepreciation. And that is assumed in spite of the fact that we'reassuming about a 1-1/2 percentage point appreciation in short-terminterest rates from current levels. Not only that, but the interestrate appreciation we assume is not matched by foreign interest rates.So I see no way, with relative interest rate appreciation in theUnited States compared to other countries, that you can possibly havea dollar depreciation with that kind of pattern of interest rates. Ithink if you turn that dollar path around you get a totally differentpicture out of the Greenbook forecast. It was pointed out in some ofthe alternatives--if you look at the one that assumes no change in thedollar, and I wouldn't even bet on that with the kind of interest ratepath we have built into the Greenbook--that if you don't acceleratemoney growth to offset the impact on the real sector you getsubstantially weaker growth and moderation in the inflation rate fromthese levels. That's a scenario that looks more plausible to me thanthe one we have built in there. So I would say, trying to take intoaccount those lags and being conscious of some of these otherpossibilities, that we ought to be very cautious about them.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I have some concern about becomingtoo much of a Johnny one-note in this Committee when I speak but Iwould like to reiterate my point that we [should] look at monetarypolicy in a very broad context of the overall picture of the UnitedStates--its social and political and indeed international course andthe economic mix. I think there are some very major problems in theUnited States, and indeed in the world, that could be severelyexacerbated if we are too aggressive, too fast: S&Ls, LDCs, the budgetdeficit and what could happen to it under several different kinds ofscenarios. And I think that our anti-inflationary efforts, to whichwe all subscribe, deserve to be considered in that larger context. Inthe meantime, for now it seems to me that as far as inflation fightinggoes there are some pretty good things going on. The dollar isbehaving very well; the aggregates continue to be very slow, which isgood; everybody, I believe, is pleasantly surprised at thesluggishness of inflation relative to what they might have expected-20-2/7-8/89given what they saw going on a few months ago. I'm not necessarilyconvinced that it's baked in the cake that we won't continue to bepleasantly surprised. In short, I think we very well may need to domore as time goes on and, of course, we should watch that verycarefully. But for the moment it seems to me that things are going aswell as they could and we should be quite careful not to create moreproblems than are already out there in the world, perhaps influencedby this body but not directly under the aegis of this body.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I just want to add a couple of points to thosemade by Governors Heller and Johnson along the lines that some of theforecasts of people on the outside seem to be somewhat different fromours. The purchasing managers' survey and the Bluechip forecast werementioned before. This morning I had breakfast with some businesseconomists representing a wide range of companies-- forestproducts company, a large energy company, two chemical companies,these kinds of outfits--and to a person they don't see the capacityshortages that we all wring our hands over. They also certainly arepleased that their businesses are doing well but they don't sense a[boom] taking place. They are expecting prices of the raw materialsthat they will purchase this year to increase but at a mere fractionof the increase of last year. And they also are expecting someslowing down. One fellow who couldn't attend, the chief economist ofsent me a fax. I mention this because we often mentionas an example of a rust belt outfit that shaped up and isnow doing well. I'm certainly not going to read the whole fax but letme just read selections. He said business has slowed down and isdeclining in housing-related construction, with about one-third ofmodels on allocation compared to well over one-half early last year.The allocated models are large machines associated with a worldwidemining boom. Industry is never tooled for these peaks; it would leavetoo much idle capacity in softer times. It's customary to stretchdelivery. Then he says that sales outside the United States are up 33percent over the last year but that business is beginning to slow downin Europe. Then he talks about materials prices being up less thanthe PPI and he expects that to continue; suppliers are asking forbigger increases but their target is less than national inflation.Also, I got something from the National Association of HomeBuilders. They have a forecast of housing starts of 800,000--a figure800,000 below ours for 1989--and a proportional decline in multifamilyversus single-family starts. And they are only assuming an additional1/2 percentage point increase in long rates, specifically mortgagerates. The third thing that I haven't heard people mention is theimpact of the restructuring. It seems to me that I read that GeneralMotors is going to be closing a plant near Boston, so maybe that willhelp the labor shortage there; that's going to throw about 3,000people in [the labor pool]. And it takes 6 hamburger flippers to beequivalent [in pay] to one of the jobs of those laid off. Xerox willbe laying off 2,000 in Rochester; that ought to help Jerry's area.Also, I haven't heard anybody allude to the thrift mess and the impactthat might have on the overall economy. I can't prove it, but I sensethat if it isn't handled promptly and smoothly there could be anegative impact. Furthermore, as Mike Kelley suggested, if we tightentoo much--if interest rates move still higher--we could also make themess worse than it now is, taking some of the modestly solvent and-21-2/7-8/89profitable thrifts and throwing them over on the other pile. Also, toreiterate, the monetary growth numbers are good; at least as I readthem, they are about the best since I've been here. I haven't beenable to quantify the impact of higher interest rates on monthlyinstallment loan payments as more and more variable rate loans areused, but I just cannot imagine that it's not going to take place. Wenow have had enough of a rise in the short rates to which many ofthese instruments are tied that I would think [the rate adjustments]would start kicking into effect and would produce higher monthlypayments. Maybe everyone who signed on to one of these instrumentshad their monthly incomes advance as fast; if that's the case, they'relucky. But for those who didn't, they aren't represented byin their negotiations. Perhaps they will have to cover theirhigher payments on these loans by cutting back on something else. So,I guess I'm just not convinced that the forecast in here is in thebag. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I agree with large parts of what several peoplehave said here. I share the skepticism with regard to how the dollarcan depreciate to the extent that it is forecasted to do, given thekind of interest rate scenario that we've adopted. And in thatcontext then one begins to get worried about whether we can continueto make the favorable progress in external adjustments without thattrend from the dollar. I agree with most of what Governor Johnsonsaid, but I'm a little more worried in that I think there has beensome lag with regard to prices and wages that we're beginning to seebubble up. And I get worried that we may not be staying ahead of thecurve anymore in that connection--that we may see some realinflationary pressures emerging from wages and prices that are nowbeginning to come up as a result of things that have happened before.So, that would argue for the constraint that is argued for here.On the other hand, I'm very concerned about the fact thatthere are some significant signs of a turndown in parts of thisoperation. I think that the energy price forecast--and Ted and I havetalked about this several times--is a little dicey. That could behigher. I'm concerned about the things that Mike [Kelley] talkedabout; he and I have sounded kind of like a broken record in thediscussions between us over the last several meetings of this group onthose issues. The thrifts are not only going to get hit with thisinterest rate increase but on top of that they are also going to getan increase in their assessment under their insurance operations. SoI'm very concerned that in our zeal to try to reverse inflation thatwe don't unconsciously create stagflation with a very low growth rateor maybe even a negative rate, while at the same time we have theseother factors catching up with us and we see some real upward pressureon prices and wages. So I'm with Governor Johnson; I think we oughtto be very cautious about what we do at this particular moment intime.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Let me start out with the thrift issue. First ofall, I think the point is well taken in terms of the effect of ratesin the short run on thrifts. Figures I looked at for the savings andloan industry as a whole show about a negative 17 percent gap. So a-22-2/7-8/8950 basis point increase in rates roughly costs them about $1 billionof their capital. One could assume, under current circumstances, thatthat translates roughly to what has to be done in terms of givingassistance. But I think that there is a difference between the shortterm and the long term in the sense that it doesn't obviate our needto take steps that prevent inflation from getting further out of handas time goes on because--and I'm sure the staff has done some work onthis--you have the linear function of what it costs the thrifts asrates rise. Also, many of the largest thrift institutions have hedgesthat are humped in the sense that they may be feeling well protectedgoing out 150 -200 basis points even when they get into residualsgoing back, say, for 100 basis points. But these hedges fall off acliff if one gets into a situation where you get very dramaticincreases, or decreases for that matter, in rates. So I think that'ssomething that has to be factored into the equation when you'relooking at the thrifts.What I have to say about our view of the real economy isprobably quite redundant to what many other people have said. We havevery little difference with the Greenbook forecast. We do come outsomewhat higher on the inflation side; we come out actually slightlyout of the central tendency area on that. That has to do with theimpact we expect the rate of growth will have on the unemploymentrate. But to be honest, that's probably related in part to our ownexperience in the region. We do feel that the risks are quiteasymmetric--that's the New England pronunciation for asymmetric, Iguess--but they're doubly asymmetric in the sense that we may get moreinflation and then we think the difficulties of dealing with theseissues may be harder if we get into an inflationary situation. Butthis is to be discussed tomorrow.As far as the region goes, we are seeing some softness,relatively, in New England. Not to contradict what I said before, butI think the reason that we're seeing some softness is because wereally had a boom for a long period of time. If you look atMassachusetts for example--and Massachusetts is half of New England--per capita income in the state now is 123 percent of the nationalaverage whereas in 1975 it was 103 percent. If you were to adjust forrelative costs it really would have been below that. Consistent withthat, wages have been rising quite rapidly. When Bob [Boykin] talkedabout Louisiana [I was reminded of] some work we had done looking atmanufacturing cross sectional data on hourly earnings versus theunemployment rate in manufacturing. States that are the highest areall the New England states. Louisiana has to be one of the statesthat was lowest, consistent with what he was saying. And the localprice level, if one wants to assign any real weight to that given thesmallness of the sample, shows that prices are rising at about a 6.3percent overall rate in the greater Boston area. Now, I think it'sinteresting that southern New England is doing much more poorly--orit's starting to do more poorly--than northern New England, whichexperienced some of this relative prosperity later on. The onlyindustry that we have right now in southern New England that is doingbetter than nationally is the construction industry, which happens tocome fairly late in the regional business cycle. And we do have aquite soft real estate market. But the lessons--if there are any--that I draw from this for the national economy are that the problemsthat we have in the region are the result of having grown very, verystrongly for a period of time at a pace that was not sustainable. And-23-2/7-8/89maybe that influences our view of the approach one should take topolicy nationally.MR. LAWARE. I'm certainly glad you didn't pronounce it[unintelligible].MR. SYRON. I used to until last year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just add a few things relevant tothe meetings of the G-7, which I think relate in part to some of thequestions with respect to the international adjustment process. Thething I found rather surprising in the talk among the central bankers,especially the ministers, is what I would call a relatively laid-backattitude on the issue of the international adjustment process slowingdown. When the issue of reversal surfaced they clearly thought thatthat would be a problem but few of them really were concerned about areversal and none about a slowing down, from which I conclude thatthere is a fairly considerable willingness on the part of thesecountries both in their private and public sectors to absorbliabilities against the United States. And I think, as Ted mentioned,that they are sort of delighted with the surpluses and the effect ofthe claims, especially the buildup of the claims, in an almostmercantilistic power sense. I suspect, however, that a goodly part ofthat reflects the fact that the dollar instead of going straight downand creating large capital losses has been kicking around over thelast year and has essentially been flat. It's a two-way street. Andhence, the negative attitude toward holding dollar-denominatedobligations I think has faded very dramatically. I think the twoupticks in the dollar in the summer and again here have created areally clear change in the fears relative to the adjustment process.It's very obvious that it can't go on indefinitely, but I think it isan important short-term event which suggests to me that the type ofcrisis that Jerry is worried about is not [likely] in the short term.It's an intermediate problem and one which I think could lull us for awhile; but I do think we have to be a little careful about it.Secondly, as Bob Heller mentioned, there is some concernabout the impact of the level of interest rates in the world--or moreexactly the level of U.S. interest rates and, therefore, the strengthof the dollar--because there is a vague laid-backness about thestalling of the adjustment process. But there is a latent fear thatit could begin to reverse and I think that would accumulate into afairly significant set of concerns amongst finance ministers, and to amuch lesser extent central bank governors, who have been largelysupportive of general strengthening. The process I think isparticularly pronounced amongst the Icertainly don't get it --clearly they have beenfoursquare about moving interest rates up very sharply--nordo I get it very much obviously in a number of the central banks. Butthere's a vague mild division that's beginning to emerge--leaving--between the finance ministers on the one side and thecentral bank governors on the other with respect to the issue ofinternational monetary tightening. The central bank governors, Ithink pretty much uniformly, have been very supportive of us; whereasfinance ministers, for reasons I don't have to get into, are lessenthusiastic about interest rates. But at the moment the issue isreally very mild; there are no strong reactions. The only strongreaction I saw in the G-7 meeting was when-24-2/7-8/89 -25-But therest of the session was relatively pleasant. So at the moment I wouldsay that one finds a remarkable degree of tranquility in theinternational outlook as perceived amongst the industrial countries.And I do not get the impression from the governors that they are in anaggressively tightening mode--in other words, after the Germans movedon the Lombard and discount rates. One gets the impression that thesequence that occurred as a consequence of that has slowed downsomewhat, at least if you listen to the oral remarks. I don't knowhow long that is going to last and what it's saying, but one does notget the sense of a continuous process moving. It's getting close tobreak time and I think we're pretty much on schedule, so I guessthere's no reason why we cannot meet as scheduled at 9:30 a.m.tomorrow morning. So, unless anybody has a problem--[Meeting recessed]2/7-8/89February 8, 1989--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me start off by requesting that eachindividual President and Governor try to get a final revised forecastfor the Humphrey-Hawkins series to us prior to 3 p.m. on Friday,February 10 if that's at all possible. If there is any difficulty--ifthere is some slippage, as I suspect is probable--let's try to getthem in as quickly as we can. That will save a lot of trouble andwork in the process.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, has the date of the testimony beenset yet?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes it has. It's the 21st and 22nd. Weare now to a point where Mr. Kohn will discuss the longer-run rangesfor the aggregates.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Mr. Kohn? Lee.MR. HOSKINS. Don, in your discussion about the multi-yearproblem, which I think you laid out nicely in terms of whether westick with 3 to 7 percent or go to something else, obviously there areadvantages on both sides. One is that we can march down theaggregates--at least the top end--consistently over time todemonstrate to people that we're serious about our policy. But thatdoesn't fit very well with the interest-sensitivity of M2 these days.You might want to argue that if we get [unintelligible] centering the1989 target on 2-1/2 percent and going from 1 to 4 percent or on 3-1/2percent with 1 to 5 percent and then next year having to say that it'sgoing to go back to 3 to 7 percent or something like that--we have toexplain that. In that context, if we were to choose to go that way,did the staff consider going to multi-year targeting now instead of inJuly? We will do 1990, I think, in July. So, if we were to go thatroute, it might make some sense to put out two sets of targets. If wewere going to go to one, would we adjust M2 to reflect the interest-sensitivity?MR. KOHN. We did not consider that, President Hoskins. Ithink there is something to be said for looking out over longerhorizons. On the other hand, I remember the Committee discussion oflast July in which there was some resistance to setting ranges for thenext year because of the uncertainties involved in specifying thoseranges even 6 months ahead of time. So I think it cuts both ways.It's really hard to know where you're going to be at the end of 1989in terms of setting ranges that might be appropriate for 1990,although we've taken our best guess in this forecast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, Don did such an excellent job ofoutlining various alternatives and he answered most any question Imight have. But I do have one little simple question that I'd like toask. Do you personally, Don, have more respect for the priceprojections made by your big model or by your single-equation modelthat stems from that very excellent memo we got back in November of-26-2/7-8/89last year? I guess that tells you which one I have the most respectfor.MR. KOHN. I have to see what's happening at my back herewith Mr. Prell. But I actually--MR. BLACK. When you're winning something--MR. PRELL. I know where he lives.MR. KOHN. I think in terms of the short run--over the nextyear or two--I would have more confidence in the staff's projectionsfor inflation on the grounds that they take account of certain factorsthat are important. I think the reason that the P star [P*] model, aswe call it, came in with lower inflation rates for the same moneygrowth is that it didn't take account of factors that are important inthe year-to-year rates of inflation. In this case I'm thinking of theenergy price impact on the early part of 1989 and particularly theassumed dollar depreciation effect on prices in the latter part of1989 and 1990. Those things clearly aren't taken account of in thatP* model in which prices depend solely on money, adjusted for trendvelocity and output. So, I would have some confidence in that modelas giving some sense of where those money supplies might be taking usover extended periods of time. But if you asked me which inflationforecast I would have most confidence in for 1989 or 1990 I think Iwould say the staff forecast, given the additional information theybring to that forecasting process.MR. BLACK. I wouldn't want to--MR. PRELL. I would like to underscore that the comparisonyou were making was not totally accurate in that the base line, orwhat was presented in the Bluebook, is the staff's judgmentalforecast.MR. KOHN. Right.MR. PRELL. We use the large models, in fact a combination ofseveral models, to create all the alternatives from that base line.MR. BLACK. Yes, I realize that. I didn't mean tooversimplify. I would have equal confidence for 1989 since theyproject the same inflation figures that I did; there was very littledifference.MR. KOHN. The lesson I took from the P* model was that if wehad M2 growth like we were talking about--in the 3-1/2 to 5 or 6percent range or something lower--we would be putting some downwardpressure on the inflation rate over time more with strategy II thanstrategy I. But even the staff's strategy, which doesn't give youmuch of a payoff in the short run, is putting into place conditionsthat will provide at least some payoff over the long run. So when weran that model, even though the results weren't the same, I took alittle comfort in that, in my view, it didn't contradict theunderlying thrust of the staff forecast.MR. BLACK. They are pretty close.-27-2/7-8/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Don, I noticed and was pleased that your long-run strategies really were based on M2, with hardly any discussion ofM3 or nonfinancial debt. Have you and your staff given specificthought to dropping the M3 targeting?MR. KOHN. We have not. I think in the past the Committeehas found it useful to have more than one target given the differentkinds of information embodied in the different aggregates. Obviously,[we would] if the Committee were to instruct us that it was theirchoice to go to one aggregate. But it seems to me that you would losea little information that you get from the growth of a broaderaggregate or credit or debt. I would hesitate to focus so narrowly onany particular aggregate in terms of announcing targets to the public,even though we have keyed our forecasting exercises off eitherinterest rates or the exchange rate or M2 as a target variable.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I think I should stop now;otherwise, it probably wouldn't seem like a question.MR. KOHN. Already I wonder.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, at your July testimony I recall asense of the [Congressional] Committee that they wanted us to narrowthe range and also to choose the range where the midpoint was equal toour forecast. How much pressure do you think there is for that andhow do you personally feel [about that]?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think that may have been to alarge extent Senator Proxmire. I'll find out in a couple of weeks.On the other hand, acquiescing to that would develop into a very toughrequest. Rather than even suggesting that we thought they wereinterested or even that we might try to meet that request, I wouldjust as soon go up there making believe I didn't hear anything andthen wait and see what happens.MR. PARRY. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I want to make sure I heard right what you weresaying about our long-term objective for monetary policy relative towhat the Humphrey-Hawkins Act had in mind. Are you suggesting thatwe're not subject to their--MR. KOHN. No, no, not at all.MS. SEGER. Okay.MR. KOHN. In fact, I was trying to use that to reinforce thenotion that that's an appropriate long-run objective for the centralbank. The Humphrey-Hawkins [language] includes reasonable pricestability as one of the objectives of that Act.-28-2/7-8/89MS. SEGER. But you said it doesn't have it as number one,which is the way I saw the Act also.MR. KOHN. Unfortunately, I guess, from that perspective itsays that one shouldn't necessarily hit that if it interferes with 3percent unemployment. But it does list it in any number of places.The whole sentence--MS. SEGER. Oh yes, I understand that. But it sounded asthough we were departing from what they had in mind, but maybe it'sjust too early in the morning.MR. ANGELL. But that would be nice.MS. SEGER. Oh you really want to be popular! My secondquestion is sort of a variation on my question yesterday aboutcovering a standstill policy. You say that alternative "I" here wouldencompass the Greenbook forecast of further tightening, right?MR. KOHN. That's correct.MS. SEGER. In our list of alternative forecasts, Mike saidthat we had one that would be a continuation of the existing, orconstant--MR. KOHN. Constant nominal interest rates.MS. SEGER. Yes, right.MR. KOHN. He gave that in his briefing.MS. SEGER. Okay. Where does that fit into these?MR. KOHN. That would require faster money growth than eventhe strategy III. For example, I think Mike said 7 percentage pointsmore M2 growth by the end of 1991, whereas this has only 3 percentagepoints more M2 growth by the end of 1991.MR. PRELL. The number we have here is 3/4 of a percentagepoint faster in 1989 and 2-1/2 points in 1990 and then another 3-1/2points in the next year.MR. JOHNSON. What velocity assumptions go with that?MR. PRELL. No velocity assumptions go with it, but one couldcalculate velocities roughly from these real GNP and price numbersthat we have here. Doing it rapidly in my head it looks like a drifttoward declining velocity.MR. KOHN. My guess is that velocities would decline over thenext year or so as offering rates caught up to the flat market rates,reducing opportunity costs and enhancing the demand for M2. Once thatequilibrium was reached then M2 velocity would essentially beunchanged.MR. JOHNSON. Right.MR. KOHN. But it would decline over the--2/7-8/89MR. PRELL. Yes. I guess there would actually be a smallvelocity increase in 1990-91.MR. KOHN. It's probably a function of the way the modelcycles the offering rates and the market--MR. JOHNSON. But a decline in the rate of change--in thegrowth rate of velocities--right?MR. PRELL. Well, basically we've got stable short-terminterest rates, so we don't get any meaningful velocity movement oneway or the other. And as you look out over time--after you getthrough the lagged effects of past interest rate changes moving thevelocity--as the stable rates are essentially reflected in the depositrates, you wouldn't expect big movements in velocity.MR. JOHNSON. I was just thinking that I would expect therate of growth maybe to settle down to the zero rate.MR. PRELL. Right.MR. KOHN. Eventually it would end up there, yes. But firstthere probably would be an increase early this year, given the laggedeffects. Then it probably would come off; I'm sure it would. Itwould have this humped shape as the offering rates caught up with the[market] rates. Possibly you'd find at some point a leveling off.MS. SEGER. I still sense, though, that there's an optionmissing here. You have number "I," which is your base line, which istightening, right? You have number "II," which is additionaltightening.MR. KOHN. Right.MS. SEGER. And you have number "III," which is easing.MR. KOHN. Number "III" was less money growth.MS. SEGER. Well, at least that's what you read.MR. KOHN. Excuse me, more money growth. I didn't have aconstant interest rate option in here in part because Mike had one inhis briefing. I thought rather than replicating the options I wouldhave one that was somewhere in between constant interest rates and thestaff's rising interest rate forecast. And that was my option three.It's easier than the staff forecast but it does not keep nominalinterest rates unchanged from current levels over the near term,although the movements in rates aren't very large. There still wouldbe some upward movement in rates over the year, but not much.MS. SEGER. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. I was just going to indicate my support for whatGovernor Angell was saying. But I'm wondering if the Humphrey-Hawkinswording precludes our focusing on one aggregate since it says "provide-30-2/7-8/89for the rate of increase or diminution in aggregates" or somethinglike that.MR. PRELL. It says money and credit aggregates.MR. BLACK. Aggregates.MR. PRELL. You probably have to have a credit measure ofsome sort unless you could persuade them that it was built into this.It's in the text.MR. BLACK. I guess, then, that you wouldn't have to have M3.I thought maybe you would since it says money and credit. If you hadone of each I think you could meet the definition as such. I supportit even--MR. PARRY. Except last July they wanted us to add one. Theydidn't want us to subtract one last year.MR. BLACK. Yes, I know. But I was just thinking about thecorrect thing to do [according to the Act], not what Congress wanted[in July].MR. MELZER. You could swap the base for M3.MR. BLACK. Yes, well--SPEAKER(?). It could be M2 [unintelligible] and credit.MR. BLACK. I would favor that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Don, I have a question about your earlierstatement with respect to the credibility of Federal Reserve policy.You said it was important that we have credibility and that we pursueit; you said that we probably gained some credibility along the way asjudged by the financial markets. I guess I have some concerns aboutnot picking a specific objective over time. My concerns are asfollows and I'd like you to respond to them. We are asking themarkets and the public in general to trust us on two levels now: onthe objective and on how we're going to implement it. We have anobjective out there someplace called price stability that we may tradeoff against anything else at any point in time. I think we might beable to increase our credibility to some extent if we could at leastpin down the objective and then just ask them to trust us on how weimplement it, because we're having trouble with the aggregates orinterest rates or commodity prices.MR. KOHN. I think we--the Chairman in particular in recenttestimonies--put out a very strong statement about our objective andbacked it with reasons why price stability is our objective, withoutnecessarily saying [we plan to achieve that] by the year 1993 orsomething like that. In my view, it's a debatable point. I raisedthe issue in part to stimulate the debate. There are dangers inputting out various specific objectives--2 percent or 1 percent oreven zero, whatever zero is in reality, by 1992 or 1993--because ofthe problems that arise when you miss it, and so forth. So I think we-31-2/7-8/89can continue to make strong statements and back it up with actions.Ultimately, as someone was saying, credibility grows out of the barrelof an open market operation. It's what we do more than what we say--read our actions rather than our lips--that sets scores oncredibility. And as we act over time with that in mind I don't thinkthere's a problem--or there's less of a problem.MR. HOSKINS. Just one other comment. I think what Marthawas alluding to, if I'm correct, was that we are not paying sufficientattention perhaps to the other parts in the Humphrey-Hawkins Act.MS. SEGER. No, I was just picking up on what I thought Donsaid was in the Humphrey-Hawkins Act. I didn't write Humphrey-Hawkins, but as it was written they put a higher priority on theemployment side of things and mentioned price stability. I was justsaying from Don's comment that it sounded to me as if we wereestablishing priorities that were divergent from what Humphrey-Hawkinshad. That's all I was saying.MR. HOSKINS. I would say we're consistent with it. If wepursue price stability then we will pursue maximum employment. Idon't see any inconsistency there.MR. KOHN. That's the way it happens.MS. SEGER. May I pick up on the credibility issue? Itbothers me to hear over and over again that we somehow or other justhave to satisfy the financial markets. I'm very respectful of thefinancial markets but it's a big country out there and there are a lotmore Main Streets than there are Wall Streets. And I think thescreaming meemees up there shouldn't be the ones who dictate to us.Establishing credibility is a much broader challenge. We have toconvince all sorts of people above and beyond the financial markettypes even though they are the ones--MR. HOSKINS. That was the reason I mentioned financialmarkets and the public.MR. BLACK. Right. You should have said the public andfinancial markets.MS. SEGER. Right.MR. HOSKINS. I'll say it now.MR. BLACK. You learned your lesson.MR. ANGELL. Martha, this is the first time I've ever heardanyone here act as if Mr. Greider in The Secrets of the Temple has theright notion.MS. SEGER. I don't know; I'm not Mr. Greider.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any further questions of Don?If not, I would like to get the tour de table on people's views as towhere we should come out. I just marginally prefer staying where weare, mainly, I must say because I'd like us to be able to go downagain next year. I like the sequence of going down but I'm not sure-32-2/7-8/89it makes all that much difference which of these two we choose. Wouldsomebody like to start off? Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Yes. I'll start off by saying that I preferthat same option for a couple of reasons. One is that it's still afull percentage point reduction in the midpoint of the range from whatwe had last year, which I think is a stronger statement than wenormally make. Going from a 4 to 8 percent range to a 3 to 7 percentrange is a strong statement by historical standards. I realize thatM2 growth, certainly if the interest rate scenario that we follow endsus being close to the Greenbook forecast, puts us closer to the bottomof that range. But that interest rate path assumption is an extremecase, in my opinion. And that's allowed for in the 3 to 7 percentrange; it still leaves us 1/2 percentage point above the [bottom ofthe] range, based on our estimates of M2 growth. I think it'spossible that we may hit a peak in interest rates at some point thisyear short of what the staff has forecast. If interest ratesstabilize, or even fall because of some weakness in the economy orwhatever else we run into, we could see more M2 growth. Certainlythat would be offset by the velocity adjustments to that and we wouldwant to be able to allow for that. It seems to me that a 3 to 7percent range accommodates all those specific concerns. As Donpointed out, the one thing it doesn't seem to accommodate is an eventighter policy than may be allowed for in the Greenbook forecast. Inthat case, I think we'd see much slower M2 growth. But I think thatoutcome is very unlikely and 3 to 7 percent or something like thatfits clearly into my point of view. I even think that's a prettystrong statement in and of itself: 3 to 7 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Heller.MR. HELLER. I agree with the Chairman. I think we shouldconsistently, gradually, lower the targets. We shouldn't try to finetune the long-term ranges. So I'd be in favor of the tentativetargets, alternative "I."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I would support the 3 to 7 percent as well. Whatwould concern me about going to the lower range is if we had to raiseit next year. I think that could be confusing to the public and theCongress, especially since the Greenbook forecast--and our forecast aswell--is that inflation rates actually could be a bit higher in 1990.So it seems to me that we would maintain an extra degree offlexibility if we were to stay with the 3 to 7 percent range and tryto explain after the fact why perhaps it does end up in the lower endof that range.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, that's a good point. GovernorAngell.MR. ANGELL. I also favor the 3 to 7 percent, although Ithink one could make a case in the other direction. The reason that Iwould stay at 3 to 7 percent is that it seems to me there is somechance--I don't know whether the probability is 20 percent or what,but there is some chance--that we will encounter a commodity pricedeflation during 1989 or 1990. If that occurred we might very wellhave short-term rates of 9-1/2 percent and long-term rates of 8-33-2/7-8/89percent. And I don't know how the monetary aggregates would respondin that environment. Don, do you know what would happen? We wouldget a slightly faster growth if we had that kind of twist, would wenot?MR. KOHN. Yes, I think so, right. In 1990 or some time?MR. ANGELL. Well, I don't know when and I don't knowwhether; I'm just suggesting that possibility. And it seems to methat it's very important that we not get in the position of having toincrease those ranges. I do believe that long-run price stabilitydoes require us at some point in time to move down to 2 to 6 percentand maybe eventually to 1 to 5 percent. But I really believe we[should] get there by a slow and progressive, sound, patient stance--not by one which in a sense tries to whipsaw the events. So, Ibelieve there's a great deal of merit in our staying with the 3 to 7percent. I would remark in regard to M3 that I believe that the 4percentage point range that we now have provides ample room for theCommittee to engage in its monetary policy actions. As far as I'mconcerned, having multiple aggregates is simply a way of not beingaccountable. I can understand why the Federal Reserve at first didnot want to be accountable in regard to having too narrow a focus.But I think it's misleading because I don't hear anyone who says thatthey believe M3 is all that superior to, say, Ml. I do believe thatwe watch and monitor M1 and I'd prefer just to monitor M3.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I come out somewhat differentlyon this issue. I'd like to go back to the credibility argument. It'sapparent to me that our credibility is really very good, not only inthe financial markets but with the public. I don't know how youmeasure the public en masse but certainly they are represented bythose in the Congress and people in my District who really are givingus high marks for monetary policy. I think it's very important thatthat credibility be maintained and I think the Chairman's recenttestimonies have certainly reinforced our credibility. It's veryimportant that we continue to reaffirm our commitment to pricestability over time and that suggests to me that we need to lower theranges. Granted, we did lower them 1 percentage point with respect toM2 in July. But we have tightened policy since then. It seems to me,given the staff forecast for the growth of M2, that we could run thedanger--if we have to tighten further--of being below a range of 3 to7 percent. In order to have that flexibility my preference actuallywould be 2 to 6 percent, but that may be a bit extreme in the shortrun. Just as an aside, it seems to me that using the 1/2 pointssuggests a degree of precision that I'm not sure we have. So, 2 to 6percent would be kind of an ultimate preference for me; but I'd bewilling to accept what's described as alternative "II" in theBluebook, 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent. I think that gives us two veryimportant things: 1) flexibility on the down side given the projectedgrowth of M2; and 2)reinforcement of our commitment to fightinginflation. That really backs up with action what the Chairman saidearlier to the Congress. M3 I would leave at 3 to 7 percent, and Iagree with Governor Angell that it probably doesn't make that muchdifference.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.-34-2/7-8/89MR. MELZER. I favor the 3 to 7 percent [range for M2]. Ihave one comment: Don, you pointed out the language in the directiveand I just don't know whether it's appropriate for us to be qualifyingall the aggregates in the context of the longer-term ranges. I agreewith what you said in terms of intermeeting [developments] and how youinterpret them. But to some extent, that sort of runs in the otherdirection. In other words we have put M1 on the bench; and ifsomebody looks at this cynically, in effect, this language begins toput some of the broader aggregates potentially on the bench. I thinkwe already have the flexibility, should it become necessary, to missthe target ranges--and that would most likely be on the low end thisyear--and to explain it. So I don't know whether I would add thatlanguage there; that is the question I would raise.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I think the case for alternative "II" is a strongone. Bob Forrestal made part of it: given the staff forecast of M2and the GNP forecast and so forth, that does get us closer to thecenter of that particular range. That is, if M2 is going to growsomething in the neighborhood of 3-1/2 percent, that range is justmore appropriate in its own right. But beyond that, we've had modestgrowth in M2 in both 1987 and 1988. Against that background, itdoesn't seem to me that an upper end of that range as high as 7percent for 1989 is appropriate. I must say, finally, that as far asconsidering possible ranges for 1990 and what we might want to do nextyear, I don't know how that's all going to play out. But I think whatwe can say with some confidence is that if we're committed to pricestability over time we're going to want to see modest growth in M2again in 1990. I don't expect that we're going to run intodifficulty. Therefore, if we move to 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think on substantive grounds it probablydoesn't make a lot of difference whether it's alternative "I" oralternative "II" or something in between where we would lower the topend or narrow the range. However, for posturing purposes, I favoralternative "I" largely because I think it already has made astatement. Manley made that point and I also think alternative "I"makes a statement. It gives us room to move down next year, which Ithink is important for longer-term targeting. It just providesadditional flexibility. On the issue of whether we ought to havefewer or more aggregates, we can have too many and have too few. Ithink we're better off not to limit ourselves to one. We've beendoing this now for 13 or 14 years and over that period if we've foundout anything it is that what looks good in one period doesn't look sogood in another. As long as we can pick and choose internally it'seasier, I think, to deal with that than to try to go out and explainwhy we add one or why we drop one. I think the last 13 or 14 yearsunderscore the wisdom of having a bit of a buffet to choose from.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think you put your finger on itwhen you said the question was really whether we would have to raisethe range the next time we look at it. So, I don't feel very stronglyabout either one of these alternatives. But I do have some preference-35-2/7-8/89for alternative "II" because I see the basic function of setting thesetargets as being that of reassuring the public about our anti-inflationary resolve. If we assume we have to have a 4 percentagepoint spread or something like that in the ranges because of thesensitivity of M2 to declining interest rates or rising interestrates, that suggests to me that what we're really after eventually isa range of about 1/2 to 4-1/2 percent or something like that. And Ithink we're in a position now that we could take that additional step.The upper part of the alternative "II" range would be 6-1/2 percent;and if we could take these figures at face value on M2 that shouldgive us sufficient flexibility, even with a declining rate of growthand a drop in short-term rates in 1990, to still hit this 5 percentrate with some room to spare--and to hit the 6 percent in 1991 withsome room to spare. Like Gary Stern, I don't think we would reallyhave to end up raising that but it's not a do or die issue with me. Icould go with either one, but I do have that preference because Ithink we can take a good step now without much risk.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. I favor 3 to 7 percent because of my personalweighing of the alternative risks. It seems to me, coming back to thecredibility issue, that the damage to our credibility if we stay with3 to 7 percent and come in below the range this year is far less--Ishouldn't say far less--it is less than what the cost might be if wewere to have to raise the range next year. In either case we wouldhave to explain it. So, I would favor staying with 3 to 7 percent andif we felt that it was possible, given unknown changes of velocity andgiven what's going on in the financial markets, we might make acomment about the thrift situation in what's said [in the testimony].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, for the reasons that I think havebeen well covered I'd favor the preliminary ranges under alternative"I." Having reduced the preliminary ranges as much as we did lastJuly, it seems to me that to reduce them further at this point has asignal effect that may contain more than we intend. And if, as seemslikely, we end up in the lower part of the M2 range for the year itseems to me that's an issue you can very well cover in your testimony.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Yes, I'd like to associate myself with thecomments of Gary Stern and Bob Forrestal in terms of their preferencefor something like 2 to 6 or 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent. I am troubled bybreaking with tradition; I think tradition is important. We've done agood job in terms of marching the upper end of the M2 range down yearafter year; I think there's a lot of value to that. But in terms ofthe substance of policy, given where the staff forecast says we've gotto go--and I concur with that forecast--then the range is skewed inthe wrong direction. I would be comfortable, I guess, with "III" ifwe were clear in the testimony that we were going to come out at thebottom end of that range. And if we don't come out at the bottom ofthe range we probably will not have tightened enough.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.-36-2/7-8/89MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think credibility isimportant. I think we've established credibility and it is importantto keep it. As I look at what we did in July in projecting for 1989--that is, taking a full percentage point off of both the upper andlower limits--I'm not persuaded that hitting it again at this pointanother 1/2 percentage point or so as, say, is suggested inalternative "II" is either (1) necessary or (2) desirable, given thestaff's projections in the Greenbook. Lastly, it seems to me that theopportunity to move down somewhat again next year, given what we hopewill happen, is important. And if we take that extra cut now I thinkit limits somewhat our ability to go down next year given theprojection for somewhat greater growth in M2 through 1990. So I wouldstick with alternative "I," 3 to 7 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, my preference would be foralternative "II," primarily for the reason that we feel we would be atthe lower part of the [alternative "I"] range. If we really believethat, it seems to me we ought to establish a range that gets a littlemore centered. Also, my impression is that there has been lessdifficulty in explaining overruns than underruns. And, at least theway I look at the long-run strategies--if you look at what happens toinflation and if there is a relationship between money growth andinflation--then it seems to me we aren't really doing very much overthe next three years or so where inflation is concerned. The commentwas that the rhetoric has been good because [unintelligible] and lookat what we do as opposed to what we say. It seems to me that if wealso confirm what we say with what we actually do, then that enhancesour credibility. Keeping inflation at the current levels, or even atprojected levels as we're looking at it through 1991, seems to mealmost to create the impression that we're accepting that as the norm.And I have problems with that. So my preference would be to go toalternative "II."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I favor alternative "I." I thinkthat with the 4 percentage point bands we have plenty of room toconduct policy either with number "I" or number "II." For that reasonI wouldn't be upset with "II;" but in the interest of longer-termflexibility in the out period, as you suggested early on, I think itmakes sense to move this in a more gentle manner. I would alsorestate what Governor Johnson said early on: if we do alternative "I"here we are lowering it by 1 full percentage point, which I think hasplenty of message effect for now and leaves us the flexibility we'llneed to do more easily what may be necessary as time goes on.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Now that I know the actual results [for theeconomy] and also what happened to monetary growth in 1988, I'mwilling to support the preliminary ranges, which would be alternative"I." For M2, of course, it does remove a full percentage point atboth ends of the [1988] range, which in my judgment is a sufficientmessage to the doubting Thomases. Secondly, I would suggest thatwe're measuring from a point that is below the midpoint; the actualgrowth in 1988 came out below the midpoint of the range for last year.-37-2/7-8/89And so it seems to me we're picking up a little there, simply inmeasuring from a lower base. On M3, again, taking a half point offfrom each end in conjunction with the full point off the M2 rangeshould be sufficient to convince our followers.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I support alternative "I" for most of thereasons cited. But I can't refrain from making a comment on thecredibility issue. I think we miss some of the environment here if wecongratulate ourselves too much on the credibility that we presentlyenjoy and assume that that's because we are seen as fearless inflationfighters. We are seen and applauded for that only so long as nobodyelse gets hurt in the process of our fighting inflation. If we wereto go out there and really beat inflation over the head and in theprocess increase the unemployment rate or dump the economy in somefashion I think that our credibility would disappear overnight.People would forget that we were inflation fighters and label us asthe black knights who have ruined people's lives. So, I like the 3 to7 percent range because I think it gives enough room for policyalternatives in managing all these different variables in a time whenI'm still unconvinced, as I mentioned yesterday, about just what thetea leaves are really saying.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would support the originalformulation that you put on the table, Mr. Chairman, with one caveat.In round numbers--and Don you can help me with this--the midpoint ofthe range for M2 implies an absolute growth of M2 of something like$140 billion. Is it something like that?MR. KOHN. It must be something like that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The caveat gets to this thriftindustry issue. The great bulk of money that was going to bedisintermediated out of the thrifts as a result of the Bush plan wasgoing to be brokered deposits. In fact, in the short run almost allof it would be brokered deposits. If those deposits are all in M2because they're all under $100,000 but they all come from Wall Street,I think it's quite likely that a very significant fraction of themoney that comes out of the thrifts due to the shrinkage of depositswill not find its way back into depositories, or perhaps even into M2instruments. And I think that somehow or other, Don, we're going tohave to try to figure out a way to keep track of that because it doesseem to me possible that if you think in terms of the absolute growthof M2 of whatever it is, $140 billion--MR. KOHN. It's $160 billion or so.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Pardon me?SPEAKER(?). $161 billion.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. --$161 billion, whatever. It'squite possible, as I think about it, that that phenomenon could have asignificant effect on the dollar change that's implied here. I don't-38-2/7-8/89know quite what that means but if we saw $30 or $40 or $50 billionthat's now in M2 through brokered deposits--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That could easily happen.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.MR. ANGELL. Here comes M2a.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't like to be difficult, Wayne,but I think we've got to do something.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think what you're suggesting is thatin the Humphrey-Hawkins report and in testimony we ought to have a fewsentences on exactly that issue.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes. But, Don, I think we ought totry to figure out some way that we could try to keep track of thatbecause it's conceivable to me that--MR. KOHN. Well, we'll look into this a bit. To the extentthat it went into money funds, of course--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's a big part of the implied M2growth.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, a lot of that, I guess, would gointo money funds.MS. SEGER. Yes, but commercial paper wouldn't be picked upin M2 or T-Bills wouldn't be picked up in M2.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh no, no.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Some money deposits are and somearen't.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. A good chunk is likely not to goback into depository institutions, there's no question.MR. KOHN. It's not clear what the preference was for. Ifthey were looking for federally insured deposits then they would haveto go back to a depository institution.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, but it kind of--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, they are looking at federallyinsured deposits at a certain rate. It's the equivalent of getting--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's why this brokered money facetof it, I think, is so important. I'm not sure that it's--MR. GUFFEY. What are the alternatives other than moneyfunds?SPEAKER(?). Treasury securities.MR. GUFFEY. Government securities.-39-2/7-8/89MS. SEGER. Commercial paper, T-Bills.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Commercial paper.MR. JOHNSON. If it's the savings part of M2 it could just aseasily go into T-Bills.MR. BLACK. Right.MR. JOHNSON. It doesn't have to go into transactionaccounts.MR. KOHN. We have made a small allowance for this,indirectly, by presuming that the average offering rates on M2 remaindamped. And the average offering rates include, obviously, thebrokered deposit offering rates and we factored that through. I doubtthat we've captured the full impact, as Jerry has implied, but--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. A lot of this stuff is not householdmoney. It's broken up into $100,000 pieces, but it isn't householdmoney; it's hot money.MR. BLACK. Well, I think it's amply true what Jerry wassaying about those [depositors] who initially come out. But theyspend that money buying something else; it moves into the hands ofsome other people. So you've got to go beyond that and ask: What arethey going to do with that? And it might well come back into depositsin some form.MR. ANGELL. But don't jump to the conclusion that all the$100,000 money is going to go, because with the present spread between$100,000 jumbo CDs and the others it is still lower cost money forinstitutions who really look at the brick and mortar costs of raisingthe other kind of CDs. So it's not all going to go in that--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I didn't mean to discombobulate thisdiscussion, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but I think it's actually animportant point.MR. PARRY. I think that an adjustment has been made. Atleast in the quantitative work we did we got a faster growth of M2just using the model. I don't know the extent of it, but I thinkthere has been an adjustment made to reflect the fact that thesedeposit rates, in terms of offering rates on M2 instruments, have beenvery sluggish. I don't know if you quantified the adjustments youmade but I think it was in there when you had the 3, 3-1/2--MR. KOHN. We ran a couple different types of simulations ofhow these offering rates would behave and they all shaved about 1/2percentage point or a little more off of our model forecast.MR. PARRY. Right.MR. KOHN. And that's the 3-1/2; it is about a half---40-2/7-8/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, but Jerry's raising a differentpoint. It's not an issue of what the forecast is; it's what the 3 to7 percent means and how one interprets it. In fact, one of theelements involved in the forecast is that if we took M2 and grossed itup for the thrift thing it would be higher in the cone. And I thinkthat we are interpreting the 3 to 7 percent to mean the grossing up--making the adjustment for the loss of brokered deposits. In otherwords, the question is: What is our target? Well, our target is 3 to7 percent after we add back, I presume, an estimate of brokereddeposits. That's what it means.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I would also like to be includedamong those who prefer a kind of strategy "II" with a 3 to 7 percentrange. That is, it does seem to me that it's important for us tocreate expectations that--if conditions unveil as the staff hasforecast--we do anticipate staying very close to the bottom of therange.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, before we vote, does anybody haveany problem with the directive language on pages 20 and 21 in theBluebook? Very specifically, what is the Committee's view of thealternative at the end of the middle paragraph on page 21?MR. HELLER. What if you just drop it?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You mean the paragraph itself?MR. HELLER. Yes. We didn't have a Ml, so--MR. KELLEY. It has been repeated many times.MR. HELLER. Yes, repeated many times.MR. ANGELL. Yes, I think that's a good idea.MR. HELLER. So just drop it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody have any objection to droppingit?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I have no problem dropping the M1reference but I think the last sentence is still important.SPEAKER(?). Yes.MR. ANGELL. Well, we could say "The behavior of all themonetary aggregates will be evaluated...."MR. JOHNSON. Yes, that's an important sentence.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Why don't we keep the lastsentence but drop the--MR. ANGELL. But do we want to say "The behavior of all themonetary aggregates will be evaluated in...."MR. JOHNSON. Of the aggregates.-41-2/7-8/89MR. KELLEY. That's the [unintelligible] language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Plural?MR. ANGELL. Right.MR. HELLER. The capitalized language.MR. KELLEY. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Taking a rough score it appears thatthere is a significant weighting towards alternative "I," so why don'tI officially put that up for a formal vote.MR. ANGELL. I guess I wonder why we're saying "establish."We've never "established." Why wouldn't it be appropriate to say thatwe lowered the ranges?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We don't do that?MR. ANGELL. We don't say we've lowered the ranges, do we?This is the first time that we've really officially lowered the 1989ranges.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, tentatively we had; we justpublished the 3 to 7 percent. Do you mean officially?MR. ANGELL. Well, those July ranges were just tentative.MR. BOEHNE. What about "[The Committee] reaffirmed itsdecision of last July to lower..."?MR. ANGELL. I like that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's good.MR. BERNARD. Reading, starting with the second sentence onpage 20: "In furtherance of these objectives the Committee at thismeeting reaffirmed its decision"--actually it wasn't in July it was inlate June--so it's "of late June."MR. HELLER. Well, just "its decision."MR. BERNARD. Or "its decision to--"MR. HELLER. "To lower."MR. BERNARD. --"to lower the ranges for growth of M2 and M3to ranges of 3 to 7 percent and 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent, respectively,measured from the fourth quarter of 1988 to the fourth quarter of1989. The monitoring range for growth of total domestic nonfinancialdebt was set at 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent for the year." And on page 21I take it that the sentence on Ml will be dropped and the paragraphwould continue: "The behavior of the monetary aggregates will continueto be evaluated in the light of movements in their velocities,developments in the economy and financial markets, and the nature ofemerging price pressures."-42-2/7-8/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, call the role.MR. HOSKINS. Point of clarification. In terms of yourtestimony, if we opt to put in this 3 to 7 percent is it with nocaveats? Or is the testimony putting in the table and then [saying weexpect to] come out at the bottom of the range?MR. JOHNSON. I would prefer not to say that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Say what? I'm just trying to--. I'veforgotten what we've done in the past. Do we actually forecast?MR. KOHN. We've often said that we expect growth in themiddle of the ranges.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have said in the middle of the rangesor instead of--MR. KOHN. Well, in the past when we put ranges out we have--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, one of the problems in forecastingwhere we expect M2 to be in the range is that it enables somebody towork backwards to what our funds rate projections are. And I'm notsure we want to do that.MR. JOHNSON. Well, let's--MR. PARRY. Why don't you just spend a little time talkingabout the potential impact of developments: the savings and loanindustry--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. I think that would be done in anyevent. But I think Lee is raising the question as to what we areforecasting in the ranges that we're adopting.MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, one could remark that we're low atthis point in part because of the lagged effects of previous interestrate changes. So that might give you some leverage to get some ofthat--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think that in the testimony wewill be discussing some of the aspects of where M2 is going. But Idon't think we want to be all that specific about where it relates toour forecasts of policy from here forward. Now to the extent thatthere are lagged effects, Lee, I think that does suggest that we're inthe lower end in the beginning no matter what. But I don't want to gomuch beyond that.MR. JOHNSON. You can always say that if it's necessary totake interest rates higher we will end up at the low end or ifinterest rates stabilize or go lower we'll end up in the upper part.SPEAKER(?). Why say that?MR. JOHNSON. Well, we don't have to say it. But I'm justsaying that we could say there's some basis for why we would end up indifferent places.-43-2/7-8/89MR. KELLEY. That explains why you have ranges in the firstplace.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Having watched the Chairman on [TV]the other night, I'm quite confident that he'll be able to--MR. JOHNSON. I'm not worried.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'll mumble my way through!MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, there's one other phrase that I'dlike to call to the Committee's attention--the very last phrase thatNorm read--"and the nature of emerging price pressures." Thatstatement, it seems to me, is a very defensive statement. I wouldprefer that to read "and progress toward price level stability."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's an excellent suggestion.MR. BERNARD. "Progress toward price level stability"?MR. ANGELL. "And progress toward price level stability."MR. HELLER. Well, since we're discussing it, don't we wantto move that further to the front end of that sentence?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I think that--MR. ANGELL. I think it has the finishing--MR. BLACK. [If it is] first in the operational paragraph,Bob, that may be sufficient. I agree with your sentiments, but in theoperational paragraph--MR. HELLER. Well, just to make it consistent.MR. BOYKIN. It seems to me that if we do that, which I wouldfavor, then on page 20 that very first sentence should say "TheFederal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditionsthat will foster price stability"--we say "over time." Why don't westrike "over time"? Our objective is to foster price stability. Andthen with what Governor Angell is suggesting that confirms it becausehere we are setting our objectives. As for that "over time" we'vebeen at it a long time.SPEAKER(?). Time is running out!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd buy that.MR. ANGELL. I buy that, too.MR. BOYKIN. Really, we prefer--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can we take a formal vote?MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell Yes-44-2/7-8/89President Black YesPresident Forrestal YesGovernor Heller YesPresident Hoskins NoGovernor Johnson YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesPresident Parry YesGovernor Seger YesVICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's an easy one.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Don, will you take up the short-termpart?MR. KOHN. You want me to take you to the coffee break.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We could manage to do that.MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Thank you, Don. Let's break forcoffee and then resume after a short break.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd like to start off with--MR. MELZER. Could we ask questions of Don?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh, I'm sorry! Certainly.MR. MELZER. I didn't mean to cut you off. I just wanted--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It was unintentional.SPEAKER(?). Carry on.SPEAKER(?). Forget your question?MR. MELZER. Maybe I should!SPEAKER(?). I hope this is a good one.MR. MELZER. Don, you talked about the instability of theborrowing function. You mentioned that normally there's about a $400million difference per 100 basis point difference--in terms of what'stranspiring now versus what historical relationships might haveproduced. My question is: What is the potential for somehow reallygetting a surprise? In other words, I think the Desk has dealt veryeffectively with the kind of instabilities we have had, but what isthe prospect of something much more dramatic than that in terms of achange in the propensity to borrow? I wonder because the spread mayget to the point where banks figure, what the heck, we haven't had aproblem with discipline at the window. Do you worry about that atall?-45-2/7-8/89MR. KOHN. Well, not in the last six months or so. Theborrowing has been so low for wide spreads that for whatever reasons--and we talked about this last time--it is particularly the small banksthat are most surprising in the way they are staying out of thewindow. Whether it's their liquidity, whether they're concerned aboutthe thrift crisis and do not want to be seen at the discount windowgiven concerns about depository institutions, or what, I don't know.But I guess I don't have any expectations at all that that's going toreverse on us with a big rush or that if it began to reverse wewouldn't detect it pretty quickly and be able to take it into account.MR. MELZER. So you're not overly concerned about thatprospect?MR. KOHN. About a big rush of borrowing at the discountwindow? No.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Would it be possible to make the case at thispoint, given this continued uncertainty about the relationship, thatwe should engage more directly in targeting fed funds rather thanhaving the flexibility in operations of the Desk?MR. KOHN. Well, I would say that that's a decision for theCommittee. My proposal was that this flexible approach, which ineffect is a blending of the two approaches, continue. The Desk hasreacted, I think, when funds have gotten way out of line fromCommittee expectations. But it hasn't [zeroed] in very closely on avery narrow range for fed funds; it is also paying attention to theborrowing function. But it isn't captive to it if it looks like it'sgoing to push the funds rate way out of whack with what the Committeeexpects. So, it's an approach that I think has enabled us to havemore flexibility than the very narrow focus on the funds rate mightallow but at the same time hasn't gotten us too far away for too longfrom what the Committee expects. Federal funds, as Peter said, havebeen running the last couple of maintenance periods a bit over 9percent. I think the last Bluebook said 8-7/8 to 9 percent; we'retalking about a difference of 10 or 15 basis points here, maybe. So Idon't think that's too far out of line.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions? Well, why don't Istart us off on the current policy recommendation problems. Havinglooked at the economy for many years, I frankly don't recall aneconomy that at least on the surface looks more balanced than the onethat we have--in other words one which is characterized by very littleevidence of excess inventory accumulation. We're not getting bigbulges in capacity or construction which would tend [unintelligible].Order backlogs are relatively high and there's a certain momentum inthe economy that is very likely to carry us quite a good way. And Imust say to you that it's relatively rare, I think, that the outlookis as favorable as it is at the current moment. One major worrisomeissue is clearly the acceleration in wage and salary costs thatemerged, really, in the fourth quarter and was partly confirmed in theaverage hourly earnings index in January. Considering the fact thatthe intermediate product gains in the wholesale price index, excludingfood and fuels, were running .6 or .7 percent but were not passingthrough into the final goods prices--very largely because unit labor-46-2/7-8/89costs as a major part of the markup between intermediate materials andfinal goods prices were suppressed, and the unit labor costs weresuppressed largely because nominal wage and salary rates were soft--itis possible that the last several months' movements in wages are anaberration. But one obviously can't assume that in the context of theunemployment rate and the tightness of the labor market where it is.Nonetheless, we do find some interesting signals that are alittle puzzling. I think the economy clearly accelerated throughDecember; but in the last several weeks there were at least somesignals that are not consistent with the follow-through that we'relooking at. First of all the 408,000 employment increase, judgingfrom the seasonal factors employed in both construction and retailing,is probably closer to about 250,000. If we make that adjustment wemay find that perhaps the February or March employment figures willreverse and actually will [seem] weaker than, in fact, they reallyare. Nonetheless, 250,000 is not a bad increase. It's solid and Ithink consistent with all of the other elements. And we will bepublishing an industrial production index with an increase of about1/2 percent for January. So, looking on the employment data side thefirst quarter really looks, if anything, stronger than in theGreenbook. But if you look at the January GNP from the product sideit clearly is a good deal weaker: we're not getting anythingresembling the income side, which is consistent with the employmentside. In other words, the income side in the GNP in the first quarteris much stronger than is confirmed on the product side. And it's notclear just how that is going to be resolved. I've been particularlypuzzled by the National Association of Purchasing Managers [NAPM]January survey, which shows a relatively sharp decline in the rate ofincrease in [coming] quarters. As best I can judge, that is not beingpicked up in any material I see coming in from the various contacts ofthe Banks. Nonetheless, that survey has been very reliable in thepast and has often been the first indication that we have had that theclimate of the economy is changing. I think that's really just toolittle information to say very much about it. But it cannot bedismissed very readily. Similarly, the insured unemployment data area little weaker. The figures that came out today showed a furtherincrease--MR. PRELL. They didn't come out today, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They didn't come out today? That's aforecast? They will come out when?MR. PRELL. Tomorrow.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Tomorrow, sorry.MR. TRUMAN. And they will be weaker.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The ones that are scheduled to come outtomorrow do at least turn around the extraordinary tightness thatthese data had suggested for much of 1988 through fairly recently.So, we're in a position at this particular stage, temporarily atleast, where we're seeing no signs of general overheating in the sensethat lead times on materials are actually shortening. And, aside fromthe wage pressures, which I indicated before are quite worrisome,we're not yet getting any evidence of inventory acceleration or-47-2/7-8/89anything that suggests that we're getting close to the peak of anoverheated economy that is about to tilt down.My own impression is that we still have a way to go intightening. I think the evidence is much too premature to suggest--leaving the forecast mechanisms aside and just looking at the currentstate of affairs--that this cycle of tightening that we've beenthrough is over. But, as Don mentioned, we are running into an oddproblem of limits to our policies--specifically, the fact that as ourcredibility builds up and there is a general expectation thatinflation will not emerge despite some of its signs and what we aregetting is a nominal long-term rate that hasn't moved, a real long-term rate that probably has moved up only very modestly, and a problemin that, in effect, we are restraining the economy very largelythrough higher real short-term interest rates. It's very clear thatwe are restraining inventory accumulation, which is a short-termdecision. We obviously are restraining some elements in the capitalgoods markets. But I'm not sure how much we are restraining (1) thehousing mortgage market or (2) the capital goods markets, because thereal cost of capital has not gone up that much. In part, that is areflection of an expectation both with respect to inflation premiumsand instability premiums that we will in fact contain inflation. Andthat's in an odd way unfortunate in that to the extent the marketsbelieve that what we're doing is right it is making it more difficultfor us.We are also running into problems with respect to how rapidlywe tighten because of the pattern of M2 growth with or withoutadjustment for the thrift problem. The slowness of M2 is corroboratedby exchange rate pressures and the strength in the dollar which, byany measures that we are involved with, should be somewhat less. Withthe types of trade balances we are getting one would assume the dollarshould not be exhibiting the type of strength that it is. What thisall suggests is the crucial importance of getting the federal budgetdeficit down to assist in the process of economic policy--to suppressthe effect of demand elements that are involved and to enhance theinternational adjustment process. This issue of getting the deficitdown is becoming increasingly mandatory, as we begin to run intoproblems where it becomes clear that monetary policy cannot be thesole tool with which we are functioning.I conclude from all of this that the appropriate stance forthe next short-term period would be to start off with alternative "B,"asymmetric, but with a recognition that, if the pressure on the dollarthat is now there stabilizes or falls and if the current mixed signalssuch as the NAPM survey and the insured unemployment numbers do notindicate early deterioration--in other words, if those signals arereversed which is probably more likely than not--it would be wise forthe Desk to be instructed to move [borrowing] up $100 million maybe ina couple of weeks or so. In any event, the period until the nextmeeting is seven weeks and I think this [outlook] is sufficientlyuncertain that I would request that we schedule a telephone conferenceat the end of this month to review where we are. And it would behelpful, if events are changing in a manner that requires a conferenceearlier, perhaps not to wait as long as that to do this. But I thinkwe are at a point where--just judging from the analyses that I heardhere yesterday--there are enough differences within this Committeewith respect to the issue of fact as to what's going on that in a2/7-8/89period such as this more frequent consultation is important. I thinkit is very important for the credibility of this Committee to try tofind some consensus as best we can, because even though there's alarge bimodal distribution out there I think we're not that far apart.And I think it would be very useful if we could find a means toaccommodate each other in such a way that we can have a policy that weall can essentially go along with, though we all may not feel fullycomfortable with it. So, I've said my piece, and I throw it out as apotential set of motions which I'd be curious to get reactions to.President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, just a clarifying question if Imight?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. SYRON. In what you've essentially proposed--alternativeB in the Bluebook--the Bluebook notes that under that alternative someof the recent rate increases might in fact slip back; we might seesome decline in rates under alternative B. I take it that in theapproach you're talking about that you would not want that, absentsome signs of weakening in the real economy or some other events inthe international markets--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Exchange rates.MR. SYRON. So I can say that under your proposal you wouldnot want to see a decline in rates in the short term?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you mean the funds rate?MR. SYRON. Yes, the funds rate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I would not.MR. SYRON. Okay.MR. ANGELL. But that's not a commitment to fed funds ratetargeting is it?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, no.MR. BLACK. He's just saying in the case of inconsistenciesbetween the borrowing level and the funds rate resolve doubts on theside of borrowing.MR. SYRON. That's essentially correct.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. I think the markets would misreada signal of that particular kind.MR. SYRON. That's my concern.MR. MELZER. The funds rate would be 9-1/4 percent roughly?What funds rate level would that be?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry. What?-49-2/7-8/89MR. MELZER. Slipping back from what level?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Where we are right now.MR. MELZER. 9-1/4 percent?SPEAKER(?). 9-1/8 percent.MR. JOHNSON. 9 to 9-1/8.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would say probably 9-1/8 percent wouldbe closer. But Governor Heller has the floor.MR. HELLER. No, let that discussion finish first. I have noquestion but--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Did we clarify that?MR. MELZER. Yes.MR. HELLER. I just want to support the same position,basically. I think real rates are already very high. Money growth isslowing and we should be patient to see that through. The one areawhere I may disagree with you just a little, if I heard you right, isthat you were expressing disappointment that investment wasn't slowingfaster than it actually is.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Capital investment.MR. HELLER. Capital investment isn't slowing faster.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, you know--MR. HELLER. Actually, I like to see high capital investmentbecause that fills the additional capacity that will hold downinflation in the future.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, there are two ways of looking atit. There's good GNP and bad GNP.MR. HELLER. I think that's good GNP and the more of it thebetter it is. Otherwise, I fully agree with what you said.MR. BLACK. Our special theme reports suggested that would bepretty strong, really, if I read that [right]. Is that the way youread it? I was very much encouraged by what that seemed to say.MR. HELLER. Yes.MR. BLACK. And that's good GNP.MR. HELLER. And that's good GNP.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, this is a tough one. I thinkpart of this question of Federal Reserve credibility that has beentalked about an awful lot here is related, at least as I see it, to-50-2/7-8/89what I'd like to call institutional harmony. In the interest ofinstitutional harmony I don't want to rock the boat unduly and I thinkI can support the spirit of what you've suggested. My druthers wouldbe rather distinctly to firm policy right now. But as I said, forreasons of institutional harmony, I am prepared to try to support thespirit of what you've said. But, for purposes of my conscience ifnothing else, let me just elaborate a bit further on my underlyingposition. As I've said in the past, I try to view the process ofmaking policy here as a matter of balancing risks. That's the onlyway you can do it. Now, I think it is possible, for example, that theeconomy could slow down kind of on its own to a path that, even withcurrent policy, would be broadly consistent with Mike's forecast. Ifit did that I think it would signify that we are lucky as well asgood, because in my judgment it would take a clear stroke of luck toproduce that result--in the sense that I think the risks are on theother side.The second point that I feel I must emphasize is thefollowing: there has been a great deal of discussion around this tableabout price stability and moving toward price stability. But as wesit here the algebraic sign on the inflation rate is unambiguous--it'splus. It's not neutral, it's not minus, it's plus. The inflationrate is going up. And Mike's forecast, which is undoubtedly the mostrigorous that is available to any of us, is saying that as best theycan judge, with current policy the inflation rate is going to go upmore. That's what the forecast says. We can all, and we do, have ourdifferences of judgment about it. But that's what it says. Now, Ihave a bit of trouble reconciling the algebraic sign on the currentinflation rate as being plus. Mike's forecast is on the side ofrising inflation. I look at the financial variables and my problemsget more severe. Take the exchange rate. It seems to me that if youeither want or you have a strong dollar, given where we are right now,then something else has to give at some point, because in my judgmentthe external position that we have and that we have prospectively isunsustainable. If it's not the dollar something else has to give.Now what is that other thing going to be? It's going to be theeconomy. Indeed as I said yesterday, taking the long view, I have areal question in my mind as to whether we can make sustainableprogress on the external adjustment side given any broadly acceptablepattern of exchange rates without a significant and sustained slowdownin the rate of growth in the economy. Now, we don't have to answerthat question today; but I think it's out there and it's going to haveto be dealt with sooner or later. So the exchange rate, at least as Isee it, creates quite a conundrum for us right now.Then I turn to the yield curve. And I, like everybody else,take an enormous amount of comfort from the yield curve and for whatit seems to imply about Fed credibility--both on Wall Street and MainStreet, in my judgment, Martha. But the crucial question about theyield curve is: What does it tell us prospectively? What does it tellus about the future? And I'm just not sure of that. I've looked atyield curves over a period of time in the United States and in all theother industrial countries and I'm just not sure. But I think thecrucial question that arises, whether it's based on experience in theUnited States or elsewhere, is: Are recessions typically inflationinduced? In other words, does the responsive pattern of recessionthat we've seen here and in other countries presage the recession?Are they inflation induced in that it's the rise in the inflation rate-51-2/7-8/89that gives rise to the tightening of monetary policy, etc.? And isthat what ultimately trips the economy into recession?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Excuse me. There's a significantinventory acceleration accumulation component in it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That is correct. But the crucialquestion in my judgment--if that is correct which I think it is--isdoes the yield curve in any reasonably satisfactory way tell usanything about future inflation? And I think the answer is no itdoesn't. The yield curve either in the United States or elsewhere hasnot been a reliable indicator of future inflation. Indeed, theevidence seems to cut the other way. And if it has not been areliable indicator of future inflation and most recessions areinflation-induced I am not prepared to bet the mortgage on the signalsthat the yield curve are giving off right now, even though obviouslythey are very welcomed, at least as we see them. So, I'm sure theyield curve is telling us a lot of important things. I'm sure we canand should both benefit from [unintelligible] but I don't think it'sreliable enough historically or intellectually to give me, at least,enough confidence in terms of [extrapolating] from it to the inflationrate and to other variables.Now, the one variable on the financial side that I do havesome confidence in is the money supply, however defined. It isintellectually not easy to look at the pattern of money growth that wehave had for basically two years now--I guess it's more than twoyears--and say to yourself: Is that a pattern of money growth over along period of time that is likely to be associated with some furtherdramatic escalation in the inflation rate? I think that is what isgiving me some pause. But as I said, Mr. Chairman, overall I cansupport your position. But my assessment of the risks is that theyare a bit asymmetric in that direction; that, I think, is clear.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Thanks. I also support what the Chairman said.I'm comfortable with maintaining current policy but in an asymmetricway. I still think the risks potentially are on the up side. I justthink that with the existing information there isn't any basis at thistime for further tightening. We may have to tighten further but Ithink we ought to leave that to some sort of discretion, some sort ofjudgment about how events unfold as time goes on. Based on today Icertainly don't see that as necessary, for a lot of the reasons that Isaid yesterday which I won't go back over again. I do have a view,though, that on the long end of the yield curve--even though thenominal rate has come down--we have had a fairly significantappreciation in long-term real rates. Now, there are different waysto look at that and I don't want to suggest that any one way is betterthan the other. My general view, though, is that there has been asignificant rise in long-term real rates. If you follow the Hoeysurvey, it suggests that the 10-year bond rate has gone up 2-1/2percentage points in real terms since mid-1987. And I don't thinkthat's insignificant. It depends on how much stock you put in theHoey survey; it's just one particular measure. But I think Don made agood point in his briefing that the slowdown in corporate bondissuance is also a pretty good indicator that long-term real rates arenot completely neutral in this whole process. People wouldn't be-52-2/7-8/89cutting back on corporate bond issuance if they thought their internalrate of return was better than the existing long-term yields. So, Ithink that's a good point. I don't think there's anything sacredabout the yield curve in terms of inflation expectations. I thinkbasically all that says is that the markets are betting that short-term rates in the future are going to be lower than they are today. Ithink you really have to isolate more on the long bond itself to getsome sort of notion of what they're thinking. It doesn't necessarilymean lower inflation expectations; it does mean that they think theshort rates are going to be lower in the future for various reasons.Maybe it's just that they think they are not going to keep up withmovements in the short rates. It's not the be-all/end-all of theevidence; there's no doubt about that.Putting it all together, I think you're absolutely right,Jerry, about the dollar. Something does eventually have to give ifthe dollar keeps appreciating. But I think the central point there isthat if the dollar does keep appreciating what will ultimately give isthe current account and the economy, to some extent. My point is thatif the dollar is going to be appreciating I don't see the scenariothat's in our Greenbook forecast. You would have a much weakereconomic picture under that kind of a scenario than you would underone with dollar depreciation--and totally different implications forthe domestic economy and inflation rate. And that certainly leavesyou with a worsening current account in exports under thoseconditions. That's some risk. But that leads me to want to be verycautious at this time. And I think an asymmetric position is probablythe best one.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I would agree that there aresubstantial uncertainties associated with economic prospects. But Ithink there is enough certainty to support alternative C. I believethat the level of economic activity is in excess of the fullemployment [level] at the present time. I think that a constant levelof interest rates, even if it is for the next month or so, wouldassure that for an even longer period. It seems to me that in thatkind of environment we know that inflationary pressures are building.As a result, I would say that we ought to get about our businesspromptly. It seems to me that it also would be much more difficult tocharacterize monetary policy as being ahead of the curve if we were totake no action now or, for that matter, over the next month. Thankyou.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, you very well described what Ithink is a very complicated and difficult current and prospectivesituation; and in a broad context I'm in agreement with you. Buthaving said that, at the margin I think I'd have a modest difference.I'm not saying that we are targeting fed funds. Nonetheless, if wehave an objective currently of, say, 9 or 9-1/8 percent, I think I'mhearing from Peter and others that there is a market tendency to movehigher--I would think 1/4 or 3/8 percentage points in that direction.If there is that kind of tendency in the market I think we ought tosupport it and move up as those pressures continue to move up. Thereis general agreement, certainly, that the risks here are on the side-53-2/7-8/89of inflation. The magnitude of the risks is something we can argueabout, but I think Jerry stated it very well: the risks are on the upside. The underlying rate of the economic expansion is strong, Ithink, and sustainable; therefore, I wouldn't necessarily do anythingthat would hurt here but I sure would move up to the extent that wecan, consistent with what I think is an underlying tendency.Therefore, I'd probably come down someplace between "B" and "C" andwould be inclined to move a little on the borrowing level now if thatwould basically support this upward tendency in the fed funds rate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think the point you madeabout a consensus of the Committee is very important. And for thatreason I would entirely support your prescription for the economy overthe short term, particularly the asymmetric part. Having said that,my preference would be to move at the present time. I happen tobelieve this forecast that the staff has come out with. And theinflation projections through 1989 and 1990, in my judgment, representan unacceptable level of inflation. And achieving that level ofinflation implicitly suggests some tightening. What I'm concernedabout is that we're going to have to tighten down the road. And thattightening might be more than we would like to have happen to containinflation. In other words, it seems to me the longer we have this runwithout taking more decisive action the more difficult our task isgoing to be in the future. But at the moment I am content to agreewith your proposal.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Yes, I can support your recommendation, sir. Iwon't tick off all my reasons because most of them have already beenstated by someone or another. I would just add one, and that is thatif we were to tighten further I think there would be copycat actionscoming from other countries. And I'm not sure that that would benefitall the economies in the world long term. Also, with the dollar sostrong at the moment and our strenuous efforts to lead it down, itjust doesn't seem sensible to be putting further upward pressure oninterest rates at this moment. So I would back your alternative,which I believe is "B."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I have to ask myself, as I think everyone elsearound the table does, where the risks are in this situation. What isit going to cost us two years from now if we make a mistake now? Andis the cost greater for being overly easy now relative to being overlytight? I don't see one structural problem--in the Southwest or withthe thrifts or internationally--that would be helped by having aninflation rate of 5.7 percent, which I think is the rate for the CPI,excluding energy, that Mike has in his forecast. It seems to me thoseproblems will be made substantially worse. We'll have to move muchmore aggressively with much higher interest rates. In my view, itwould be simply a repeat of policy mistakes that we have made in thepast. It seems to me that we could undo the cost of being overlytight now relatively quickly if we needed to. We can't undo theother. It gets built in. It's serious and it's unacceptable--notjust in the sense of the current inflation. What we're trying to do-54-2/7-8/89is get the maximum output for this economy. There is not a trade-offbetween real growth and inflation. There isn't. It's[unintelligible] in the very short run. So it just seems to me thatwe ought to ask ourselves about those risks and then come out on theside, at least from my perspective, of moving away from the approachwhere the costs are enormous. I think now is the time to move. I'dbe in favor of alternative C.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'm very close to Jerry Corriganand very close to Lee Hoskins. A while ago I appeared to becomplimenting Don Kohn unduly at the expense of Mike Prell. But I'dlike to say that I think that Mike's forecast for the economy--theneed for increasing short-term rates--is probably absolutely accurate.And I favor sooner rather than later. But there's always this riskthat we could do too much now. As far as this yield curve isconcerned, one reason it's the way it is [relates to] an expectationon the part of knowledgeable observers that we probably will do somefurther tightening fairly soon. So, I clearly come out in favor of"C." But there is this matter of institutional harmony that Jerrymentioned a while ago. And given your commitment, Mr. Chairman, tomove to this in a couple of weeks or so I can go along with that. I'drather do it now but I can vote for that.MR. HOSKINS. I want to clarify that. Is it a commitment tomove in a couple of weeks or to reconsider in a couple of weeks?SPEAKER(?). No, it's not.MR. BLACK. Well, I meant to consider a move depending onwhat the data say. And if they point in the other direction Iwouldn't want to move; I think it is very "iffy" right now. I'm lessconvinced than most of my colleagues in Richmond that this has gottenquite as far away from us as some people think.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, let me comment a little further about therisks as I see them. I don't see much risk at this point in time,with one caveat, to some further tightening. I personally wouldn't goall the way to "C," but I would be inclined to go to $700 million[borrowing] immediately. The only risk that I can really see of doingthat relates to external factors--the issue of external balance. AndI think the solution to that ultimately lies with a change in fiscalpolicy rather than anything that we can do. Beyond that it does seemto me that something between "B" and "C" is appropriate here and now.As I say, I don't see much risk to the real domestic economy from sucha move. While I personally feel that inflation is already excessiveand probably will rise, we may be pleasantly surprised here; I'llacknowledge that. But I don't see that an additional small move atthis point in time is going to [be harmful]; if anything, it's simplygoing to help [produce] a pleasant surprise if we're fortunate. Andat best it will turn out to have been an appropriate action. I don'tplace a lot of weight on it but there apparently is some expectationin the market that some further tightening is imminent. And I don'tthink we want to see rates slide back from where they are now.-55-2/7-8/89CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Well, first of all, I'd like to make up for thatrude question before. I'd like to reiterate the position I statedearlier: first of all, I think inflation is too high; and secondly, Ithink it's going higher. On the other hand, I don't think it'sgetting away from us or that it's going to get away from us if we stayon this course of monetary restraint that we've been on. In addition,I feel that the only shot we have at long-term price stability--and Iwould agree with Lee that that should be our goal in the long term--isif we can get there with a more or less stable real economicperformance. In other words, I don't think we're in a situation nowwhere it will be productive in terms of the long-run inflation fightto run too close to the line in terms of a recession.In formulating this view I think that, in a sense, it's alltoo easy to ignore the narrow monetary indicators; that's notsomething that gets a lot of discussion around the table. As aresult, there's a great temptation for [unintelligible] most recentnumbers we see and so forth. Obviously we should be looking at those.But I think at inflection points that can really result in procyclicalpolicy, in easing too long or tightening too long. Having said that,if you look at the reserve base and M1 as well as M2, we've beenlooking at slow growth rates for two years with further slowing in thelast six months or so--and particularly in recent months. In thefourth quarter we had reserve growth that was barely positive; I thinkthe Bluebook showed that in the period from November through Januarywe were actually looking at a negative growth rate of 5 percent. Andthe Board staff's forecast is assuming 0 percent reserve and M1 growthfor all of 1989. Now, in my own view, that kind of policy is veryrestrictive and I think there's a reasonable likelihood that that willput the economy in a recession in late 1989 or 1990. As I say, thereason I'm concerned about that is that the response in the otherdirection is going to put us so far off of a sustained path ofmonetary restraint that it could take us years to get back to theposition I think we're in right now. I want to be clear on this. I'mnot afraid, in a sense, to take a recession if that's what we have todo. I don't think you ever like to do that, to make that judgment.But obviously if things have gotten out of control, in the end we haveto be willing to run that risk for the very reasons Lee said. And itbecomes difficult later. But, as I said, I don't think that's wherewe are. There has been a lot of discussion but it seems thatimportant financial markets don't think that's where we are either.Otherwise, why would the dollar be doing what's it's doing, and golddoing what it's doing, and long Treasuries doing what they're doing?My final point, which is more or less an aside, is that Ithink the FOMC has done an excellent job in this period in terms ofmoving early. But I wouldn't necessarily say that we have led themarkets. I simply want to point out that if dramatic additionaltightening is undertaken at this time, we certainly don't have thefact that the markets are calling for it. The constituencies, if youwill, that are represented there are supporting it. In a dramaticmove here--and I know that's not really on the table--in effect, wewould be really stepping out in front, which I don't think we've done.Obviously, in pursuing a path of tightening there always are going tobe constituencies that are against that, as Governor LaWare referredto before. But in this case where investors feel inflation is getting-56-2/7-8/89away I just think one is in a better position--if one is responding topressures either in the foreign exchange markets, presumably backed upby our foreign trading partners, or behavior in long-term securitiesmarkets--to move against that background. Obviously, there's thechance of doing that too late and never catching up; I understandthat. Anyway, that would lead me to a position where, really, I wouldsupport "C" as stated--not "B" as stated.MR. HELLER. You woke us up.MR. MELZER. I figured I would.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That was the apology.MR. BOEHNE. Well, the issue is clearly one of weighing therisks of too much versus too little tightening. Reasonable people candiffer on that and that's what we're seeing around the table. I don'tthink any of us can be overly sure, whatever we do, that it is theright thing to do. Therefore, I think it is very relevant to ask thequestion: What are the implications of whatever we do today if we'rewrong? It is possible that we could do the wrong thing today. And itcomes down to this: Is it more costly to unwind too much tightening oris it more costly to make up for too little tightening? I think thatthis Committee has been in existence long enough and that there's apretty clear historical record, even though this group is much wiserthan our forefathers and mothers, that [the answer] is very, veryclear. It is more costly to make up for too little tightening. It isrelatively easy to lower interest rates. If you lower interest ratesyou don't cause a lot of unhappiness. Given the uncertainty, and ontop of that my assessment of the risks, I would move towardalternative C fairly promptly. I think it's a mistake to let interestrates fall at this point. Temporizing makes sense for institutionalharmony for now and I think that's worth something. But I must saythat it makes me very uneasy about the future because I thinktemporizing can be quite costly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I think this has been an excellentdiscussion; there is a great deal to be said on both sides of theseissues. It's not surprising in the light of all the ambiguity outthere; I think it's rather what one would expect. As I consider howto come down on this issue, I'd have a great deal of concern if wewere doing nothing now--as everyone here would. But I don't thinkthat's the case. For one thing, as I understood our expectations atthe last meeting we were expecting the funds rate to settle basicallyon the shy side of 9 percent. In fact, it has been on the plus sideof 9 percent. So, to some extent, you could say that we already mayhave gotten one extra tranche of tightening than we had expected toget at our last meeting. And I fully support that. I think it wasentirely appropriate and was well done. Nevertheless, it has beenthere. The aggregates are growing very slowly and I think that'sentirely appropriate; but I would be concerned if they went very muchslower than they are. I think it makes some sense to try to hold themaround where they are. The dollar has implications when it goes inboth directions but I think the way it's going now it is on the strong2/7-8/89side and supports an anti-inflationary stance. Whatever the yieldcurve may be telling us, it is inverted enough that it is clearly onthe anti-inflationary side. So, I think we are moving cautiously andappropriately and I am very comfortable supporting your proposal.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. I think, as Ed Boehne said very well, that we arein a period of some substantial uncertainty and that one has to weighthe symmetry of the risks. I fully agree with his analysis that it isalways easier to loosen later on than it is to tighten later on. Thestaff forecast, which seems to me as good a forecast as one is goingto find any place, does have some worrisome implications in terms ofinflation, excluding energy, as one gets out beyond the forecastperiod. So, in an unconstrained world I would tend to favor anapproach somewhere between "B" and "C." But I do agree strongly thatit is important to communicate institutional harmony at this point intime given the number of things that are going on. And I would becomfortable with your position, given that you suggested that therewould be a consultation within a matter of a couple of weeks and thatthere would be no decline, effectively, in market rates in the interimperiod--that we wouldn't have sent a signal that we were going in theopposite direction when that might have to be reversed within thatcouple of weeks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That would be a bad mistake.MR. SYRON. So, I prefer a "B-" but am comfortable with "B."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I find myself in the usualdilemma when it comes to this point, given where I live all the timeexcept for a couple of days every seven or eight weeks here inWashington. It's hard for me to rationalize being a little morerestrictive or a little tighter, given the risks of what that might doto the Southwest since it seems that most of the problems have beenand are still pretty much centered down there. The arguments, Ithink, have been well stated on both sides of the issue. Intuitively,I would be in favor of moving toward "C" now. I'm not so confident ofthat, though, that a two or three weeks' delay to get us a littlebetter reading on what's going on is that important. But I remainconcerned, as I indicated earlier in the meeting, about the level ofinflation and what appears to me to be a fairly timid approach toreducing that in a fairly significant way. I just think it's toohigh. But I would be supportive of the proposition that you put out.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, we still have President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Coming into themeeting this morning I guess I was looking for something between "B"and "C" on the short run, with some immediate movement toward "C"following this meeting. In view of your plea for accommodation,although I'm not a voting member, I could almost interpret yourproposal as being a "B-C" stance--taking a look at it again in acouple of weeks. And from that standpoint it would be very acceptableto me. I'd just like to lay on the table the way the tightening mighttake place in the period ahead. I understand that using the discount-58-2/7-8/89rate probably doesn't meet with much favor among those who have tovote on it--that is, the Board members--given the comments that havebeen made the last couple of days. But there is a time beyond which Ithink we will not be able to move the discount rate and close any gap,if that's a concern to anybody. When I talk about "B-C," a bit ofsnugging now, I would like to consider that we could deal with adiscount rate [increase of] 1/2 percent and not let it all showthrough--in other words, come to a funds rate level of something like9-1/4 to 9-3/8 percent. The further you go, if indeed you believe thestaff's forecast, you've neutered yourself on using the discount rateas an instrument, I think. And if we're ever going to do it, nowwould be the time to do it, given the projection that I think most ofthe people around the table believe.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm still missing Governors Angell andLaWare. Would either one of you--MR. ANGELL. I've never gone last.MR. LAWARE. I have the view of last time.MR. ANGELL. I've never gone last yet.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You want to go last?MR. LAWARE. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman. Iam skeptical about the possibility of unwinding some of these otherrates simply because we keep the present level of pressure on. Isuspect that in two or three weeks when we discuss this again weprobably will want to cinch it up a little. But I think that thecurrent suggested approach is a sound one.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Yes. The staff's forecast, as I understand it,is for a funds rate 150 basis points higher in the fourth quarter of1989 than in the fourth quarter of 1988. Is that about right?MR. PRELL. About 150 basis points by a year from now.MR. ANGELL. A year from now. If that does turn out to bethe path that we end up on, it seems to me that it would be somewhatdesirable somewhere in there to have a discount rate move. I wouldnot share Roger's enthusiasm for a discount rate move not showingthrough. I tend to prefer to have discount rate moves really showthrough the full amount when we do them. So it seems to me that's analternative that ought to be looked at. I do not favor that now, eventhough I favored that in November and December; to me it's a questionof timing. And I just don't quite understand how matters of weeks arethat significant in regard to the long-run impact on inflation. Mostof what we know about inflation suggests that it takes quite a whilefor it to show through. Indeed, if our analysis of commodity pricesis correct at all, we really can expect the CPI turning point some 7to 9 months after we get a turning point in commodity prices. And anyturning point in commodity prices at this point is somewhat tentative;it is not in the bag. So, I think we have a period ahead of us that'sgoing to be a period of some travail. I don't know where I'm going tobe at the end of the month. I would prefer, Jerry, to tighten when we-59-2/7-8/89have some lack of super-strength in the dollar. It seems to me thatit would be somewhat more desirable to get our economy, in a nominalGNP sense, to slow down by domestic [factors] rather than to get itdone by a lack of improvement of the external [side]. So, I believeit's important that all of us keep something of an open mind as towhere we are at the time of the telephone conference call. I know I'mgoing to. And if the conditions are such that we can make a move atthat time--and we're getting closer to impacting the second quarter'smoney growth rather than the first quarter's money growth--and itwould appear that we're not running the risk of driving M2 to zero,then that's the time to do it. I believe it's a long-term patiencestruggle. It is clear that I am more confident than some that themonetary restraint, if in place, is the real measure. I just do notknow when interest rates are high or when they are low; I do feel veryconfident about our maintaining a 3 percent growth path for M2. AndI'll be prepared under those conditions to vote restraint if itappears that is what's necessary to keep M2 growth at the bottom ofthe range. Thank you. So, my vote is yes for "B."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we vote on that proposal, butlet's see if this language is correct.MR. BERNARD. It reads: In the implementation of policy forthe immediate future the Committee seeks to maintain the existingdegree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking account ofindications of inflationary pressures, the strength of the businessexpansion, the behavior of the monetary aggregates, and developmentsin foreign exchange and domestic financial markets, somewhat greaterreserve restraint would or slightly lesser reserve restraint might beacceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserveconditions are expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 overthe period from December through March at annual rates of about 2 and3-1/2 percent, respectively. The Chairman may call for Committeeconsultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations thatreserve conditions during the period before the next meeting arelikely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outsidea range of 7 to 11 percent.MR. HOSKINS. Can I clarify one thing? In the interest ofinstitutional harmony, when we meet in two weeks will a vote be taken?MR. ANGELL. Two? I thought it was the end of the month.MR. HOSKINS. Well, end of the month.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The telephone conference will be towardthe end of the month. The issue of a vote depends on whether we haveto change the directive. If we don't have to change the directivethen there isn't a vote. But that's the purpose of the conferencecall: to develop--MR. BLACK. If we say "maintain" would that preclude ourletting the federal funds rate move up?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not that I know of, it wouldn't.MR. JOHNSON. I assume that there's an implied managementapproach by the Desk that goes with "B." It's what Don reported on.2/7-8/89Now, I don't know what that means. It means being more sensitive tothe funds rate but obviously there's some play in it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There has to be some play in it.MR. JOHNSON. It doesn't mean any persistent upward pressure.But I think everybody agrees it doesn't mean a decline in rates fromthe current level.MR. BLACK. And "maintain" would permit us to raise theborrowing target $100 million?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The answer is yes; the instruction tothe Desk does permit the Desk to raise the borrowing target to $500million in that the asymmetric language allows that to occur.MS. SEGER. But not until it's discussed at the conferencecall, right?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, the conference call is scheduledbasically later than that, unless we need to consult earlier.MR. ANGELL. Look, I don't think we ought to be trying to pin[the Chairman down]. If something happens and the Chairman agrees weought to have a conference call before the end of the month I think heought to call one before the end of the month. It seems to me this isasymmetric language and asymmetric language should give the Chair somefreedom between now and a conference call.MR. JOHNSON. That's what's in there.MR. BLACK. I wanted to make sure that we didn't preclude adecision to raise the borrowed reserve target if the data indicated,simply because we said "maintain" in here. And the answer is no.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No. This language provides for it.MR. JOHNSON. Asymmetric language always means that.MR. BLACK. I just wanted to be sure on that one.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesGovernor Heller YesPresident Hoskins NoGovernor Johnson YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesPresident Parry NoGovernor Seger Yes-61-2/7-8/89-62-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next regular meeting date is March28th, but we'll be talking, obviously, before then.END OF MEETING