Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 18, 1990A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 18, 1990, at 9:00 a.m.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneBoykinHoskinsKelleyLaWareMullinsSegerSternMessrs. Black, Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis,and Boston, respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Kohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey,Promisel, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Siegman,Simpson, and Stockton, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountPRESENT:Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Beebe, T. Davis, Ms. Greene, Mr. Scheld, andMs. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of San Francisco, Kansas City, New York, Chicago,and Atlanta, respectivelyMr. McTeer, Senior Vice President, Baltimore BranchMessrs. Goodfriend and McNees, Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Richmond and Boston, respectivelyMessrs. Guentner and Thornton, Assistant Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of New York and St. Louis,respectivelyTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofDecember 18, 1990CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move the minutesof the previous meeting?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So move.MR. SYRON. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Gretchen Greene.MS. GREENE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any questions for Gretchen?MR. FORRESTAL. Gretchen, do you think the market continuesto anticipate further easing by the Fed? Is that the [unintelligible]of the market?MS. GREENE. I think the body of opinion does expect that.The questions in the market's mind are: How much and how fast?MR. HOSKINS. You mentioned that negotiations to ratify theswaps are finished. My question is: Given the size of our currentforeign exchange holdings, why do we need to ratify those levels?MS. GREENE. These are the swap arrangements that we havewith other central banks, which have a term of one-year and arerenewable every year. As a routine matter we renew them each year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It was more than just Germany and Japan.MR. TRUMAN. Yes, the action to renew them was endorsed bythe Committee at the last meeting.MS. SEGER. Gretchen, I've always wanted to know how much ofthe activity in the foreign exchange market involves corporatepositioning as opposed to traders who work for money center banks. Iknow that many multinational corporations are having to get involvedwith foreign exchange more and more as a byproduct of their real work.Do you have any sense of how that proportion would fall out?MS. GREENE. That's a very difficult question to answer,partly because we don't have very good statistics and partly becausethe concept is hard to define. When we last conducted the turnoversurvey, in 1989, we did ask banks to tell us what proportion of theirtotal foreign exchange turnover was with customers. I've forgottenthe number, but I believe it was somewhere between 5 and 10 percent.But that only goes so far, because it depends on every respondentidentifying who was a customer and that would not necessarily be acorporate customer. Nonbank financial institutions could be customersalso. The rest of the business that a bank does, although it'sreported as interbank business, may be in support of the customer'sbusiness. For example, if I do a trade with a customer and then Iwish to manage my position, that forces me to go into the interbankmarket to do a certain amount of transactions. I think the average12/18/90number of interbank transactions one might engage in to support onecustomer trade could be anywhere from 4 to 10.MS. SEGER. What made me think of it was that I was talkingto a friend of mine who is a corporate treasurer and he was sayingthat in their shop, which is a very major company, they now have atleast one person in the treasurer's office 24 hours a day monitoringwhat is going on around the world not only because of general interestbut also because of their foreign exchange situation. That's whatmade me think that maybe corporations as whole, particularlymultinational ones, are more involved than they used to be, say, 10 or15 years ago.MS. GREENE. I think they are; the trend is definitely [up].MS. SEGER. Thank you very much.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Gretchen? If not,can we hear from the domestic Desk, Peter?.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Peter on either the Deskoperations or the leeway request?MS. SEGER. You mentioned the reserves that institutionswould need for clearing purposes and that, obviously, the requiredreserves also have served that purpose to this point.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MS. SEGER. Who actually will be determining that number? Isthat a bank matter? It's not a monetary policy matter.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, the banks will make their individualdecisions on this; it's a question of what levels they will feelcomfortable with. We've spoken to some of the money center banks whohave been reviewing where they will be with the reduction in reserverequirements. Several of them are considering establishing theserequired clearing balances because they say, for example, that thebalances they would have to keep at the Fed would be coming down to arange that just doesn't give them enough of a margin of comfort fordaily operations.MS. SEGER. Well, I understand that. But I just wondered ifthe people within the Federal Reserve who are so concerned about thedaylight overdraft issue are also going to get involved in setting thenumbers or if it would be driven strictly by managerial [decisions].VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Reserve Banks--MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, the comments I've heard have had to domore with just the avoidance of overnight overdrafts. Some of thestudies by the Board's staff suggest that not very much impact isexpected on the daylight overdraft side of it.MR. KOHN. We expect some increase, but relatively small. Itis very hard to gauge, given that banks presumably would re-orient and12/18/90re-configure their transactions to avoid those overdrafts if possible.In terms of required clearing balances, my understanding is that thatis driven primarily by the commercial banks in an effort to avoidovernight overdrafts.MR. BOEHNE. Will we need to use foreign currency as backingduring this period?MR. STERNLIGHT. It looks as though we will need to in earlyJanuary; I think Don would know.MR. KOHN. Our projections agree with Peter's.MR. BOEHNE. Will there be some announcement of this or willit just happen mechanically?MR. KOHN. The Chairman signed a letter--I asssume it wentout last Friday or Monday--to the Hill notifying them and an S-letternotifying the [Reserve Banks]. Hopefully, there will not necessarilybe a public announcement; it's up to them. An S-letter should bealready out or will be going out to the Reserve Banks with theappropriate documentation to the Federal Reserve agents. That wassupposed to go out at the same time, so it might have left yesterday.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Peter, you mentioned market expectations of whatmight happen next in terms of rates or even a discount rate move.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MR. SYRON. You noted what the situation was and the range ofexpectations developing in the market. To what extent is thatdifference due to this year-end situation? In other words, people aresaying that it may be a while before something happens; how much arethey influenced by the year-end situation? Is it markedly differentthan if we were at the same place in the cycle--if it's possible todetermine that--and this were July rather than December?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think the reserve requirement move wasseen as being helpful in [terms of] the year-end situation. Withrespect to a further easing of reserve pressures or a reduction in thefunds rate, I think some have felt that the steps taken recentlyhelped in reducing some of those year-end pressures. But to say thatthat is a factor may just be imparting my own speculation about whattheir thinking process might be; maybe they're looking forward toanother move near term. As I say, there was a high expectation,particularly after the last employment report, that there would beanother easing by year-end; but it tended to get set back a little bythe producer price report last Friday.MR. SYRON. Thank you.MR. PARRY. I'm just wondering if the funds rate is going tocome down without a change in the discount rate. How do you think theparticipants in the market would view that? Would that confuse themor would that be a non-event?12/18/90MR. STERNLIGHT. There has been some discussion about whetherthere are technical impediments to the funds rate coming down to thelevel of the discount rate or perhaps even below the discount rate. Ithink it would be feasible for that to occur--that the market wouldaccept it. They would probably continue to look for the discount rate[cut] in due course, but they might think there were reasons--perhapsconcerns over the dollar or whatever--that the Fed was holding off fora time on the discount rate.MR. PARRY. Would it affect your operations at all?MR. STERNLIGHT. It would take some careful implementationwhichever way one goes on this. So, yes, it would have some effect;but I think it can be done either way.MR. PARRY. Easier or more difficult?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't really have a strong point of view.MR. BLACK. It would be easier in that you would not have toworry about what the level of borrowed reserves was as much as youdid.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I have a question that relates to Bob Parry'squestion involving the relationship between the discount rate and thefed funds rate and also the very low level of borrowing. It seems tome that a big part of the so-called reluctance of banks to borrowcould be explained by that. If you can get fed funds for about thesame rate as the discount rate why go through the hassle at thediscount window? [Unintelligible] your favorite desk a call. Weprobably will see borrowing go to zip, if we let the fed funds rateand the discount rate coincide.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Except for those who pay big premiums[over] the funds rate.MS. SEGER. Yes, but I may know an atypical group that hasmade money--MR. SYRON. Would this have been seen as a possible temporarychange or do you think the market would interpret this as either achange in operating procedures as far as what we said about theborrowings or a ratification of a change that may or may not haveoccurred in operating procedures? If we were to go effectively to nodifference [between the funds rate and] the discount rate or a penaltydiscount rate without saying anything about--MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm not sure how they would interpret it; Ithink they might regard it as a temporary circumstance.MR. KOHN. As I indicated in the Bluebook, I think that wouldproduce a little uncertainty. I agree completely with Peter that froma technical perspective he could execute policy either way,particularly now that we pay a lot more attention to the funds rateand a lot less attention to borrowing than we used to. But I do thinkputting the funds rate under the discount rate would raise a question12/18/90in some minds as to whether we had gone to a penalty discount rate.And it also would raise questions because the newspapers have reportedthat there are preferences within the Fed not to do that. So, I thinkif they see that, they then would be waiting for a discount ratechange. It would raise a bit of uncertainty but it's certainlycompletely doable from a technical perspective. It would perhaps leadto a small increase in federal funds rate volatility, but very small.MR. KEEHN. Peter, I think maybe you have answered thequestion, but let me just go back over it again. On this year-endissue, I keep hearing that because of capital level constraints thisyear the year-end pressures are going to be particularly tough. Areyou saying that was the case but [unintelligible] a bit?MR. STERNLIGHT. Certainly, the concern is still there. Itseemed to reach its peak about the end of November and came off. Inthe last couple of days we've seen some move back up but not with thatnear panicky feeling that seemed to be there in November. An awfullot of preparation was undertaken for year-end and in some cases we'rehearing that institutions have prepared themselves to be able, withinlimits, to take on some credits at year-end where they think they willfind good business opportunities to do some of that. So, at thispoint anyway, I'm not looking at it as a terrible looming problem, butit's certainly something that we're going to keep a very close watchon right up to the year-end.MR. GUFFEY. Peter, I don't think I understand the Japanese[unintelligible] in the market that has pushed the rates up. Are[U.S. money markets] providing liquidity to offshore Japanese banks orare they only providing liquidity to the Japanese banks here in theUnited States?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think it has been provided mainly tothe U.S. operations and then they may have done operations to movesome of the funds. I can't say what might have happened after thatstep. But as to why there was this greater sense of demand--maybe Tedor Gretchen would want to comment too--there was some greaterreluctance among U.S. banks to extend lines to Japanese banks to thesame extent as before, because even though U.S. banks were beingdowngraded and were regarded with less favor, so were Japanese banks.There was less willingness to extend some of those lines and lesswillingness particularly to serve as intermediaries between, let'ssay, smaller U.S. banks that would have funds to provide and theultimate Japanese bank as buyer. Whereas before a major U.S. bankmight have been willing to sit there in the middle and take its 1/16thor 1/8th, they might say that it's not worth 1/16th or 1/8th to havethis exposure to an entity that's coming under some question.MR. HOSKINS. Peter, I think you alluded somewhat--maybe Imisread you--to the idea that in your day-to-day operations it's alittle more difficult to signal where we are, given the reserverequirement change. I'm wondering if we should view this as anopportunity to get a little more variability into the funds rate andto get back toward more of a reserve borrowing approach. Of course,that would require the discount rate to be moved if we were to chooseto operate in that way. Is this an opportunity?12/18/90MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't really see it that way because Ithink what we have now just is a very low level of borrowing. And wedon't really have a good substitute to put in the place of the focuson the funds rate. If anything, as we go through this transitionperiod in the reserve requirements, I think we're going to have tolean even more on the funds rate. I really just don't see a goodalternative to that.MR. HOSKINS. Maybe we ought to signal explicitly then andtell the market what the funds rate [objective] is.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it's coming darn close to that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Peter? If not, weneed two motions. I'll first entertain the motion for ratifying theDesk operations since the last meeting.MS. SEGER. So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Secondly, wouldsomebody like to move Peter's request for a leeway increase?MS. SEGER. I'll move that also.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We'll now move on tothe other regular staff reports. Messrs. Prell and Truman have thefloor.MR. PRELL. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Comments?MR. PARRY. Ted, I'd like to follow up a bit on your commentsabout net exports. The decline in GNP for the fourth quarter that thestaff has in the Greenbook is about $32 -$33 billion and theimprovement in net exports is about $30 billion. That improvement hasto look highly unlikely, given the October number. You usually don'thave reversals, though this could be something of an aberration.MR. TRUMAN. Well, it could be. You may have noticed thatlast year we had a similar aberration in October, so I think there aresome misplaced seasonal factors at work in these data. Obviously, ifwe had to go back and do the forecast given the data we have as ofthis morning, we might have a somewhat smaller swing. However, muchof this swing is coming from the oil phenomenon and we have prettygood data going through the early part of December on that. I mightnote that the oil number that's on the table there is higher than wehad projected both in quantity and value, but that is largely becausewe found some oil in the New York harbor that hadn't been included inprevious months. If you strip that out, you have a sharp drop-off in12/18/90the quantity of oil, which will be stripped out in the GNP account,and a sharp drop-off in the volume of oil imports, which get valued at1982 prices. So, that's going to have a big statistical impact in thecurrent quarter.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me add: the oil was in ships!MR. PARRY. If the improvement were on the order of maybehalf of what was forecast here, we could be talking about a decline of1 or 2 percent more at an annual rate than the forecast.MR. TRUMAN. Sure.MR. PRELL. We have not had time to sort through these datain detail and to try to match them up against the various expenditurecategories, but I think one needs to emphasize that GNP measuresdomestic production.MR. PARRY. Right.MR. PRELL. Indeed, as of last Wednesday when we went topress with the Greenbook, we didn't even have retail sales data, etc.We were depending to a considerable extent on the labor market data toget some sense of what the input was to domestic production and thenwe were trying to make some reasonable guesses, in effect, aboutproductivity and so forth. But I think one should not leap to theconclusion that dollar-for-dollar any surprise in net exports wouldtrack through to GNP. We may find stronger expenditures on capitalgoods, for example, to match some imports or some other adjustment.There may be more luxury cars being imported, which will be part ofour bulge in consumption in the fourth quarter. If that were thecase, rather than coming out of inventories, that might haveimplications for the first quarter. So, I think it's a very complexprocess that one needs to go through with these data.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, can we assume that since the PCEfor October is higher than originally estimated and imports are higherthat we may be seeing nothing more than a higher level of imports ofconsumer goods?MR. TRUMAN. Every category was actually up; there is no oneparticular thing to point to. Automobiles were up substantially andthat may be the luxury car phenomenon. Other consumer goods also wereup substantially, but capital goods were up too.MR. PARRY. But you said PCE in October, right?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. I'm sorry; I meant November.MR. PRELL. [Unintelligible.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for the gentlemen?If not, I think we'll start around the table.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, these are obviously uncertain anddifficult times not only for consumers and producers but also forforecasters. This looks a little different from anything we've everhad before. I think the staff's forecast is highly plausible, given12/18/90the assumptions on which it rests. But our hunch is that theprojection for real GNP for the current quarter and the first half of1991 will turn out to be on the high side even if the oil prices docome down from the relatively optimistic path that the staff hasassumed. I have several reasons for saying this. One is the bigrevision the staff has made in net exports of goods and services byshowing a pretty steep, near-term drop in imports which, of course,has the effect of raising both real GNP and net imports of goods andservices compared to the November Greenbook forecast. We think thedirection of this revision was clearly appropriate, given the weaknessin domestic demand that's been evident in the recent data and also thecensus data mentioned in the Greenbook and again the figures thatwe've gotten on the merchandise trade balance for October--though alot of that may wash out as Ted suggested. Despite all those things,the magnitude of the revision looks a little big to us. And thesecond reason is this persistent weakness in M2, which I don't thinkanybody really can explain satisfactorily. That continues to worry usa great deal. And finally, we've been impressed by the continuedstrong negative tone of most of the anecdotal information that we'vebeen getting from all sorts of sources. One piece of information thatstruck me as particularly impressive came from thewho is in theplastics business and makes parts for manufacturers all over thecountry and sells them on a nationwide business. He called upspecifically to tell us that the bottom had fallen completely out ofhis order book, which is something that he had not seen before.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That was as of when?MR. BLACK. This had happened last month. Now, we feelsomewhat more comfortable with the staff's inflation forecast thanwith the projections on output and employment. The staff has reviseddownward a little its projections for inflation for 1991 and 1992 fromthe last Greenbook, and that strikes us as appropriate. But as I saidearlier, I really think the monetary restraint that we have put inplace over the last several years as a whole may well produce greaterlong-term benefits on the inflation side than the staff has beenprojecting even if this recession turns out--as I hope it will--to beas mild as they are projecting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, about the best that we cansay about the Dallas District is that it's pretty flat. This is whatour statistical evidence is saying and it has been confirmed by ourboard of directors at our meeting last Thursday and by other anecdotalinformation that we've been getting lately. It is increasinglydifficult to find a segment of our District economy that is doingwell. Most of our contacts are mentioning either mild declines orslight gains. Manufacturing activity has been weak, particularly inelectronics and defense-related industries. Construction activity haspicked up slightly, but most of that pickup represents a completion ofmajor petro-chemical projects begun about two years ago. Ourretailers are telling us that the Christmas season has been slow, withmerchandise not moving except at post-Christmas-type discounts.Overall, the outlook for the District economy is for little or nogrowth over the next few months.12/18/90With respect to the national picture, I certainly would nottake issue with Mike's forecast, particularly since he added somewherealong the line that the risks are certainly on the down side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the economy in the Twelfth Districtcontinues to be slow overall, with mixed pockets of activity acrossthe region. The California economy, which accounts for about two-thirds of the District's employment, has slowed along with the nation.If we look at employment, what has happened since August is thatemployment is actually down slightly and our year-over-year employmentgrowth remains about 1/2 point above the national average. Notsurprisingly, the slowdown has been most pronounced in trade,construction, and manufacturing, with year-over-year declines inconstruction and manufacturing that are not that different from therest of the nation. In the near term we expect that the state willcontinue to move along with the national pattern. If you look at theremainder of the District, however, there are some rather interestingdevelopments. There are some effects of the national slowdown, butthe District's manufacturing employment outside of California isactually at the same level as a year earlier and construction andtrade employment are up 4.3 and 3.6 percent, respectively.Residential real estate sales volumes are certainly down inCalifornia, Hawaii, and Washington but up in a fairly sizable way--believe it or not--in Arizona, Utah, Idaho, and Nevada. Home pricescontinue to rise except in Seattle and the coastal California areas,which, of course, do represent a very substantial part of theDistrict. The agricultural outlook, which is very important to usbecause in some measures it is the single largest industry in theDistrict, is quite bright. The USDA points to particularly strongproduction and export performance for the region's fruits, vegetables,and other specialty crops.If I may turn very briefly to the national outlook: In thecurrent quarter we see real GNP declining at a rate of about 4 to 5percent, which is a bit stronger falloff than projected in theGreenbook. I must admit that I can't point to any particularquantifiable factor that would be causing that degree of weakness.It's obvious, for example, that the oil shock is not enough to producethat kind of a falloff. Our best guess is that we'll see a small rateof decline in the first quarter, similar to that in the Greenbook,followed by a pickup in the second half of the year much along thesame lines as in the Greenbook, including improved exports. It doesappear to us that the underlying inflation rate may have peaked andthat with the unemployment rate on the rise we're likely to see somemoderate progress in that area over the next year or so. Ourprojections for inflation, however, are somewhat higher than those inthe Greenbook. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had thought untilrelatively recently that we were beginning to see some signs of a sortof second derivative in New England--a turnaround to some potentialflattening. But I must say, given the beginning of a slowdown in thenational economy, that that's probably not in the cards at this point.We have seen some real evidence in the region of markets working in an12/18/90entirely favorable sense in terms of better price performance andbetter asset levels [unintelligible] in wage levels. As far as theDistrict itself goes--and I don't know what the implications of thisare for the nation--retailing looks very, very soft. People are out;there is activity in the stores, but people are not buying.Promotions haven't been that effective, and retailers say they don'texpect that people are going to be buying after the first of the year.This isn't a case of delaying purchases; it's a case of people justsaying "I'm not going to buy very much more." I talked to some peopleyesterday at major department stores who indicated that it has been avery poor Christmas season thus far for their outlets, both locallyand nationally. And consistent with that is what we see in creditcard activity. We talked with some people at credit cardunit and they said year-over-year the level of charges in New Englandis down 3 percent, compared to up slightly nationally. I don't knowwhat the national implications of this are, but certainly in NewEngland an important factor has been the loss of paper wealth in[declining values of] housing. We're beginning to do some work onthis and very very crude estimates would indicate paper wealthreductions of $600 to $800 billion in the region's real estate. Thatis very significant on a personal income of about $290 billion interms of any sort of consumer consumption factor. I think housingconstruction in the area still has to go down a ways. As I said, wehave seen some real improvement in prices, with some spec housinghaving declined 40 to 50 percent in price and land prices also havingdeclined in some areas.MS. SEGER. That's an improvement: down 40 to 50 percent?MR. SYRON. Well, it's an improvement because the price levelwas just so high that it wasn't consistent with any long-term viableeconomic gain.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Because it stops being solvent onsome of the prices? Is that what you're saying?MR. SYRON. It just stops being solvent at those prices. Ithink that's an important point; I'm glad you mentioned that.Actually, until recently the transaction level had improved a bit, butland prices had very significant changes, again involving speculationin developed lots, finished lots. In some cases we know of,transaction prices were down 1/2 and in a few cases 3/4 from theoriginal asking price. We're also seeing this in labor markets, wherethere has been a very dramatic improvement [in the availability of]marginal labor, if you will--for warehouse labor, McDonald's labor,and that kind of thing. The banking situation has been pretty bleakand obviously is going to continue to be so for a while; some bad newsseems likely after the first of the year. As far as the credit crunchgoes, I think we have seen indications that some of the larger banksare attempting to improve their earnings as they go out to increasetheir willingness to lend. At this stage, that really hasn't beentranslated very much into increased activity, given the concerns thatare going on. Manufacturing is generally weak, with some exceptions.Some exports are doing fairly well as are some short-term defense-related items, particularly missiles ordnance that has to be replaced.Capital spending looks quite weak to us. In talking to some people--and one has to remember that 1981-1982 was a fairly benign periodrelatively in New England--we hear them comparing the current period-10-12/18/90to 1974-1975, and they are saying that they are just going to wait awhile before they do any spending and that survival is the mostimportant thing. I think a good side of all of this is that it hasbrought an increased awareness of the excesses of the past. We hearfrom more and more people: "Let's just get this over with as quicklyas possible and go on to something in the future."I agree with Bob Parry in terms of the forecast; what we lookat internally suggests that the fourth quarter could be a littleweaker than the Greenbook [forecast]. As far as the national economygoes, I think we may well face somewhat of a bimodal potentialoutcome. I personally find the Greenbook a feasible forecast, albeitwith somewhat of a change in conditions--some modest further easing.However, I am concerned about some of the imponderables [such as]consumer confidence. Historically, if you look at the data, theseperiods of oil price run ups and then improvement have been associatedwith a real bounceback in consumer confidence. This may be differentbecause of the issue of diminishing war fears. I don't know that Ithink this will wash out, but the perceived decline in wealthnationwide that Gary mentioned, given what is going to happen tohousing prices, may have an effect. On the exports side, there's someconcern about whether foreign economies, particularly that of Japan,will be as strong as we might hope. And given what's happened toprices, I think housing nationally will be depressed for a while. So,even without a real problem in the financial sector, there are anumber of factors that could tip us over to the other side--into thesecond of the two modes. I think all this argues for taking out somemodest insurance on where we're going; I don't think in any sense thatit means one should panic. I think we have made, or are in theprocess of making, substantial improvement on prices. And the issueis to keep that improvement but at the same time be vigilant so thatthis doesn't really tip over into something that none of us wants.Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, conditions in the SixthDistrict continue to weaken with the exception of the energy andchemical areas, which seem to be doing fairly well. Most of theindustries in the District are experiencing deteriorating conditions.We did a recent survey of retailers about their Christmas seasonsales, and they say that spending is not only weak but has fallenbelow what had been very modest expectations to begin with. And asother people have mentioned, the retailers are not really looking forany comeback after the first of the year. The good news, to theextent that it is good, is that inventories at least are under tightcontrol at this point, which is consistent with the discussion in theGreenbook. We don't have the base of export activity in the Districtthat other parts of the country have and, therefore, manufacturingactivity is not good and we won't get the effect of greater exportactivity. As a result of that, we've seen in recent weeks a stream ofannouncements of layoffs and plant closings. That includes thebanking industry and that, incidentally, is getting front pageheadlines--not only the condition of the financial institutions butthe layoffs associated with it. The business and financial contactsthat I talked to in recent weeks are universally gloomy, and thatincludes our directors. Most of them, I would say, think that thiscontraction is going to be a deep and lengthy one--deeper and longer-11-12/18/90than the standard forecasts. Worries about the banking system, as Isaid, get daily attention, and recent publicity about the FDIC iscertainly aggravating peoples' concerns and not contributing toconfidence in any great way. On the credit crunch, the most recentthing I heard was at a meeting I had with about 14 or 15 businesspeople. The only thing they wanted to talk about was the lack offinancing. They simply can't get financing even though they have hada long association with their bank, and that is a source of greatconcern to them.While the situation in the Sixth District does not look atall good, our forecast for the nation is very similar to the Greenbookboth with respect to GNP and inflation; and our assumption about thebehavior of oil prices is very similar as well. Notwithstanding that,I do think that the risks are on the down side of the forecast and I'mvery concerned about the stress in the financial system that couldvery well restrain a rebound in activity. I'm also concerned aboutthe weakness in the monetary aggregates.Now, there are two other things that I would mention, whichaffect my outlook for policy. Because of the credit crunch andbecause of the situation at financial institutions we may not begetting the same effect from monetary policy that we ordinarily would;it may be damped. And that may call for a little more aggressivepolicy response at this particular time. I think it would be a verybig mistake for us to deal with the financial problems of the bankingindustry by exercising greater forbearance; the way to deal with thissituation as well as the economy generally is to have a moreaggressive monetary policy. I guess I'll have a chance to say alittle more about that later.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There's not a lot ofadditional news to be said about the District economy; there hasn'tbeen a lot of change. I will comment on a couple of things that havecome up recently. In talking to some of the large firms in the TwinCities, a good number of them had a very good 1990, particularly thosethat have some substantial foreign exposure or are major exporters.Despite that, they almost universally have a good deal of concernabout 1991, particularly domestically, of course. One of thereactions that seems to be occurring is that they are stretching outtheir salary programs. That is, they're going to go ahead in Januarywith the normal kind of salary programs that they've had in previousyears but are telling employees that those increases will last for 15to 18 months. That's something that I, at least, hadn't come acrossuntil recently, and I think it is clearly because of their concernsabout the economy and business conditions in 1991. With regard toholiday sales in the District, I'm not hearing much in the way ofeuphoria nor terrible gloom. So, I assume that things are rathermediocre and that's about all that can be said about it.With regard to the national economic outlook, I generallyagree with the shape of the economic performance as expressed in theGreenbook, although I will admit that I'm less confident that theupturn is going to occur quite as quickly as envisioned in thatdocument. There are a number of intangibles to worry about at thisjuncture, it seems to me. And I think, as Dick Syron suggested, the-12-12/18/90major wild card is real estate values. I just feel instinctively thatif those values continue to come down substantially and if thatbecomes more pervasive around the country than it has heretofore, thathas to have a bigger effect on the economy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. While in a comparativesense economic activity in the District has been stronger than thenational economy, as I have commented at past meetings, I think therehas been a clear downward shift both in sentiment as well as in theunderlying level of activity itself. Probably the greatest impact--and Mike can certainly comment on this--has been in the auto sector.We've finally reached the point where these fleet sales have movedthrough the system. And that had kept both production and sales at ahigher level than we would have expected over the last several months.Given that, I think sales levels probably will be down and will bemore reflective of underlying consumer demand. As a result, salesforecasts have been reduced. One manufacturer that I talked to hasreduced its sales expectations for next year by about 1 million units--down to 13-1/2 million units. And even that is dependent on apretty good improvement in the second half of the year. At this pointthe auto inventories are at pretty reasonable levels with days supplyaround the mid-80s, and that's certainly better than was the case lastyear. Nonetheless, production schedules for the first quarter of nextyear are down substantially. And the manufacturers say the risk isclearly on the down side--that they probably will be reduced evenfurther as we get into the quarter. All of this is backing up intothe suppliers to the auto industry; they've seen very significantcutbacks in their orders. So, the backup is beginning to be prettypervasive both in Michigan and Indiana, which are heavy suppliers tothe industry.Another swing factor has been the level of constructionactivity. We also have finally been hit by this. Commercial contractawards have all but stopped. At this point we have quite a number ofprojects that are still [some distance from their] completion dates.So, we're going to have a lot of floor space coming on and, therefore,vacancy rates which already are beginning to climb certainly are goingto be climbing even further. We're going to have some cash flowproblems developing in some of the developer areas. For home starts,our numbers are perhaps not off as much as the national numbers, butcurrently we're seeing a downturn there as well. The volume of homesales this year is significantly lower than last year.In the good news category, in the agricultural sector theproduction levels clearly were high, although the prices weren't quiteas good as farmers would have liked. Farm incomes at the end of theyear are really in very good shape and I think the farm sector is inpretty good balance. Many of the uncertainties that were botheringthem before are behind us. Farm equipment sales next year areexpected to be about level with this year. There are going to be somelayoffs in that sector to bring inventories into line, but the farmoutlook seems to be pretty good.It is hard to get a fix on retail sales, particularly thisearly in the season. My hunch is that the Christmas season will comein better than a lot [unintelligible] would suggest. Clearly, the-13-12/18/90pricing is bad. When I say that sales will be okay, I really meanthat in a volume sense. I think pricing is going to be very toughand, therefore, the profit levels will be down. On the inflationfront, excluding energy, I think the news is just okay. Competitivepressures out there are terribly heavy and, therefore, the pricingcontinues to be tough. The steel industry is a good example. They'regoing to ship 84 or 85 million tons this year, which comparably is apretty good year, but the pricing is really rough. As a consequence,companies are shipping a lot of metal but are not making as much moneydoing that. And certainly on the labor front there are no currentexcessive upward pressures.In a national context, our forecast is very consistent withthe staff forecast, at least in broad contour, We have some interimquarterly differences, but I don't think that's particularlysignificant. In my mind, the major uncertainty here is the financialsystem. I can't remember a time when there has been a bigger buildupof pressures throughout the financial system. It's awfully difficultto measure the impact if something were to get loose on us here in akind of [destabilizing] way. And when we get into the policydiscussion, that would be a very important determinant, at least to mymind, of how we should conduct policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I would say that the sentiment is increasinglypessimistic or if it's not pessimistic, the level of concern isrising. Retailers are still hoping for a season-saving finish. Theyhave a long weekend just before Christmas and there's still some hope;but there has been so much price discounting that even if sales dopick up, their profit margins are going to be poor. Manufacturing hasbeen weakening longer in our District than it has in the nation, soit's at a very low level. But a number of manufacturers are buildinginto their 1991 plans some pickup for the second half of next year.There is extreme pessimism in construction for obvious reasons.Bankers are worried to scared, depending on how close they are toretirement.MR. HOSKINS. Some may retire sooner than they expected!MR. BOEHNE. The District's unemployment rate, which had beenbelow the nation's, has caught up with the nation's and I suspect willrise above it. And for the first time in a long time we now haveareas in the District with unemployment rates of 7, 8, and even 9percent. The state and local fiscal situation is very serious,particularly in Philadelphia, but it is not limited to Philadelphia.Now that the state elections are over, I think the state ofPennsylvania will have to face up to a large deficit. New Jersey,which has had huge tax increases, still has a deficit. And a numberof municipalities that probably won't make The Wall Street Journalnonetheless are having very serious problems.On the national economy: While the Greenbook forecast of arelatively mild, short-lived recession is plausible, my guess is thatit's wrong and that we will have a longer lasting and a more seriousrecession. Even if one is optimistic about how the Middle Eastsituation will come out and about oil prices, I doubt very muchwhether consumer spending will bounce back with the same amount of-14-12/18/90vigor by spring as envisioned in the Greenbook. Consumers just feelchastened after a number of years of some fairly loose spendinghabits. And I think they're going to remain cautious. Even if theoptimistic assumptions on oil and the Middle East are realized, westill are going to have high and probably rising unemployment. Theconsumer still has these high debt burdens, and delinquencies arerising. Also, the worries about bank safety, which are all over thetalk shows and in the newspapers, just weigh on people and I thinkthey are going to weigh on people even more. So, my guess is thatwe're going to see a fairly bearish consumer for longer thanenvisioned in the Greenbook.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Starting off with the District, in terms of thestatistics we are still slowing. But even though manufacturingemployment is going down, we're still getting modest employment growthoverall. I'd say the employment picture generally in the District issomewhat stronger than in the nation. In terms of nonresidentialconstruction, over the last year we're down about as much as the restof the country. Housing has not been hit nearly as hard, but it isdown. As far as anecdotal information goes, and I mentioned this onour recent telephone conference call, the sense I'm getting fromdirectors and others--and it was reinforced in some furtherdiscussions last week--is that things have not gotten materially worsein the last 30 days. As far as holiday sales go, I think retailers inthe District are expecting modest, or maybe somewhat larger, realdeclines in retail sales. But that generally was anticipated and Ithink inventory levels in general are in pretty good shape. One verybright spot is bank performance in the District. We have third-quarter numbers in now: Returns on assets are still about 1 percent;returns on equity are greater than 12 percent; and nonperforming loansare unchanged from the prior quarter and the prior year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can't you create some contamination?[Laughter.]MR. MELZER. Probably the fourth quarter won't look as good;I'd expect some deterioration. But again, it's a much better picturethan I think we see elsewhere. In terms of expansion of credit, thatgenerally has been sluggish over the last year in the District.On the national front, the one comment I would make is thatwe've had some concerns over the last couple of months--really sinceSeptember, October, and November--about the slowdown in the monetaryaggregates. I guess the way that one would conceptualize what isgoing on is that as demand for reserves has fallen our operatingprocedures of pegging the funds rate has really caused us to drag outreserves to maintain whatever the targeted funds rate was. I thinkthere was evidence in, say, the early part of this 2-1/2 month periodthat we weren't really keeping pace with declines in other short-termmarket rates. I don't know to what extent we can rely on thesespreads, but it's something that I think is worth looking at. Themain point I wanted to make in this connection is that with the stepsthat were taken in November, we really have not only caught up withthe declines in market rates but actually have moved the funds rateahead of them. Just to cite a couple of examples: From the end ofSeptember to the end of October, the funds rate had only come down 9-15-12/18/90basis points, whereas short rates had come down on the order of 20 to30 basis points depending on what instrument we looked at; but for theperiod as whole, from the end of September through the middle ofDecember roughly, the funds rate was down 100 basis points and thesevery short-term rates were down roughly 30 to 60 basis points. So, ifone worried about our being out of position and not providing adequatereserve growth, to the extent that these interest rate spreads aresome indicator we certainly have caught up with the market movementand gone beyond that. Perhaps that gives a somewhat more optimisticperspective in terms of what reserves and money might do down theroad.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the Tenth District,in contrast to several other Districts, we still have growth--thoughto be sure it's rather modest. But we always had modest growth, Ithink, relative to the nation; this time we happen to be positivewhile the nation might be negative. A lot of this largely comes froma very good harvest. For virtually all of the crops grown within theTenth District, the harvest is completed. The exception is the cottoncrop down in southern Oklahoma, which is an outstanding cropapparently, and the prices are very high for cotton because of somereduced crops in other parts of the country. All in all, theagricultural sector is very healthy. Cattle and hog prices remainvery strong. Wheat, corn, and other small grain prices havediminished because of the large world output in agricultural products.However, there is some hope--not euphoria--that with the exportcredits that have just recently been granted to the USSR that exportsof agricultural products will pick up and will impact our part of theworld.On the energy side, there has been some modest pickup inexploration drilling. I'm not sure that that will last very long.For example, the rig count in the Tenth District went up modestly from325 rigs to 336 rigs in the month just passed. But the employmentpickup in the energy sector probably is related more to the reworkingof old wells than it is to new drilling or exploration. That is, youcan take a well that may be producing 6 to 10 or 12 barrels a day,rework it for $10,000, and increase that production to 18 or 20barrels a day; it makes sense given the oil prices currently.Retail sales within the District, as best as we have beenable to determine, are essentially flat. I'm talking about theChristmas season, ex autos. Autos are very soft as they are aroundthe country. I might just indicate, however, that the best anecdotalevidence about the agricultural sector [arose at] our branch boardmeetings: There was one report that new pickup trucks were actuallybeing sold for cash, which is something that hasn't happened in 6 to 8years in the Tenth District. As for retail sales being flat, thereport that I received most recently about the Christmas season notbeing very strong [is partly related to] the very warm weather we havehad. Retailers expect or at least hope that in the last seven days--and there is a cold front coming through the Midwest--those sales willpick up and that the Christmas or holiday season will indeed turn outbetter than most people expected, at least in our part of the country.-16-12/18/90With regard to manufacturing, automobile assembly plants havebeen closed down periodically because of cutbacks by themanufacturers, and the extended holiday will continue well into thefirst of the year for all of the auto plants within our District.Construction is essentially flat, both commercial as well asresidential. There is some hope, particularly in the state of Kansas;there is a very big highway project there as a result of this publicworks project. The value of the nonbuilding contracts in that stateis well ahead of last year.All in all, the Tenth District is doing fairly well. All themajor cities that are metropolitan areas have unemployment rates wellbelow the national rate. And there's fairly good optimism--at leastbased on comments of our board members, not only at the head officebut at each of the branch boards.With regard to the national outlook, we differ a bit in ourview of that but the depth of the recession is not greatly differentfrom peak to trough than what is projected in the Greenbook. We havehad some concern, and our numbers would reflect it, that the recessionwill be a little longer by one quarter. In other words, rather thanturning up in the second quarter of next year we would not expect tosee that uptick until the third quarter; and then the latter twoquarters of the year would be fairly close in the aggregate to whatthe Greenbook projects. With regard to prices, in the Tenth Districtwe don't see any price pressures and we don't quarrel with theprojections in the Greenbook.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, as far as the nationaleconomy is concerned, I think Dick Syron made my point earlier. If Ihad to put a forecast on a piece of paper, I'd probably put down onethat looks a lot like the one that Mike has put in the Greenbook.Having said that, and for all the reasons that have been citedearlier, I think the risks in the second quarter of 1991 and beyondare probably on the south side of that forecast. Indeed, in lookingat Mike's forecast, if we had an economy behaving in growth terms likehis forecast for the next seven quarters--while it may be cyclicallyless than we've seen in the past--I'd consider that terrific.Basically, he has 2-1/2 percent growth throughout the balance of 1991and 1992.Let me say a brief word on the local economy, in the New Yorkmetropolitan area particularly. Keeping in mind that in manufacturingterms that is nowhere near as important as it once was, the fact ofthe matter is that it still has something like 10 or 12 percent of thenation's population and in some industries such as real estate it'sdisproportionately more important than even population would indicate.For the metropolitan area as a whole, it is clear that the whitecollar recession is still deepening. Some of this is the prominentheadlines that you see on cutbacks in financial firms. But it's notjust that. Indeed, that white collar profile of the recessionaryforces in the metropolitan area really is quite extraordinary in anykind of a historical perspective. We think the real estate situationstill has a ways to go south. Again, the market measured in squarefootage terms is very, very large. You lose sight of the fact thatlower Manhattan by itself has almost as much office space as the city-17-12/18/90of Chicago. And when you look at the situation in the metropolitanarea broadly defined, New York City itself probably is marginally okayin that vacancy rates are now in the area of 20 percent, which is highbut not fatal. And there is not a whole lot of fresh new supply inthe construction pipeline; there is some, but not tremendously largeamounts. Rents, on the other hand, really have plummeted. If youlook at prime midtown office space--I'm talking about large chunks ofspace, say, 200,000 to 400,000 square feet, not little pockets ofspace--space that perhaps as recently as a year ago but certainly 18months ago could have commanded $50 to $55 a foot, today they arelucky to get $30. It really is an extremely large change in a very,very short period of time. As I said, the only saving grace is thatthere aren't that many truly large blocks of space even in the midtownmarket with the exception of three or four buildings that are beingfinished on 6th Avenue. The suburban real estate markets are worsethan the New York City markets and that is true pretty much across theboard, whether you're talking about Long Island, Jersey, Westchester,or parts of Connecticut. We don't have very good statistics in termsof how much space is sitting there. Most of these surveys, ColdwellBanker and the like, are pretty good for cities but not so good forsuburban areas. Based on what developers are telling us and what ourexaminers see, we think the downside potential in the suburbancommunity is still quite considerable.Ed Boehne touched on this in the context of Philadelphia andPennsylvania, but we have basically the same kinds of pressures on thestate and local fiscal side with all the implications either forhigher taxes and/or lower spending at the state and local level. TheNew York City situation isn't great at the moment; it doesn't lookanything like the way it looked in the mid-1970s, but it's not good.And whether we're talking about Connecticut or parts of Long Island,there are large prospective deficits in state and local governmentbudgets pretty much across the board. Leaving the metropolitansituation alone for a moment, the general psychology of the situation,as reflected in attitudes of CEOs of major multi-national companies,is that it's pretty lousy. Interestingly, in the face of Ted'scomments earlier, I don't get the sense that the companies that aremajor exporters are quite as confident about the potential for volumegrowth in exports in 1991 as they were even three months ago. Now,they haven't said so, but it's not considered a [near certainty] as Ithink it was as recently as three months ago that they would continueto see volume growth in the area of 10 percent or 12 percent.As far as the Christmas retail season goes, the sense I getfrom both the national retailers that are headquartered in New Yorkand even from some of the small businessmen we talk to is that "Itain't good." It's very soft. The only exception is in the very highprice end of the retail market in New York City, and that's comingfrom foreign buyers. I don't know how this gets into trade statisticsand things like that--not that it's all that important in absolutedollars--but the very high end of the retail market in New York Cityis quite strong mainly because foreign buyers benefiting from theexchange rate look upon New York as a shopping haven at the moment.On the credit crunch, there too I think we still have a waysto go. We will talk about this later, but one particularmanifestation of that--the way it seems to be at least at the momentspilling through into the money supply--is becoming a greater concern-18-12/18/90to me. The silver lining behind the cloud of the credit crunch isthat there is now what I would describe as pervasive evidence ofsignificant rebuilding of pricing and margins taking place pretty muchacross the board. Now, some of that has been facilitated by thewithdrawal of the Japanese banks from not only the direct lendingmarkets but the commitments and standby-type markets as well. But theevidence I think is now pervasive that we are seeing a significantrebuilding of pricing and margins; whether it can be sustained isanother question. But I mention that because it is quite clear to methat there is some combination of margins and spreads and levels ofinterest rates that will snap the credit crunch and snap it in aconstructive way. I'm not sure we're there yet, but we may be gettingcloser than we suspect, especially if this rebuilding of spreads andmargins proves to be somewhat durable.There are a lot of uncertainties. But the combination, asGary and Dick and several others said earlier, of the real estatesector and the vulnerabilities as they impact on the financial sectorare probably the biggest single source of uncertainty as I see itright now. I've said this before but let me emphasize it again: Thereis a natural tendency to focus commentary on financial concerns on thebanking system; but as I see it those problems are every bit as acutein both cyclical and structural terms for the nonbank sectors of thefinancial system as they are for the banking system. Indeed, justyesterday we were looking at a broad cross section of data on theinsurance industry, top to bottom. And I will tell you, that ispretty grim stuff, to put it mildly.Just anecdotally on the real estate situation, I spent amorning last week with Bob Boykin and his Dallas directors and upuntil then I had been tending to convince myself that Texas had turneda corner. Maybe Houston has, but one of in theconstruction business was telling me that he thought there were 10 to20 million square feet of newly constructed office space in the Dallasarea that would be better off bulldozed. If you say $100 a squarefoot and take the midpoint of that estimate of 10 to 20 million,that's $1-1/2 billion worth of new construction with no place to go.So, again, of all the wild cards out there I think that real estate--as it reflects directly on the economy, along the lines of Gary'scomments, but also as it reflects on these problems on the financialside--is the biggest single wild card.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. The District continues to perform better thanthe nation. Just as an example: For the year October-to-October,output in the state of Ohio was up 5 percent and in the nation it wasup about 2 percent. The weakest link, as you might expect, is inautos right now. There is one exception: We have an announcement of anew auto plant in the Lexington area that is going to employ a numberof people. The Lexington area is an abnormal situation; theunemployment rate there is 3.2 percent. But the unemployment ratesaround the District over the last three months average 5.5 percent inOhio and 4.2 percent but rising in the Pittsburgh area. Economicactivity is definitely weaker than it was last month but that weaknessis nottranslated, at least by most participants that we surveyed,into a recession in the District. They're apprehensive that one willdevelop there; they believe one is under way in the nation. But when-19-12/18/90we talk about a softening market, we talk about reducing overtime.And other than in autos and construction, we haven't had major layoffsin the District. So, it's still performing quite well. In fact, thecapital goods side is still doing better than manufacturing overall,but not quite as well as it was before. It's a little more mixed now,but there are still some positive signs. Heavy trucks had their thirdbest month of the year, in terms of new orders, in October. So thereis still a little strength around the District in capital goods.Retail sales are flat, as everybody has indicated already.In terms of the national outlook, I think we'd be prettyhappy to see Mike's forecast come true. It has a declining inflationrate. We'd like to see a little more of that. I would simply like tofocus on the fact that that's a relatively short recession he hasforecast and that whatever is causing it--whether you believe it's oilor the credit crunch--neither is laid [at the foot of] monetarypolicy. And the kind of decision we're going to make later todayreally is going to have its impact at the time Mike has a snapback inthe forecast in terms of real growth. So, that is something that weought to think carefully about in terms of making our policy decision.In the longer term I guess Mike has 2.4 percent growth, which is closeto our potential growth; but I would expect us to see in his footnotesa note that our potential may be somewhat less now. We have a lot ofasset prices that are coming down. It seems to me that thoserepresent some excesses that occurred in the past and that resourceshave to flow out of those areas. I don't think there's any way aroundthat. We have some defense restructuring to do and obviously somerestructuring in financial services. It seems to me that thosethings, along with the factors that Mike pointed out, argue that ourpotential growth probably will slow in the future. So, I don't havethe sense that anything is falling apart on us at the moment. Severalof you suggested a number of risks that are out there, and I thinkthose are always there. What that points out to us is the size of theerrors around the forecast--that we are very uncertain about those.And when we're uncertain about them I think we ought to proceedcautiously. If there is a reason to ease, it seems to me it has to dowith the monetary aggregates. About the best we can do in terms ofmanaging the economy is to keep inflation low and let the economy takecare of itself. That means we've got to watch the aggregates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I think looking at the M2 growth is always agood place to start. It seems to me that there is clearly a verysignificant downtrend over a four-year period in the growth rate ofthe monetary aggregates. But so far there has not been what you wouldcall a classical monetary shock; that is, the rate of growth actuallyhas been brought down in a very gradual pattern. It is true that therate of growth over 26 weeks is now getting close to a level at whichI think anyone would be concerned if that were to continue to weakenon a 26-week basis. But I would just note that in 1987 and 1989 wehad almost identical periods of weakness on a 26-week basis. Clearly,we ought not ignore what those monetary aggregates are saying. But Iwould note, as Tom Melzer did to a degree, that the yield curvedoesn't really suggest that we have a monetary tightness phenomenonthat's being driven by the central bank; that is, the slow [money]growth is not driving short-term rates above money market rates. Wehave just the opposite. The yield curve basically shows that there is-20-12/18/90quite a bit of monetary liquidity out there. The foreign exchangemarket also I think shows considerable monetary easing; that is, thetransmission mechanism of monetary policy for the United States isincreasingly through the foreign exchange mechanism. Certainly we'vehad a considerable, 15 percent decline, of the dollar against the G-10currencies. That is a factor for domestic stimulus. Commodity pricesit seems to me are showing more money neutrality than they aremonetary restraint. That is, you have some fall-back in commodityprices, but you don't have the rate of deflation in commodity pricesthat set in during the 1985-1986 era and that really became pervasive.Of the factors that we have going for us, the two factors I'dlike to mention that are difficult to judge are the phenomena of houseprices and other real estate. Unfortunately, there's no futuresmarket for housing. But I think we ought to begin thinking abouthousing and other real estate more as if they were a commodity,because clearly what has been happening here is really [similar] towhat happened in the agricultural depression of the mid-1980s, whichwas a rather short, sharp depression in agriculture. What we seehappening is that the forward price is not rising as fast as it wasexpected to have been rising before. Now, if someone has a 10-yearhorizon and expects house prices to rise at a 10 percent annual rate,that would mean a $100,000 house would be worth $269,000 in 10 years.But if all of a sudden you think it will rise not at 10 percent but ata 5 percent rate, then instead of $269,000 you're looking at $163,000for the 10-year forward price. That means that the forward price hasto come down about 37 to 40 percent. If the forward price comes downfaster than long-term interest rates, then of course the present valueis also going to fall. But that doesn't mean that housing inflationis gone; it just means an adjustment from a 10 percent housinginflation environment to a 5 percent housing inflation environment.What makes this so tricky is that houses have so much to do withhousehold perceptions of wealth. Consequently, household savingbehavior is certainly impacted. I think all of us understand thatwe're seeing a long-cycle event in regard to attitudes here.The other area of uncertainty, it seems to me, relates to thefact that the U.S. economy is increasingly competitive in a globalmarketplace. The international competition just means that there willnot be sustained profit margins in any industry such as there were informer times when there was less vigorous international competition.Now, the problem that concerns me here is the advent of failure andwhether or not we might be falling into a turnaround in an expansionin an international economic order and we turn that into aprotectionist world in which international trade stops growing. Thatevent then, of course, could lead the world into a most precariouscircumstance. In that regard I think we should be rather carefulabout policies that might cause the foreign exchange value of thedollar to weaken further, which in some sense can be a very strongmotivating factor in regard to protectionism elsewhere. We haveenough protectionist forces in the United States. And when we startseeing these protectionist forces hit the European Economic Community,as I think is entirely possible where the foreign exchange value ofthe dollar is right now, it means that we're going to crowd in thereat a rate that they're not going to like--not just in agriculture butin other areas. So, that's an uncertainty that causes me to thinkmore than once.-21-12/18/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Just so you'll know, I'm crying not because ofthe outlook but because I have a virus in my eye. Last night when Iwas reviewing the staff forecast one more time I was reminded ofsomething in my childhood. Although it was a long time ago I doremember a few things from it! My mother always read to me everynight and I had a strong preference for stories that had "they livedhappily ever after" kinds of endings. I feel the same way about theforecast. I really do love the ones that are positive, optimistic,and happy. So, I have no problem [with the forecast]. And that's whyI would remind you that at the beginning of the year, when we had thesoft landing scenario which was marvelous because it accomplished allour goals with no pain, no strain, no sweat, that was terrific. Butit sounded too good to be true and what I have discovered is that ifthings sound too good to be true there is often a problem. So whilethis forecast isn't [unintelligible] scenario, it still isn't a dismalforecast. I hope that what is in the Greenbook turns out to be right.But I'll just mention some of the questions I have about the numbers,even though, as I said, I hope that Mike's and his staff's assumptionsare on target rather than mine.First of all, I really sense that whatever it is we're innow--I call it a recession--it's going to be longer and more seriousthan the Greenbook suggests. One thing I'm more concerned about isconsumption. As you know, I've been taking a more dismal view of theauto industry for some months now, and I think that some of myconcerns are [now] rather evident to the public at large. And I don'tsee what is going to turn that around really quickly. Also, in theconsumption arena I am concerned about the nature of the layoffs thatwe're seeing around the country; it's not just Joe on the line at theRouge, the blue collar types I used to assume would be laid off. Butthat didn't have the same impact as when the sales vice president ofsome company who lives next door loses his job or a bank presidentloses his job or in some states bureaucrats are being laid off. Thatsends a different message and I think it's having a big impact even onthe people who are still working.Also, there is the deterioration in confidence. I'm from astate where confidence is usually negative because the state's economyis very cyclical, so I'm used to a lack of confidence and nervousnessand all that. But I've never seen anything like what I'm seeing now.And I'm not confining my remarks to Michigan at all; it's widespreadand is impacting ordinary individuals who just have this feeling thatsomething isn't right. They don't necessarily know what it is that'swrong, but they just feel uncomfortable. I know that it's nice toassume that that's a fallout from Saddam Hussein and the highergasoline prices and the worries over availability of oil, but my senseis that if all those things were taken care of [unintelligible] thisafternoon and whatever it takes to solve this problem were done, thiswould not go away completely. Also, you don't hear much about it, butthere is a real problem with the consumer debt load. I used to nagour researchers about looking at the consumer debt load and was toldthat the two sides of the balance sheet were okay--that the assetswere building at the same time as the debt load was, so forget it.But it is a problem now, at least for a lot of individual consumers.And I think some of the delinquency and loan write-off data suggestthat. In fact Sunday night I happened to have my TV on and one of the-22-12/18/90PB evangelists came on and his wife was announcing that in Januarythey're going to run some seminars for their parishioners to tell themhow to get out of debt in 1991. Now, that says something to me: Ithas even become a moral issue!Also, we are being hit by very much higher taxes in thiscountry. I realize we've just seen a nickel a gallon increase ongasoline so far, but that budget deal has a lot more coming up. Thatmay help the budget deficit, but I don't think it's going to be apositive for consumer behavior. And at various state levels, thereare substantially higher tax hikes down the pike. We saw a lot of taxhikes in 1990 and I believe we're going to see still more in 1991because so many states and cities and other localities do havebudgetary problems. So, I just feel very concerned that theconsumption side is going to be weaker than we're assuming.Housing has gone down rapidly. We're now down again to wherewe were back in the 1981-82 recession--depression for my part of theworld. That's where we are already. It seems to me that the so-called credit crunch has been especially tough in this arena; it hasbeen centered on the home builder, not Mrs. Jones who needs to get amortgage to buy a house. It's the financing for the person who wantsto build the darn thing. Again, I hope I'm not being too negative butI just don't see what's out there that's going to turn that creditavailability problem around really soon for those kinds of folks. IfI'm right that that's a big constraint, then I don't know what's goingto turn this around.On exports, I would just repeat what Jerry said. In talkingto people who actually export rather than to academic analysts, Ithink the opportunities for 1991 look a little less robust. And whenI think about the shape of the economies of some of our major tradingpartners such as Canada, which is already in a serious recession, itmakes me agree with the folks who are in the business. Also, Irealize we're running a sort of war in the Middle East, but I thinkthere are still some defense cuts coming through, which will have animpact on places like sunny California and have already had someeffect in the Northeast. So, those are some of my concerns. And whatI think is really unique this time, though--to borrow the term of myfavorite peanut farmer--is this general malaise that seems to existthroughout the land. It's hitting individuals as consumers but alsoas businessmen and women. Personally, in my life time, I have neverseen it that way.On the financial fragility issue, there is this drumbeat--which unfortunately is coming out of Washington, D.C.--about theproblems of the financial industry. If we could put a gag or a muzzleor something like that on some of these people so they would shut up,maybe this problem would be less severe. But we haven't, and theawareness of this is just becoming a big problem and in turn is tiedinto the so-called credit crunch. And as I already have mentioned anumber of times, there is the special situation in real estate, thedeflation in real estate values. Unless you go back to the 1930s, Idon't think you will see anything like it. My good friend WayneAngell in his comments used +5 and +10 percent figures; you'd get someexciting numbers if you used -15 percent. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.-23-12/18/90MR. MULLINS. I was most impressed with Lee Hoskins' reportthat in the middle of this environment they're building auto plants inLexington, Kentucky, which shows you the resiliency of the Americanpeople. You didn't mention: Was it Toyota or Nissan? [Laughter.]MR. HOSKINS. Toyota.MR. MULLINS. Toyota. My view is generally in agreement withthe staff's forecast. Producers seem to have cut back almost inadvance of the cut in consumer spending, keeping inventories lean.And I think that puts the economy in pretty good shape for a reboundin the spring. It may be a bumpy landing rather than a soft landing.I'm not quite so sure that consumer confidence, Humpty Dumpty, can bereassembled as quickly as it is in the Greenbook. The pessimism isstill rampant; I think Martha's correct on that. I got a call from aformer student who is a partner in They just had a meetingof their national partners and the overwhelming view there was that wehad entered a deep and long recession. That doesn't seem to beentirely consistent with the somewhat better than expected retailsales data and orders data, so there's still this gap. Perhaps it hasjust been a long time since people have seen a nationwide recession,so they don't remember what it feels like and it's pretty scary andthey don't know how to get through it. Still, I think there is thepotential for this rebound. The stock market thinks there is; itdoesn't appear to be quite so pessimistic as the public. Indeed, ifwe have a resolution in the Gulf, if the bad news on financialinstitutions becomes old news, and if the banks start to go for theprofit, I also believe there's a potential for consumer purchases thathave been deferred. The autos that people are driving are reachingvery old ages in terms of the average for autos. People still aren'tgoing to buy in the current environment, but at some stage we mightget a rebound. I think the real estate problems are more troublingand long-lasting in terms of the wealth impact of that reduction [invalue]. I still speak from the perspective of a New Englandhomeowner. We also have several sources of stimulus in place movingin our favor. The oil prices have started to come down and I hopethey'll continue; the dollar is down; there is monetary ease--longinterest rates, not just the short rates, have come down fairlysubstantially over the fall.Financial fragility continues to be a concern. Publicityabout it seems to be unending in virtually all areas. Jerry mentionedinsurance companies; I would just mention one industry that has yet tohit the news but conceivably could and that is the mutual fundindustry. If you look at junk bond mutual funds, high yield bondmutual funds, they've done an extraordinarily good job of managingthrough this collapse in the junk bond market. However, over the pastseveral months a number of them have allowed their redemptions to runtheir cash reserves to precariously low levels. Given the illiquidityin the market, if one of them should have to suspend redemptions, veryquickly I think all of them would be under pressure. They're a tinypart of the market. It's not significant from an overall point ofview, but I think it would get publicity and perhaps have an impact onother mutual funds--bond funds, money market funds, and the like. Iwouldn't suggest that monetary policy can do anything about that,although it would be nice to have liquidity and a lot of creditavailability in that case. But I do think there is a potential for a-24-12/18/90series of negative surprises in the finance area, which does not bodewell for confidence.More generally, though, the concern is: Who is going tofinance this rebound? Where is the financing going to come from tofuel the rebound? If you look across the board, the non-RTC thriftsreported very large losses in the third quarter. Most of that was inthe group that is targeted for RTC action. But even the good thrifts,it seems to me, about broke even. Insurance companies are underpressure due to asset quality, and they also have a great need nextyear to refinance a large volume of maturing GICs, guaranteedinvestment contracts. So they're going to be under some pressure;it's not clear they can expand lending. Finance companies have beentaking up a lot of the slack and growing at a rapid pace. Businessloans by finance companies started the year at about $250 billion andthey're closing in on $300 billion. That compares with $600 to $700billion in business loans at commercial banks, so it's still not toolarge. I wonder how long they can continue to grow and take up theslack at this pace. Commercial paper also took up some of the slack.Again, nonfinancial commercial paper is only about $150 billion, sopresumably they can't take up all the slack. But commercial paperissuance, after growing rapidly in August, September, and October,collapsed in November presumably due to credit quality concerns asmarginal credits decided to take down their back up lines fromJapanese banks, which probably accounts for some of the fed fundsanomalies in that period.I think there's little evidence of a credit crunch forinvestment grade companies. You only have to look to the bondissuance in November, which was up very dramatically; but none of thatinvolved below investment grade issues. One wonders who is going tofinance the segment of the market that is below investment grade.Banks have been the traditional source. I thought that the bankcredit supply conditions were likely to ease in January. The logicwas that a lot of these banks want to show a good risk-based capitalnumber on that year-end statement, and that is done by investing inmortgage-backed securities and governments, not loans. I thought thatwould tend to free up. And there is the point that Jerry mentioned:The fed funds rate has come down quite a bit without the primechanging. At some stage those competitive juices have to startflowing, and I thought it would happen pretty rapidly in the firstpart of the year. I'm a bit more pessimistic now for a number ofreasons. First, I'm pessimistic in the sense of thinking that thiscredit supply [situation], including bank credit conditions, is likelyto extend into the new year. There is a growing concern and publicityabout the bank insurance fund. Now, it's accepted that there will besome sort of recapitalization paid for by the industry. I think therewill be a period of uncertainty and banks may continue to hold backuntil they see how that issue is resolved in terms of how much they'regoing to have to pay and in what form they will have to pay. I alsothink the FDIC will start to resolve some of these institutions thatit may have delayed until the new year. The Treasury report onbanking reform when it comes out, probably in the first week ofJanuary, may well call for some fairly dramatic changes, which willresult in a lot of debate in Congress. That again might be the typeof thing a banker would look at and say: "I think maybe I'll holdtight for a bit instead of moving out aggressively." Obviously, westill can have some bad news in the fourth-quarter results on asset-25-12/18/90writedowns at banks. And even an issue like mark-to-market for banksis going to be debated, I think, in the early part of next year. Theproponents of mark-to-market will argue very loudly that banks aremisrepresenting their assets and misleading investors. And thosesorts of arguments are not the type that are likely to lead toincreased confidence in the banking system. So, on balance, there maybe some easing of the credit supply condition, but I don't think we'regoing to return to normalcy until a number of these issues--such asthe bank insurance fund and having some of these problem institutionsresolved and off the street--are resolved, probably later in thespring.We can't control a lot of those issues. We can't takeresponsibility for junk bond funds. But we should have responsibilityfor money. I continue to be bothered by its anemic growth. We didhave blips in M2 in August and September but the overall patterncontinues to be one of slow growth. M2 growth was 3.2 percent in thesecond quarter of 1990, 3.1 percent in the third quarter of 1990, andI think we're projecting about 2 percent in the fourth quarter. Thisis no monetary shock, but it is a squeeze I would say. So, while thereal economy seems to be feeling its way--however depressed peopleare--through this downturn in a manner which in my opinion has thepotential to produce a rebound, I do think the slow growth in moneyand credit is not good news in this environment and does not augurwell for achieving that rebound in the spring.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, one of the advantages of waitinguntil almost the end is that you could just say "Me too" becauseeverything has pretty much been said. But I can't resist theopportunity to make a comment or two about the Greenbook forecast. Itseems to me that oil is the major wild card in that forecast. And I'muncomfortable with the assumptions that either the situation is goingto stabilize in the Middle East or get better, which would bring oilprices down and keep them down. That seems to be an important part ofthe recovery [forecast]. It might have been useful in this specialcase to have had an alternative forecast that might suggest what wouldhappen if there were hostilities in the Middle East or if the Saudiproduction capacity had been damaged in some fashion which wouldcreate, for example, an oil price of $40 a barrel and keep it therefor a while. I think that would significantly prolong the timing ofthe recovery. The other wild card, it seems to me, is the creditcrunch, which I think except for the comments around the table hasbeen dismissed rather casually. And yet we have in at least one partof the country a credit paralysis that is affecting the whole economyand shows no signs of reversal. And I think that serious impairmentis spreading down the East coast. Bankers clearly are worried andscared and certainly are unwilling to lend in major parts of thecountry. And consumers are worried. And Messrs. Littan, Brumbaugh,and Seidman and the media are doing their best to raise that worry tothe level of sheer terror. I think that terror relates to consumerattitudes toward banks and toward investment and spending and gettingfurther in debt. And since we have such a consumer-driven economy,it's hard for me to see a rapid upturn until those consumer attitudeshave changed. My best guess would be that those consumer attitudeswill not change significantly until the Middle East situation issettled one way or another and until the banking situation is-26-12/18/90perceived as being stabilized. I think those are the underlyingconcerns that are haunting consumers, and I don't think thoseattitudes are going to turn markedly more optimistic until those twofactors have been addressed.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Finally, Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess I'm the last leaf onthe bush and there's certainly very little left to be said aboutcurrent conditions, as Governor LaWare just remarked. But I wouldlike to try to resurrect a perspective that I first offered, probablya little prematurely, a year or so ago as to the underlying longer-term thrust of what's going on here. It seems to me that what we maybe seeing is the first downturn in what may be a rather powerful andlong-lived deflationary era--a sea change, if you will. I thinkthere's considerable evidence underlying that. On a worldwide basisalmost all commodities are abundant: food, materials, heaven knows inthis country built space, and labor. Capital can seek out low costlabor and is mobile enough to get there and put production in place ona low-cost basis. It seems that monetary policy has been under tightcontrol for some time; there's not too much of a problem in sightthere. Hopefully, fiscal policy is turning around. Maybe the mostimportant thing on an economy-wide basis in this country is that Ithink we've gone from an era of creating debt, which was inflationary,to servicing debt, which is deflationary. And if there's anything toall of this thesis, I think it can explain a lot of the financialproblems and a lot of the real estate problems that we see. And itmay be manifesting itself in this long decline that we're goingthrough in corporate profits, where firms are being squeezed betweenthe last of the upward thrust of cost pressures and the inability topass that through in the form of prices. I don't think this is a donedeal. There are a lot of things--monetary, economic, political,sociological--that could change this and abort it. But if this istrue, it has implications for how we view everything. If this istrue, we may have a stickier short-term situation--a little slower in.the near term to come out of the recession, but a far more positivelonger-term outlook as time goes along and we do come out. Theconverse of that would be if we're in another episode of what we'veseen before in the postwar era. If that turns out to be true, wecould wind up with a quick, weak recovery and then fall back rathersoon and be very disappointed. But if it becomes clear that this is anew era and a disinflationary one, I think the long-term perspectiveis really quite positive. But that does leave us with a near-termchallenge: to facilitate the weaning of the economy off of theinflation kick that it has been on for so long and to avoid thepotential for deflation and serious contraction that that could leadto. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Why don't we adjourn forcoffee and come back in 10 minutes.[Coffee break]MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don?-27-12/18/90MR. MELZER. Don, I noticed in the money projections in theBluebook that there's a very dramatic difference when you get out toFebruary and March between alternatives A and B, much more so than Ithink we normally see. Do you want to comment on that?MR. KOHN. We tried to stick with about a normal difference.First, we have a different base here. We are meeting earlier in themonth than usual. Ordinarily, we would have a December-to-March baseand we'd be meeting around the end of December or early January. Sopartly, it's because we're meeting a couple of weeks earlier. Asidefrom that, we didn't do anything special to widen the difference. Weused the usual assumed elasticities.MR. MELZER. I just can't recall 2 and 3 percentage pointdifferences in the growth rates between these various alternatives.It just struck me.MR. KOHN. I think that's roughly in line with what we see asthe elasticities after three or four months.MR. MULLINS. What interest rate elasticities do we assumefor money demand, roughly speaking?MR. KOHN. I can give you some numbers on what if the fundsrate changes by x basis points, that kind of thing.MR. MULLINS. Yes.MR. KOHN. A 50 basis point decrease in the funds rate--nowthis is a quarterly average, so it won't show up the way it would inthe monthly numbers--gets you about 3/4 point for the year, but it'sloaded into the first and particularly the second quarters. So 1/2point on the funds rate will get you about .09 by the second and thirdquarters and then it tends to drop off after a while.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's four times the quarterly rate.MR. KOHN. Dave just handed me a note: the elasticity after,say, four or five months is about .08 or .09.MR. MULLINS. And empirically that works very well. Myimpression was that the theoretical models had much lower elasticity.MR. KOHN. Well, I think in this case a lot depends on howthe offering rates adjust to the market interest rates. Thatadjustment drives this a lot; the elasticities are lower over timebecause the offering rates then adjust to the market rates. So overtime--after a couple of years--you get some very low elasticities.But our assumption here is that the offering rates, while adjustingperhaps faster than we would have thought a couple years ago becausethe market rate is moving down and we presume the banks don't want [toattract deposits], would still adjust sluggishly.MR. MULLINS. And in the past the model fit the data prettywell. When did it stop fitting the data pretty well?MR. KOHN. About the second quarter of this year. Well,that's not quite a fair response. We've had large errors from-28-12/18/90quarter-to-quarter and even for a couple of quarters in a row. But interms of cumulative error, this year we're going to have the largesterror we've had, even outside the sample period, by at least a halfpoint.MR. MULLINS. Okay.MR. HOSKINS. Don, to your surprise, I'm not going to ask youwhere alternative C is today. I do have a question.MS. SEGER. You must have been in the Christmas punch!MR. HOSKINS. I started early, Martha. I do want to follow-up on a couple of questions that have already been raised. You havepretty rapid growth--accelerating growth--in January, February, andMarch. The quarter finishes at 7.6 percent. And I guess that'sreally what David was [raising]. To press on: What happens in thenext quarter? Do you expect us to go back to a 6 percent growth rateor 5 percent or lower?MR. KOHN. In terms of alternative A?MR. HOSKINS. Yes, if we adopted alternative A.MR. KOHN. In the 6 to 7 percent range, I think. It wouldstill be an increment from where it would have been otherwise. So Iguess what we would have would be more like 7 percent.MR. HOSKINS. So, we'd have a pretty strong first half, at 6percent or something like that? It seems to me we'd be giving up someof our gains--MR. KOHN. I think you could have that kind of growth. I'lltry to be a little clearer here. We are assuming that this upwardshift in velocity continues--a downward shift in money demand--sowe're sort of going off a base. If we had alternative A, say, thatwill give us about 125 or 150 basis points [since] this past summer.Before, we would have expected much more rapid growth by the secondquarter of next year if it weren't for this shift. Our models, infact, are projecting growth of around 6-1/2 percent in the firstquarter; instead we have 2-3/4 percent growth. So, we have that downby an increment, but that's relative to the fourth quarter which isalready coming down. So, we still get the trajectory going up. Itjust has a couple of percentage points shaved off what you would haveexpected before the second quarter.MR. HOSKINS. But instead, under alternative A it will beabout 6 percent money growth for the first half of the year, orsomewhere in that range. You have 5 percent in the first quarter and7 percent in the second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We are a couple of weeks away and thereis just no evidence that that has started yet. So, be careful withyour forecast.MR. HOSKINS. Well, we've been concerned about the modelbecause, as you know, we put a lot of emphasis on M2. We did tryrunning a different version with no trend variable in it. What we put-29-12/18/90in was a thrift share as an explanatory variable and that did get ridof the drift in the model. It doesn't make money grow any faster, butit tries to get at the problem in a different way.MR. KOHN. We're trying a number of experiments using yieldcurve variables and things along that line to try to capturesubstitutions in and out of M2. Our expectation was to try to supplythe Committee before the February meeting--well before the FebruaryCommittee meeting, we hope--with a memorandum summarizing the variousexperiments we've been running to help to explain this number. A puremodel forecast with alternative B in it has a 5-3/4 percent growth inthe first quarter and then 4-3/4 percent in the second quarter. [One-and-one-half percentage points of] the impetus [behind] that 5-3/4percent is an interest rate effect; the interest rate decline we'vehad through the fourth quarter has its biggest effect in the firstquarter in that model.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black, first.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I was just looking at the P* modelshown in Chart 9 and, as I read that, it provides me with a prettygood comfort level. Don, do you take much comfort in that?MR. KOHN. The problem, President Black, is that it rests onan assumption about what the equilibrium velocity level is. And Ithink the discussion we just had--MR. HOSKINS. Clarifies it.MR. KOHN. Occasionally, we have some doubts about whether wewill return to V* or not at that--MR. BLACK. Well, in the long run it has been pretty darnstable.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We don't know anything that contradictsit.MR. BLACK. That's right.MR. KOHN. We're beginning to accumulate a few quarters thattend to move it away, but so far we certainly don't have any long-runevidence that it has moved away. If velocity were to return to itsold pattern and if we were to get the same M2 growth--so that theCommittee didn't compensate by having more M2 growth as velocityshifted back--then you'd get this pattern of prices.MR. BOEHNE. If the discount rate were to go down by 1/2point but the Committee only wanted the funds rate to go down 25 basispoints, how difficult would it be to communicate that to the market,given the fact that we haven't done this much in the past and giventhe normal churning that goes on at year-end? It might take a whilefor this to occur and we may find ourselves in a situation of havingto--. I guess the miscommunication risk is what I'm driving at.MR. KOHN. Peter may want to answer this as well, but mythought was that you really have two instruments for that. One is thepress release. If this were the decision of the Committee and the-30-12/18/90Board separately arrived at [a decision to cut the discount rate] butsomehow coordinated that, we could hint--without necessarily sayingthe funds rate will only drop by 1/4 point--that it's partly to catchup to previous decreases in market interest rates. That would be avery broad hint and we could play with that wording to give the bestpossible clue in the press release. And I think it would only take acouple of operations by Mr. Sternlight thereafter to make it clear.If they dropped the funds rate further than the Committee wanted itto, all we have to do is bring in some reserves in a pretty aggressiveway. Now, I think you're right that the churning around year-end is aproblem; and my view is that if we're going to do something, weprobably ought to do it in the next couple of days to get it out thereand done with and then pretty well even keel it through thispotentially difficult period around year-end. But I don't see why itcan't be done in the next few days.MR. STERNLIGHT. I would agree that it can be conveyed. Ithink something about like that move is what a number of people in themarket expect. That would also help in being able to convey [anintention] like that.MR. BLACK. If we did this, you don't think it would providean undue degree of surprise, do you?MR. STERNLIGHT. No.MR. BLACK. That's the way I read it.MR. HOSKINS. And what if we didn't do anything? Would thatbe a surprise?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think people are looking for some actionbut not necessarily immediately. If nothing were done going well intoJanuary, let's say, I think that would be an element of disappointmentto the market.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Wayne, you were first.MR. ANGELL. Yes, Don, I just wanted to comment. Of course,the problem that occurs by the Federal Open Market Committee movingaway from the borrowing targeting is that we thereby take away theseparation between the discount rate decision, which is the Board ofGovernors decision with the recommendations of the Reserve Bank boardsas a factor. If the Federal Open Market Committee really were tochoose a fed funds target precisely--if we said we want it to be 7percent, say--then under those circumstances there is no monetarypower left with the Board of Governors and Reserve Bank Districtboards as we'd normally see. As long as we maintain the charade of aborrowing targeting then that separation of function can still bethere, it seems to me. That is, as long as we write the FOMC minutesbased upon the charade of borrowing then the old practice can still bethere.MR. HOSKINS. Are you recommending that?MR. ANGELL. Well, I don't want to get into a discussionabout the discount rate. I can argue both sides of that.-31-12/18/90VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You'd have to! [Laughter.]MR. ANGELL. But I do think in this discussion we ought torecognize that it might be desirable--that is, the Committee and theBoard may wish to consider maintaining a policy that does not wipe outthis distinction we've historically used. And I would not be for thatkind of a change [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Peter, you made the point that you thought themarket might be expecting something like 1/2 point on the discountrate and 25 basis points initially on the funds rate. I find thatoverall approach fairly attractive. But I'd like to ask Gretchen: Isthat generally in the neighborhood of what's expected in the exchangemarkets as well?MS. GREENE. I think it's fair to say that in the exchangemarkets the distinction between the discount rate and the federalfunds rate may not be quite as widely appreciated. The symbolicinfluence of the discount rate probably carries a greater weight inexchange markets than it does domestically simply because the exchangemarket looks at lots of central banks and the discount rate for somany central banks is an important policy instrument. So, it mighttake a little while for the exchange markets to come to the sameinterpretation as the domestic market of such an action.MR. SYRON. Would there be some comfort, if I can use thatterm, to the exchange markets by what would be conveyed in the sort ofpress release that Don talked about?MS. GREENE. They do look at the press release and, sure,anything that could be comforting in the press release would help.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Don, what do you think it would take to get theprime rate to come down?MR. KOHN. I don't know. We had a grand debate when we werewriting the Bluebook as to whether something like this would take theprime rate down. Most of us felt that come hell or high water banksprobably wouldn't do it before the first of January. I do think thatanother easing and something as symbolic as the discount rate mightpry a few people loose even before year-end. A further easing in mymind would raise the odds to a very, very high level that the primerate will come down after year-end. The issue is whether they mightreduce it sometime in the next two weeks. The discount rate changemight do [the trick] by focusing some attention on it. But I think italmost certainly--he says hesitatingly!--would happen at some pointafter the first of the year. It would still leave an unusually widespread between funding costs, assuming CD rates came down pari passuwith the funds rate. So their margins would still be wide.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Roger.MR. GUFFEY. As I remember your earlier comment, Peter, theyear-end positioning has almost run its course, is that right?-32-12/18/90MR. STERNLIGHT. I think the intensity of pressures reached apeak about the end of November and then subsided. We've seen someincrease in rates again in the last couple of days but--as I see itanyway--without the same sense of stringency or near panic that seemedto be there in late November. I wouldn't want to say it has run itscourse. I think we could still be in for some pressures that you'dwant to monitor and maybe deal with in some way.MR. GUFFEY. Well, given that, my question is: How soon afterthe first of the year would you see that unwinding being completed?What I'm really driving at is whether to delay a discount rate actionand a reduction of the funds rate until after the first of the year,which is two weeks, roughly, given the several days on which themarket would [not] operate in any event because of the holidays.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, in terms of what the market looks for,I think one of the critical things will be the next employment report.which I believe comes out January 3rd or quite early in January. Ifthat looks weak again and if they haven't seen some [easing] by then,they will look for it and be quite disappointed if they don't see it.Normally, you'd expect year-end pressures to unwind about a week afterthe turn of the year. We do have the added complication of thereserve requirement reduction and how banks respond to that and how werespond to their response.MR. GUFFEY. I guess I was suggesting that since the activityhas not been as intense this year as in past years it might unwindmore quickly after the first of year--in a shorter period of time.MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't have a particular sense of that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions? If not, let meget started and be fairly brief because I think that we've covered alot of ground this morning and put on the table most of the majorissues. I think it's fairly clear at this stage that the type ofeconomic phenomenon we're looking at is something without any parallelin the post-World War II period. This is in a sense a balance sheetsuppression, the type we've all been mentioning. It's really quiteinteresting to see the process, which is essentially one in whichvalues continue to be under significant pressure. For example, we'renow beginning to see the weakening of residential real estate priceswork its way into the CPI through the owners' equivalent rent numbers,which have finally flattened out. Earlier data suggested that thesenumbers moved in parallel; they went out of line a bit earlier thisyear, which is probably a statistical fluke. But it's fairly clearthat we're beginning to see a disinflationary process going on,starting largely from the balance sheet structure of businesses aswell as the financial system. And I think that's a major element thatis feeding into the basic price structure. We are looking at itthrough the assets side and also as assets affect prices and pricesaffect wages, reversing the usual type of pattern. We're obviouslyalso seeing a significant weakening in the retail markets as aconsequence of a fairly dramatic decline in realized capital gains onthe sale of existing residences, which started to be weak in thesecond quarter. And, although the data are very fragmentary, as wemove into the fourth quarter the level of existing home sales has tobe awfully low. I think a goodly part of the weakness in consumermarkets is not only consumer psychology but also a reduction of-33-12/18/90purchasing power--quite similar to what President Syron was talkingabout with respect to New England, only on a much broader basis. Thepsychology issue is obviously becoming really quite pronounced. Whileone can argue that a substantial part is balance sheet related andasset related, the coincidence of the decline with the Persian Gulfcrisis clearly has to be a considerable part of that. But it's fairlyapparent, irrespective of how one is looking at the pattern ofeconomic activity as it works its way back between psychology andaction, that we are seeing a seizing up of some forms of creditavailability. And the intermediation that has been taken out of thesystem in large part because of the savings and loan shrinkage is notinsubstantial at this stage. So, overall what is occurring, as anumber of you have said and one can sense it, is that the fear [feltby] banks and the fear of getting involved in the intermediationprocess are really putting a big suppression on things. I wouldsuspect the 2 percentage point difference that Don is getting betweenthe growth of M2 and that in his model may in fact reflect somethingwe don't measure--namely, the inclination of individuals to holdliquid deposits which in the previous calculations are all presumed tobe risk free. The very substantial [volume of] noncompetitive tenders[in Treasury auctions] obviously in train this year is a meresuggestion of that particular phenomenon.Having said all of that, we have severe recessionarypressures. But recessions always end. And while our basicrequirement as far as policy is concerned is to make certain that wemaintain adequate liquidity in the system, especially under conditionssuch as those we are now experiencing, we also obviously have to lookat the other side of this. At some point we are going to come out ofthis and we want to make reasonably certain that when we do we're notlooking at a degree of liquidity in the system that brings with it[higher] inflation rates and the next downturn much more quickly thanis usual. So, I think that it's apparent that we have a fairlydifficult next six months ahead. I don't think there's any particularshort-term policy uncertainty. My judgment and what I hear as thegeneral consensus around here, if I read it correctly, is that themoney supply has become extraordinarily restricted and that we'relooking at what is a very major credit contraction. The fact that theprime rate hasn't moved is an indication of the extent of that. And Ithink there is an inclination to ease up a bit further here. I'mbecoming more convinced as the days go by that, while the optimumpolicy would be to somehow bring the funds rate down and [to generate]the associated credit with it until we get the economy in somewhat ofa balanced growth position at which point [short-term rates] couldstay down, the chances of being able to implement that are becomingincreasingly small. It's just not credible that a central bank can'tprint money; and the more we try to print it, in figurative terms, themore likely it is that at some point we'll succeed beyond our wildestdreams. And while I would argue strongly that we have to get somedownside policy cushion here, namely to make certain that we supplyadequate credit into the system, I think we also have to be preparedfor the fact that we may, and probably will, overdo it. At some pointthe equations will come out right and we are going to be required tostart pulling back, probably earlier than we might be desirous ofdoing so. So, I would not at this particular stage leave out thepossibility that we may overdo it, but I would not be overly concernedabout that provided we are aware sufficiently in advance that that'swhat's happening. The difference between where the credit aggregates,-34-12/18/90the money supply, the monetary base--all the various financialelements with which we interface--are at this moment and whereinflationary concerns are I think is rather substantial. We have along way to go, so I'm not particularly concerned about it. Thebottom line that I come out with is: As I think we implied, thediscount rate is on the table [for Board consideration] tomorrow.Should the Board decide to reduce the rate in line with the vastmajority of the recommendations of the Reserve Banks, then it strikesme that perhaps the partial accommodation of a 1/2 point reduction inthe discount rate with a 1/4 point in the funds rate, bringing it from7-1/4 percent to 7 percent, probably is at this stage the mostsensible policy option. If the Board chooses not to reduce thediscount rate, I would still argue in favor of moving the funds rateanother 1/4 of a point to 7 percent under appropriate open marketpolicies. And I would further suggest that having done that, weshould remain asymmetric toward ease. Comments?MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I'm sympathetic to what you'resaying, but I just want to be sure that we're maintaining as best wecan the fine line. I wonder if you could accommodate that to meanthat we would be voting here for alternative B symmetric toward ease,and then you as Chairman of the Committee would have some discretionover the intermeeting period, particularly as you sat with the Boardof Governors in regard to the discount rate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It could be done that way. What I'mactually recommending is that the FOMC act independently to move. Butas I noted, it's a technical question.MR. ANGELL. Here again, I'm thinking that the way policyruns and has run over the last several years is that at some period oftime the Federal Open Market Committee has the balance of power. Thatis, during periods in which interest rates are increasing, ordinarilythe fed funds rate moves up as pressures are put on the fed fundsrate. In a sense the Reserve Bank directors and the Board ofGovernors have a standby policy. And even [when the rate is] on theway down that's also the case. Now, on the way up a point is reachedwhere the distance between the fed funds rate and the discount rategets so wide that no one is willing to allow that kind of a subsidy,so then the balance swings to the Reserve Bank directors and the Boardof Governors. And until someone convinces me otherwise, I would favormaintaining that [balance]. And I would favor the FOMC saying at thispoint in time that the direction of interest rates downward nowlargely rests with the boards of directors of the Reserve Banks andwith the Board of Governors. In a sense it's kind of a flip-flop. Ithink we ought to hear a debate on that question and see if there's abetter way to do it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, why don't we quickly put that onthe table and let people comment. Bob Black first.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, you formulated exactly what I wouldhave done. I just want to express the hope that the Board of Governorsin its wisdom does what you suggested it might do tomorrow so that thenet effect would be a 1/4 point change in the federal funds rate. Ifthe Board does not act, then 1/4 point is all I would want to do atthis point. I think a 1/2-point move would do things to the bondmarket and the foreign exchange market that we wouldn't like very-35-12/18/90much. That would be seen as throwing in the towel [on inflation] atthis point. So, I'm with you 100 percent on that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. [Unintelligible], I guess mainly because theGreenbook is a bit more optimistic than I would be. I would like tomake two points, though. It seems to me that the process that we'vebeen going through in recent months does suggest that there is a highlikelihood that we will overshoot at some point. I feel as though wehave to have a view of the future that we have some confidence in. Werealize that there are rather substantial lags in terms of when thesepolicy changes will have an effect. And if we don't do that, and wereact primarily to conditions as we see them appear in the statistics,I think that there is a high likelihood we will overshoot. Secondly,if that does occur and maybe even if it doesn't--and this is a pointthat you certainly alluded to--I think we need to be prepared toreverse our actions at some point rather promptly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you have any views on Wayne Angell'scomments?MR. PARRY. I want to think about it.MR. HOSKINS. I wanted to get a clarification from GovernorAngell. Are you suggesting that we stay at 7-1/4 percent asymmetrictoward ease and, not to prejudge what the Board will do, but supposethat it lowers the discount rate 50 basis points, that all of thatwill be passed through? Or is that just a signalling device?MR. ANGELL. No, I was suggesting that with our asymmetrytoward ease we delegate to the Chairman the decision as to whether ornot the full 50 points show through or only 25 show through. I'm justtrying to keep it technical so that the FOMC is only talking about theso-called pressure or [existing] pressure between the fed funds rateand the discount rate. But in the intermeeting period, given theuncertainty in the FOMC about what the Board will do, the Chairmanwould have the discretionary authority. And if the Board chose not tomove the discount rate, the Chairman then could go ahead andimmediately move the fed funds rate by 25 basis points. So, I'm nottalking about any difference in outcome in terms of what the Chairmanis suggesting; I'm just talking about the technical manner.MR. SYRON. If the Board voted not to accept therecommendation of the majority of the Reserve Banks, what would be theexpectation, if I can use that phrase, of what the Chairman would do?MR. ANGELL. Well, I think the Chairman has made it clearthat he would expect to move the fed funds rate.MR. SYRON. 25 basis points now and maintain asymmetry towardease?MR. BLACK. Which might or might not be used.MR. SYRON.-36-Oh, yes.12/18/90MR. ANGELL. I'm not talking about any change in outcome fromwhat the Chairman is proposing.MR. HOSKINS. Let me finish off then. My preference would benot to change; I could live with asymmetric language. But I wouldagree with Governor Angell's proposal: that is, if the Board is goingto change the discount rate, do it first and see what happens. Thenwe would have the opportunity, if the foreign exchange markets reactedbadly to that, to sit for a while or to move forward. It seems to meto give you more degrees of freedom. But my overall preference--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We do have to have a press release witha discount rate action, which does bind our hands with respect to thatissue.MR. HOSKINS. No, I'm saying that [unintelligible] you'velowered the discount rate, say, 50 basis points, but you don't doanything with respect to the funds rate until that reaction--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But if you do that, the problem is thatthe normal market expectation would be a 50 basis point decline in thefunds rate, which is more than I think we want to suggest. So, in thepress release we're going to have to say something to the effect thatthe expectation is for it to show through only partially in the fundsrate.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I think the FOMC ought to talkabout the distance between the fed funds rate and the discount rate,and they ought to be advising us along with the boards of directors.And I think the Board of Governors should decide this question.MR. LAWARE. I'm not clear on why you think they must move inlock step. There has been a disparate relationship as long as I canremember between the discount rate and the fed funds rate. We've beenoperating for two weeks at least at a 1/4 point [spread between thetwo rates]. We operated at 300 basis points for a while. Why wouldthe assumption be that we would drop both by the same amount?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Because that's in fact what we've beendoing.MR. ANGELL. Any time we've moved the discount rate, exceptSeptember 3 of 1987, we've moved the fed funds rate the same amount asthe discount rate.MR. LAWARE. Well, I don't know why we should feel our handsare tied because of that.MR. BLACK. I think we could put out a news release if wedecided this sort of thing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me put it this way. Let'sfirst get the policy down for which there seems to be very littledifference. And then we'll worry about the means of implementation.It will not be viewed differently in the market but it will affect howthe minutes read and how the implementation of the directive reads.It won't affect anything else, but let's make certain that we get some12/18/90agreement on what we're actually going to do and hold for a minute thequestion of how that is technically implemented. Bob Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, with respect to thepolicy issue I start from the proposition that we're in a contraction,that the contraction is going to continue, and that the risk of a moreserious downturn is present. And the risk of that kind of a downturnis one that I would not like to take at this point. I think it's anundue downward risk, and I would prefer that policy be contracyclicalat this point rather than procyclical. I think you put your finger ona very important aspect of this downturn: the psychology. And thepsychology is universally bad. Although monetary policy can't cureall of the ills in the economy and certainly can't deal with theMiddle East and so on, I do think it's the only thing at this point--unless there is a solution to the Middle East situation--that isreally going to bolster the psychology. So, while we do have the riskof overdoing it, I would be prepared to run that risk at this point.My preference would be to move 50 basis points immediately; however,if you wanted to do it in two steps with an asymmetric directive, Iwouldn't have a great problem with that. If you did 50 basis pointsimmediately, I think that to some extent technically solves thediscount rate problem because the funds rate would be below thediscount rate and the market would be expecting some symmetry betweenthe two. My preference in terms of policy and implementation would beto move 50 basis points [on the funds rate] and to drop the discountrate as well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. First of all, I support preciselythe recommendation that you put on the table. That is, I hope theBoard will move the discount rate 1/2 point, with the Committee tryingto settle the funds rate in around 7 percent--I have no questionmyself that Mr. Sternlight and his friends can engineer that even inthe year-end environment--and maintain asymmetry in the directive. Iknow it's late, but let me just make a couple of quick comments interms of the policy setting. I think Martha made a good point beforewhen she spoke about the soft landing. Everyone knew that was goingto be a difficult exercise. The economy now seems to have tipped intoa recession. But I think it's important that we and others keep inmind that if indeed it is a recession, the causes of it seem to be[primarily] an autonomous shift in expectations growing in part out ofexcesses of the past, of which the credit crunch is a symptom, and inpart from Saddam Hussein. Not to raise vestiges of the past, but inhis Per Jacobsson lecture Paul Volcker made the point that if there isa recession, it's not going to be monetary policy's fault. And Ithink that's right. Moreover, if we can achieve an outcome likeMike's forecast, I don't think it's the end of the world by a longshot. In addition, we can say now what we couldn't say six monthsago: that there's at least a strong [hint] or two that suggests thatthe inflation outcome could be better than we thought six short monthsago. All in all, while no one likes a recession, I don't consider theoutcome terrible by a long shot as long as we get something likeMike's forecast. And that's where I do worry a bit, if not a lot,about the money supply. No one is ever going to accuse me of being amonetarist, but as I see it the money supply, total reserves, andwhatever, are all kind of in the red zone. And in those circumstancesI think the policy you're suggesting is exactly right. Even with that-38-12/18/90policy I'm by no means convinced that we are inevitably andirreversibly destined to overdo it. I think we can squeeze through.Just quickly on the point that Governor Angell raised, whichI think goes well beyond how we communicate this particular change: Ithink Governor Angell is raising a more difficult question of thewhole matter of the relationships between the Board of Governors andthe boards of directors on the one hand and the Open Market Committeeon the other. I must say, Wayne, that looked at over a very longperiod of time on both sides of the interest rate cycle, I for onethink that those relationships are about right. And I would be mostreluctant to change them. I might add, at the risk of seeming to proda bit, that if one does care about the [monetary policy] role ofdirectors and the Board of Governors it seems to me it's a matter oflogical extension that one should not be too crazy about a penaltydiscount rate.MR. ANGELL. I understand that and as I suggested, Jerry,there's another side of that issue. In regard to that relationship Ifeel exactly as you do.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, it might not be a bad idea at somepoint to have a sort of a fleshing out of this [unintelligible] issueyou're raising. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I can accept your recommendation on the fundsrate, Alan. I think it's probably appropriate. I have a sense--as Iexpressed earlier and to use a phrase I heard elsewhere--that we'regetting ahead of the curve a little. I think we have brought thefunds rate down faster than market rates, and I presume that that isgoing to show through to the aggregates. But this is responsive tothe concern of the slow growth. I agree with you that we're likely tooverdo it. Unfortunately, I don't have the same confidence that we'llundo it. I say that simply because I sat here as recently as 1986 and1987 as we looked at quarterly growth rates in M2 in excess of 10percent and I have to tell you there are lot of asymmetricmonetarists. That's Lee's phrase, but I think it's very true. Therewere many people not at all worried about that [M2 growth] at thattime. I hope I'm wrong, but I'm not--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If P* is any sort of basic inference, weare significantly better positioned than we were then.MR. MELZER. Oh, I understand what position we're in, andthat's why--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have a lot of room to make a mistakein here.MR. MELZER. Yes.MR. BLACK. Bob Parry and I are going to be on next year too[as voting members]!MR. MELZER. In any case, I would like to try to avoid theovershooting not only for that reason but also because I think avolatile monetary policy has other consequences that flow from that.On the discount rate, if it were up to me I would let the 1/4 point-39-12/18/90show through in open market operations tomorrow and I'd be inclined tocut the discount rate on Friday. And at that point I'd make it veryclear that it's simply a technical adjustment to move the discountrate in line with other rates. I think the communication in thisother scheme could get a little confusing. I think we could establisha 7 percent funds rate by Friday and then just have a technicaladjustment [in the discount rate] and use the appropriate language forthat. I'm not concerned about Wayne's concern here. We could be leftin the same position if the Board decided not to move the rate onWednesday and then we would have a situation where, with the authoritywe are proposing to delegate to the Chairman, we would still have thefunds rate coming down close to or possibly below the discount rate.So, I'm not troubled with that. I'd go ahead with the open marketoperations.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I would enthusiastically supportyour recommendation, which I think is absolutely the right thing to dogiven the current circumstances. Specifically, in terms of ourdecision here today, I would reduce the fed funds rate by 25 basispoints, have asymmetric language, and hope that the discount ratewould be reduced concurrently or shortly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I would support your recommendation, Mr.Chairman. I would also hope that there is a discount rate cut. Theonly comment I would make is that I hope you would exerciseconsiderable discretion in going any further in the intermeetingperiod unless something very unusual happens.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I just wanted to finish the policy statementseparate from the discount rate issue. I think we ought to haveasymmetric language. I'd rather have the 25 basis point move in thehands of the Chairman at his discretion. We have made somesignificant moves in terms of interest rates in the recent past and wehaven't seen those fully show through yet. Don's projectionspresumably could err on both sides, not just one side, and we may wellget a faster growth rate of money. But even with the projection thatwe have, a 50 basis point move puts us at the top of our tentativetarget range for next year by June. And it seems to me that somepatience is needed here and some careful watching of the aggregates.I'm not averse to moving if the aggregates pan out to be more than a26-week fluke. But maybe we ought to see what's in that aggregate boxbefore we move ahead.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I like your suggestion exactly asit was put. I disagree with Lee in the sense that I think what theFOMC ought to do--I'm not a voting member--is vote to make a 25 basis-40-12/18/90point cut with asymmetric language toward ease. It is true that thisis not a policy-induced recession. I think that's a very importantpoint. It is also our responsibility to take into consideration theworld as it exists, and I think what you suggested does that withoutpanic on the down side. I think it's very important that we now moveahead, but I must say I feel some of Tom Melzer's concerns about howquickly we'll adjust, being a confessed asymmetric monetarist. We maynot react as quickly on the up side. It's important that the FOMCvote for what it thinks should be done, and I'm a little wary ofgetting into things that have too many conditions. This is a verydifficult question. Besides the results of being on horseback here,there are too many things that are permutations and combinations--thatif A happens we'll do this and if B happens we'll do that. We oughtto say what we think should be done, and I think your suggestion didthat.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I enthusiastically support a move toward ease,and tomorrow I will vote in favor of a discount rate cut because Ithink one of the reasons for the lack of confidence in businesscommunities is the feeling that somehow or other a lot of people inWashington don't know what's going on. I think this would be a kindof discreet action. It wouldn't be so discreet that no one would knowit, but it would be something that would fit on the front page of thenewspapers and, therefore, would be communicated all over the countryand not just to fed watchers. And that would help a great deal. I'mnot a betting woman, but to answer Don Kohn's question: If this goesacross the wire tomorrow at 9:30 a.m., we'll see the prime rate cutannouncements starting about 9:42 a.m.MR. SYRON. That's pretty precise!SPEAKER(?). You want to bet?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman. Ithink the Federal Open Market Committee ought to vote for a 1/4 pointreduction in the rate today with an asymmetrical directive, and Ithink you and your colleagues ought to do what you will tomorrow.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As long as it's the right thing!Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.The only thing I'd add is that I feel quite strongly that under thecircumstances there is very little chance that this particular policydirective would lead us to overshoot the mark.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I regretfully suspect that you may beright. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.-41-12/18/90MR. MULLINS. I support the recommendation. I think we haveallowed the fed funds rate to come down gradually this fall and morerapidly recently as market rates also have fallen more rapidly. We'veyet to see the full impact on M2. Still, M2 seems to be deceleratinga bit. And I think there's ample room to continue at least thismarginal decline. It is true that I've only seen Don's forecasterrors on one side, but there's always the possibility that it willturn around.MR. KOHN. It has.MR. MULLINS. So, I support the recommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Roger, do you have any remarks?MR. GUFFEY. I would support your recommendation, Mr.Chairman. I would go one step further, however, given the backgroundthat we have reduced the fed funds rate by roughly 3/4 of a percentagepoint in a six-week period starting with October 29 and that hasn'tshown through yet. Another 1/4 point doesn't bother me, but if wecontinue I do have a concern about overshooting and I also have aconcern about moving the fed funds rate to the level of the discountrate or making the discount rate a penalty rate. I would feel a lotmore comfortable about your recommendation if indeed I was assuredthat the Board would act rather promptly to reduce the discount rateand that only half of it, 1/4 point, would show through.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I might just say technically--MR. GUFFEY. I don't see standing on ceremonies, which Ithink Wayne Angell has brought forth in the distinction between theBoard and the FOMC. Now is the time to set policy and I'd like to seeit established here.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I would like to comment on themonetary policy question rather than the technical one that I spoke toearlier. My position is just about exactly identical with TomMelzer's. We have quite a few more months of rather unpleasant newsahead of us. And if anyone is under the illusion that there are notgoing to be pressures to reduce the fed funds rate and the discountrate in January, and February, and March--. It seems to me that wehave at least three more months of rather bad news because in spite ofall the manifestations from looking at M2 I really believe that mostof the members of the Committee are looking at the real economy. Andthere's always a lag in regard to the information on the real economy.That's why the Chairman was suggesting the problem in regard to ourovershooting. Now, I hope that this time around, Tom, there will bethe votes to make the rather dramatic move, which may have to be madeif you look at the forward looking indicators--the money stock,commodity prices, and the yield curve. We could find ourselves in aposition where we have to tighten before we have any real evidencethat the economy has recovered. And I think that's going to be verydifficult to do. So, Mr. Chairman, I can go along with this, but mydecided preference is to go much slower than 75 basis points aquarter. And I mean 75 basis points a quarter. If we continue to dothat, at some point we're going to find out what the Foreign Deskwarned us about: the problem of the dollar. It's almost as if there'sa willingness to walk us there and we're going to find that we're-42-12/18/90going to be blindfolded; we're going to walk in the dark and sometimewe're going to find it. And that frankly scares me. So, I'm veryuncomfortable voting to do what we're doing. I do hope that the votesare going to be there when it is necessary and the time comes totighten.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's well said. This is notthe tough vote; the tough vote is on the other side of this.MR. BLACK. And it's on the other side where we've made ourmistakes every time throughout our history practically.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let us remember one thing that wecan be pleased about and that is that we've cut off the top of this[inflation bulge] very early on. In terms of looking at the real M2,we have not been confronted with this big [unintelligible]. In otherwords, essentially we've stabilized the growth in money supply to anextent that we haven't seen in quite a long time. And hopefully wecan continue doing that. We're not going to get it [unintelligible]but we have kept it within our target guidelines now for asurprisingly long period of time. And I just hope we have thecapability of doing that in the future. But I think what Wayne Angellhas said is something we'd better be at least careful about.[Unintelligible] run this. It's going to happen. If it turns outthat the Greenbook forecast is right, that would be terrific. But asMike said very early on, he thinks that the risks of that forecast areasymmetric toward a worse outcome. And I think we're all saying thatthat's what we're responding to, but it may not turn out that way.And we had better be prepared to--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, the last time we really hadthe problem that Governor Angell was talking about wasn't in fact in1987; it was in 1988. To use the soft landing analogy, Mike pointedout to us 15 months ago that we overshot the runway. And if you wantto look for mea culpas, the mea culpas belong in 1988 and not 1987.And I think that's the last time--MR. ANGELL. But, Jerry, my view is that in the last quarterof 1986 everything really took off and we really ignored all thoseevents. Every money market watcher knew in March of 1987 what hadhappened and market interest rates soared and soared twice as much aswhat we did.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. And policy firmed and then firmedfurther through the summer of 1987 and the stock market crash took itdown. And when we got into 1988 that is where the real problems were.MR. ANGELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are you saying we overdid it in 1988 onthe up side?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, we didn't go down soon enoughand far enough.MR. HOSKINS. We didn't have a recession then; it's a lottougher when there's a recession on.-43-12/18/90SPEAKER(?). No, that's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, can we put this directive to avote?MR. KOHN. Norm, I would put 4 percent and 1 percent in thetwo blanks at the end.MR. ANGELL. On line 21--. I'm sorry, I may be ahead.MR. BERNARD. We also distributed changes for lines 17-20 and20-21 to take account of the new information on trade for October andthe CPI for November, which we got this morning.MR. ANGELL. I think lines 21-23 as proposed risk the mistakeof our saying that the inflation is okay. Do I have the wrong one?It is dated December 18th. It says "Consumer prices continue toincrease moderately." My view is that it would be better to say thatconsumer prices are rising moderately as compared to the rather strongrise that occurred in the first nine months of the year. I'm afraidthis will be interpreted as meaning that we think consumer pricesduring 1990 have been okay.MR. SYRON. Why don't we say consumer prices have improvedsomewhat.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The trouble, unfortunately, is that theex-oil part also accelerated at some point, which gives some--. May Irequest that the Committee leave with the chair the solution to thisproblem?MR. ANGELL. That's fine.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have to get the right language.MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to decrease slightly theexisting degree of pressure on reserve positions, taking account of apossible change in the discount rate. Depending upon progress towardprice stability, trends in economic activity, the behavior of themonetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and domesticfinancial markets, slightly greater reserve restraint might orsomewhat lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in theintermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expectedto be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period fromNovember through March at annual rates of about 4 and 1 percent,respectively."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Will you call the roll?MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin Yes-44-12/18/90President Hoskins Against my instincts but giventhe collective weight of my colleagues and the promise that they'll dothe right thing next year at the right time--YesMR. BOEHNE. Get it in writing.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Some of us take that personally!MR. BERNARD.Governor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Seger YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We'll now adjourn to luncheon. Our nextmeeting is February 5-6.END OF MEETING