Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 13, 1990A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, November 13, 1990, at 1:30 p.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneBoykinHoskinsKelleyLaWareMullinsSegerSternMessrs. Black, Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis,and Boston, respectivelyKohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPatrikis, Deputy General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Promisel, Rolnick,Rosenblum, Siegman, Simpson, andStockton, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountA third option would be to maintain current reserve conditions,even following passage of a fiscal package like the one proposed. Such achoice would be based on the notion that the proposed fiscal policy, per-haps in light of its time profile, and current conditions more generally,were not likely to result in weakness in the economy over coming quartersbeyond that needed to contain inflation. The lack of policy action mightbe seen by some as a failure to follow through on a promised policy ease,and in any case would disappoint market expectations slightly. Once itbecame clear that policy was not going to ease following the budget ac-cord, short-term rates would back up a little and bond yields also mightrise. The longer-term response of bond markets might be more favorable,however, reflecting a continuing sluggish economy and damped inflationexpectations.Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Madigan, Assistant Director, Division of MonetaryAffairs, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMr. Guynn, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank ofAtlantaMessrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, T. Davis, Ms. Munnell,and Mr. Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of St. Louis, San Francisco, Richmond,Kansas City, Boston, and Chicago, respectivelyMs. Lovett and Mr. Meyer, Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of New York and Philadelphia,respectivelyTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofNovember 13, 1990CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move approval ofthe minutes?MS. SEGER. I'll move.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No objections. Mr. Cross, foreigncurrency operations, please.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. HOSKINS. I have two questions. One has to do with thewarehousing arrangement. Sam, I didn't catch what you said in termsof our exposure now and where our ceiling is. And, is it advisable toconsider lowering it?MR. CROSS. We now have $4-1/2 billion warehoused.MR. HOSKINS. And limits?MR. CROSS. The limit is $10 billion.MR. TRUMAN. The [current] limit is $10 billion and the[potential] limit actually voted by the Committee is $15 billion.MR. HOSKINS. So, we have a $15 billion limit but we'recurrently at $4-1/2 billion. I'm wondering if we should considerbringing the limit more in line with the outstandings, especiallysince it has attracted some attention.MR. CROSS. Well, there is an occasion to reexamine theselimits, which comes up in February. I'm sure we can look at it atthat time.MR. HOSKINS. My second question has to do with the swaparrangements. I've brought this up before. Most of the countries onthe list are industrialized countries with AA ratings for their debtand an exchangeable currency. There's one exception, and that'sMexico. My view on Mexico has been that it doesn't meet the goals ofwhy that swap arrangement was originally set up. In a sense it's morelike foreign aid or a loan to Mexico by the Federal Reserve and that'smore or less outside the goals of swap arrangements. Mexico is adifferent [type of] country than the other ones.MR. CROSS. But we do, of course, have very close ties withthe Mexicans for many, many reasons. And we've had the swap lineoutstanding with them for decades. At times it has been regarded asuseful for the Federal Reserve to be in a position to provide somefinancing during a period when Mexico was working to try to get itssituation under control. We have participated with the Treasury andit has been very helpful to be in a position to be able to provide ineffect a measure of confidence about what Mexico was trying to do,which we were very much supporting. But never did we do anything thatcaused really great exposure for us.11/13/90MR. BOEHNE. In the current market environment, do you sensethat the exchange market would react differently to a change in thefunds rate versus a change in the discount rate?MR. CROSS. I would think that most market participantsexpect that there will be some change in the federal funds ratelooking ahead over the next few days or so; at least there seems to bea general expectation of a very modest change and a [possibility] foranother one. The latter is a much smaller expectation but some peoplein the market are thinking about a further step maybe by the end ofthe year. Even though they are expecting such a move to take place,that doesn't mean it would not have any impact in the exchange market;I think much will depend on how and when [a move is made] and thecircumstances and so forth, and whether the market gets the idea--looking further into the future--that we're on a particular path in aparticular direction. So, even though most people in the marketexpect that there will be a modest change in the federal funds rate, Idon't think one can conclude that that wouldn't have any effect. Itmight not have any immediate effect, but it certainly goes into theirthinking about what they're looking for over a longer period. My ownfeeling would be that a discount rate move would be regarded as a moresignificant step and one that I don't think they really areanticipating at this point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Sam? If not,would somebody like to move to approve the one-year extension of theswap lines?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Move it.MR. ANGELL. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is a second. Without objection.Peter Sternlight, domestic operations.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Peter?MR. HOSKINS. This is just a hypothetical question. If thefunds rate were to come down, do you see any problem with the discountrate--with the spread being narrowed? I know you're not using it asthe fulcrum anymore.MR. STERNLIGHT. At some point I think there could be, but Idon't think a modest further move of the funds rate would causedifficulty in that regard.MR. PARRY. What is the nature of that problem?MR. KOHN. It would be more a problem if we were trying tojudge the adjustment borrowing--MR. HOSKINS. Yes.MR. KOHN. We have operated before with the funds rate belowthe discount rate.11/13/90MR. HOSKINS. It seems to me in the current environment--theway we're tending to operate by pegging the funds rate--that weprobably could go ahead and operate with a penalty discount rate. Isthat right?MR. PARRY. Right.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that's right.MR. HOSKINS. I had one other question, the perennial one.Given all these changes that have gone on and the consideration ofpotentially reducing reserve requirements as well, are we going tohave a collateral problem soon?MR. STERNLIGHT. The dewarehousing that Sam referred to andthat I noted relieves the immediate concern. I think we could stillrun into a problem early next year. We came close on some days in therecent period--closer than we had expected because of the very slowgrowth of money and, hence, reserve requirements. But thedewarehousing gave us some more breathing space. I don't really lookfor a very tight squeeze again until maybe February.MR. KOHN. Our projections, President Hoskins, actually haveus squeezing through February with a little breathing room; I'm notsure about Peter's. It is the case after the dewarehousing--andobviously depending on what happens to the dollar and the reserverequirements and what not--that if reserve requirements were reducedas a policy move, something would have to be done about using theforeign currency holdings. We don't have enough space to move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Si.MR. KEEHN. In the Bluebook there is a comment about theJapanese banks borrowing overnight and about the fact that [suchborrowing] apparently doesn't have an impact on the domestic rate.I'm not quite clear how that works.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think the comment was that there hastraditionally been a little premium paid by Japanese banks borrowingin the fed funds market and that has tended to increase in the recentperiod.MR. KEEHN. A premium.MR. STERNLIGHT. There are various reasons for it; some of itis the market perception of the Japanese banks and some is that thosebanks seem to be concentrating more of their funding in the overnightmarket.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I can understand why the spread hasopened up, but what I can't understand is why the spread existed inthe first place. What is there about the risk on overnight funds,versus, say, a year and a half ago, of a major Japanese bank? Why isit any more than for an American institution?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it's just the reluctance of someparticipants in the market to extend their range of contacts. Thesellers in the funds market are typically the smaller regional banks11/13/90that are not used to dealing in the international markets. They justhave had a preference for selling their funds to their traditionalcorrespondents. To get them to reach out and sell to any foreignbanks has taken a bit of a step-up in rates.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The Japanese banks have always paidup in London too.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's even more bizarre.MR. KOHN. And they used to pay up more, even before, at theend of the quarter on the statement dates; the spread would widen fora day or two and then come back down. So, it's clear that people,rational or not, were having trouble showing that [borrowing] on theirbalance sheets.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. More trouble spelling some of the names!MR. STERNLIGHT. There has been a tendency for all of theforeign banks to pay up a little, although the increases recently havebeen more or less confined to the Japanese banks. The European bankshave not seen a step-up in premium.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Peter, again this is a hypothetical question.If you had been able to meet the demand for reserves that would haveachieved the target funds rate, would that have substantially affectedthe growth rate of reserves over this period? I'm not sure you cananswer that.MR. STERNLIGHT. I just don't know whether it would have hadthat much short-run impact.MR. KOHN. My view would be that it would not, because thedifference in interest rates, in effect the fed funds rate, is veryminor and, therefore, the demand for required reserves would beaffected by a very, very small amount. I'd be skeptical, as Peter is.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Peter, there has been a lot of discussionconcerning the Japanese and other foreign investors pulling back fromtheir investments, particularly indirect investments, in the UnitedStates. I'm not sure what the order of magnitude of those flows hasbeen but if they have been substantial, why aren't we seeing someupward pressure on interest rates as a result of that?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think there has been a pulling backby the Japanese but what impact that would have has been offset,because in a soft economy other demands for credit have beenlightened. And there is this quality differential factor as well,where Treasuries have been in demand because they are seen as thepremier type of investment as against virtually any other kind ofinvestment.11/13/90MR. TRUMAN. President Forrestal, you probably have seen it,but you've seen it more in the exchange rates than in the interestrates.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, it goes to the question of thefinancing of the deficit, and we've talked about--MR. TRUMAN. Although Japan is still running a currentaccount surplus, it is a lot smaller, so there's less financing goingto come, net, from that country anyhow. So, some of that is going tocome out in various pieces. But to the extent you have some[unintelligible] factors, you're going to find it both in interestrates--and there may be special reasons why you don't see it in theTreasury bill market--and also in the foreign exchange markets.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. One of the related things going ontoo, Bob, is a very clear widening out of spreads even on standbys andthings like that. In other words, one manifestation of all of thisconcern about credit quality is that for a given structure of interestrates, spreads and fees even on standbys are actually widening--andperhaps by a lot. Some of that I think is directly related to thisgeneral concern about credit quality, but some of it also is directlyrelated to the fact that the Japanese banks' profile--not just here inthe United States but in Europe including Britain--really has changed.MR. MULLINS. As a factual basis: In the recent refunding,how did the foreign demand hold up and also how did individualpurchases hold up?MR. STERNLIGHT. Foreign demand was on the light side. Ithad been on the light side in August also, as you may recall. TheJapanese dealers were there but it was not altogether clear how muchwas really going back home to Japanese investors. To some extent Ithink they put in an appearance and then just turned the stuff over inthe U.S. market. They were not very big participants; they weremoderate size participants.MR. MULLINS. What percentage appearance did they put inwould you say?MR. STERNLIGHT. In the 3-year note it turned out to be verylittle because they were bidding but other people outbid them, so theyonly got around 5 percent. In the 10- and 30-year issues myrecollection is that it was more in the 15 to 20 percent range.MR. CROSS. I got the impression from the Japanese that theytook about 2/3rds as much this time as they had in some earlierperiods.MR. STERNLIGHT. That sounds about right.MR. MULLINS. And the individuals?MR. STERNLIGHT. Individuals were about normal, I'd say.MR. KOHN. I think their participation was down from theprevious couple of auctions but still pretty high given that [market]rates had come down closer to the deposit rates.11/13/90MR. MULLINS. I have a question also on the collateral issue.If we had a major problem with a large banking institution, would thataffect our collateral [against Federal Reserve notes]?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, it would if we were making big discountwindow loans. What they put up as collateral might or might not becountable in backing currency. It would depend on what--MR. MULLINS. And barring that, we get through Februarybefore we bottom out again?MR. KOHN. Maybe. It's close, but it looks as if we have amuch better chance than we did before the [dewarehousing].MR. MULLINS. Thank you.MR. BLACK. Well, at some point that law has to be changed,it seems to me. This is probably not the time to do it.MR. BOEHNE. It never is.MR. BLACK. We really ought to get rid of that; it's afiction [unintelligible] reserve requirement rather than some notesand deposits.MR. LAWARE. How big would the discount window borrowing haveto be in order to create a problem? Assuming, let's say, that all orrather a quarter of the collateral wasn't as nice as you'd like tosee--MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, there is a fairly tight spot inFebruary, as Don noted, so we wouldn't have to get any really majorborrowing.MR. SYRON. A billion dollars would do it?MR. STERNLIGHT. It might.MR. KELLEY. I'm glad you amended your question to say 1/4.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's interesting. Any furtherquestions?MR. GUFFEY. Just a follow up. We have the authority to backcurrency with foreign assets, right?MR. STERNLIGHT. Legal authority, yes.MR. GUFFEY. Does any additional action need to be taken inorder to implement that?MR. KOHN. Yes, by the Board.MR. TRUMAN. The Board [unintelligible] required authority.There was some in place because your Bank and a couple of others usedit as I remember. The Board declared that it would not do so.11/13/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but didn't that come up justbecause of Mexico?MR. TRUMAN. No, it came up because we were using Swissfrancs.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Swiss francs?MR. TRUMAN. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That soft currency!MR. TRUMAN. It is true that during that period there wereproblems with the Mexican peso, but in the particular cases in which[foreign currencies] were used we were using Swiss francs. The Boardsaid at the time that it would not do so again except under adetermination of unusual and exigent circumstances. So, there's an Sletter out governing the use of collateral and that would have to bechanged.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Maybe we should go back to the goldbacking.MR. TRUMAN. The greenback would go to a premium then.MR. ANGELL. You want to devalue also?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, this is so bizarre--the sillinessof this. Any further comments for Peter?MS. SEGER. May I just ask one question?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Go ahead.MS. SEGER. When you alluded to the pressure being put onmutual funds to improve the quality of their--MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, the money funds.MS. SEGER. I figured you meant bank CDs and commercialpaper. Is that correct?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MS. SEGER. I guess I didn't realize that the SEC has theauthority to manage accounts. I thought that the primary purpose ofthe securities laws required--well, that it was not to tell themanagers what to put in their portfolios.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think this would involve a rule that woulddictate the accounting practices that they follow. In order tocontinue accounting for investments in the fund, keeping the unitvalue at $1 or whatever, they would have to follow certain accountingrules. And the rule that was being proposed would have set a verystringent standard as to what proportion of their assets could be inless than the top rated forms of commercial paper or bank deposits.11/13/90MR. PRELL. You recall they also have regulated thematurities, in essence for the same purpose.MR. STERNLIGHT. That's right.MR. PRELL. So, they played a very active role in this field.MR. MULLINS. But this is for money market mutual funds thatdon't want to mark to market and that want to be allowed to use thatcost plus basis and keep the unit values. The rule is no more than 5percent A-2/P-2 paper and the maturity has been shortened to 90 days.MS. SEGER. But still, they will come back up and makefinancing problems for the issuers of those--MR. MULLINS. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I agree that the problem you werereferring to is ludicrous, but I do believe that we need to make upour mind by the next meeting about what we're going to do. It wouldbe better for us to deal with it before there's a crisis. I wouldlike to suggest, Mr. Chairman, that the Committee be open to yourrecommendations at our next meeting as to what--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I'll put it this way: One percentgold is better than 40 percent something else at least, because you'vegot--MR. ANGELL. Well, I wasn't really thinking about gold. Iwas thinking about our collateral problem. I believe that we oughtnot to wait until we need to make a loan and then at that time have todeal with this. It would be far better for us to make up our mindahead of time than to wait until we need to make a discount windowloan. The time we need to make a discount window loan is going to bethe worst time to make the changes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You want at least $20 billion indiscount loans?MR. ANGELL. Well, I wasn't thinking of anything quite thatlarge, but--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think this issue is getting to thepoint that the logic of it makes no sense. This is really anextension of the original statutes in which we had backing for thecurrency for the legitimate purpose of its convertibility; that hasceased to--MR. ANGELL. It's the law. We would either have to send theletter back to Congress and say we don't mean to do it anymore or we'dhave to get rid of some foreign currency holdings. Or we have anothersuggestion--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's one of the options. If there areno further questions for Peter, may I have a motion to ratify thetransactions at the Desk?11/13/90MR. SYRON. So move.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. At this time DonKohn would like to address another anachronism at the end of ourdirective.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, since we have some policyconsiderations ahead of us, I would support waiting until that is donebefore we deal with this issue.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the reason we decided to do itbefore [the policy discussion], because we ran into that problem thelast time. We decided for exactly the opposite reason that we wouldmake a decision [about this issue first]. I'm not quite sure what itis we're going to say later that comes to grips with any of theoptions that Don has raised. Do you have an idea?MR. ANGELL. Well, it does seem to me that there might be onealternative that would get us a little more volatility in the fedfunds rate. And if we did have more volatility in the fed funds rate,then the 4 percent range specified could be a clear indication of whatwe were doing. Now, it may be unlikely that there will be a majoritywho would wish to do that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that happens to be true. ButI'm not sure that that solves the problem because you're talkingsubstance and we're talking public relations. The issue that you'reraising, which is a substantive operational question, is somethingwe've been struggling with and have not been able to find a consensushere that would enable us to function in that context. We had put itaside temporarily hoping we'd find an opportunity to address thatissue. But pending [a resolution of] that substantive question, wehave this anachronism that is in the directive, which is on the tablefor us to address. The question is: What option do we choose? Oneoption is to do nothing. And it may well be that we should do nothinguntil we come to grips with the fundamental question. That's clearlyan option, but I do think we at least ought to make that judgmentexplicitly if in fact that's the option the Committee chooses toadopt. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, since you characterized thesentence as an anachronism, why don't we choose the environmentallysensitive solution and eliminate it?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible] I'm not sure we'd havethat much trouble explaining it.MR. PARRY. I don't think so either.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think that Don gave us a goodsolution to the problem, and I certainly agree with Bob Parry that the11/13/90final option is the best one. We certainly don't want to lockourselves into the pre-1979 procedures where we have a very narrowrange and have all the problems attendant to that. When you look atthe third and fourth options, we have all these difficulties writingwhat we want in the directive now, and I can't imagine this groupbeing able to sit around the table and come up with an alternativethat we would agree on for the language there. So, this kicks me backtoward the final option. If we're not willing to do anything in theway of adopting a new one, then I think what we have now is betterthan any of the alternatives other than dropping it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you mean option one?MR. BLACK. Yes, go back to option one if we don't go tofive, but I much prefer five. I've always been opposed to any limitsof any sort because my predilections are to try to control things withsome kind of a reserve measure. That necessitates a wider range overwhich the federal funds rate can move than we've been willing totolerate in the past.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. In the interest of truth in labeling, given theway we've been operating, it would probably be a good idea to get ridof it because that is a straight-forward, honest interpretation ofwhat we're trying to do. However, the issue that Wayne raised--andyou correctly identified it as substantive--is an important one. Ihave asked Peter before and maybe we should ask him again, in movingtoward the substantive area: Would you want some more variability inthe funds rate than we have now?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I would welcome some greater day-to-day flexibility in the funds rate. I don't know whether it has anawful lot to do with this.MR. HOSKINS. Would getting rid of this sentence do anythingto your operation in terms of how people might interpret what goes onin the funds market?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think that would be detrimental. Ifyou went for a substantial narrowing, I think that would.MR. HOSKINS. We've been on that road.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. I have a fair amount of sympathy for what BobParry said because I think it's somewhat consistent with thediscussion we had earlier in the day. We ought to say what we'redoing when it's possible and do what we say. If this is somethingthat we're really not paying much attention to and it's hard to thinkthat we are--and this is separate from the substantive point--I reallywonder why we have it there. That was a very effective rhetoricalquestion that Lee asked--whether the 4 percent range was reallyaffecting Peter very much now. So, I'm sort of driven to the polarextremes: just to drop it out of the directive completely or to go tosomething that leaves it in there and then also add something like thesentence in the fourth suggestion--the sentence on what's happening in11/13/90the real economy and the statement that the Chairman has a great dealof discretion, which is what I think should be the case. So, in theinterest of simplicity, I'd come out in favor of just dropping it.MR. HOSKINS. Or, following those up, we could go to sayingexplicitly what funds rate we are targeting.MS. SEGER. They figure that out.MR. SYRON. That's another sensitive question, but I thinkit's worth--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a substantive question, which Isuspect would not enjoy this Committee's support. I hope not, anyway.MR. HOSKINS. I think the interest in the Committee would beto provide more information, though maybe not necessarily that pieceof information.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In our previous discussions there hasbeen a very significant amount of discussion in which we've extolledthe advantages of having certain flexibilities in our operatingprocedures. Peter feels extremely restricted at this moment forreasons that I think are fairly clear. What we're failing to do is tofind the means to do it. I don't think there's a lack of interest intrying to go in that direction. It's an issue of [finding] anoperational procedure that is objective and that we can function with.And I think we're still looking. But literally trying to lock in on afunds rate probably will give us real problems in any event.President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I'd favor dropping it. I would just observe, inthinking back to that memo Ann-Marie Meulendyke did 3 or 4 years ago,that it's interesting that we have had different operating regimes,but if oriented toward the funds rate there used to be a constraintassociated with reserves or aggregates--I don't remember specifically.Of course, the irony of this one is that, in effect, we have anoperating regime that practically targets the funds rate and ourconstraint is the funds rate. And a point that falls down the road isthat if we're going to have an operating regime and a constraint, theconstraint really ought to be oriented toward reserves or somethingbehaving drastically differently from what we expected. That would bea sensible restraint in the current operating regime.MR. ANGELL. If we are willing to admit we're targeting thefed funds rate.MR. MELZER. Yes. I would just eliminate the sentence.MR. BLACK. Well, when Roger used to say we were targetingthe federal funds rate, Chairman Volcker used to say: "That's what youalways say, Roger." He always used those exact words.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. And nothing changes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.-11-11/13/90MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I agree that the two options thathave been mentioned most here are the two best ones: either to donothing or to delete the sentence. It is an anachronism now; it hasbeen an anachronism for a long time. I don't see any compulsion to doanything about it right now, given the fragilities that we're allintensely aware of and have been discussing and given the fact thatthe Fed is in many ways at the center of the scrutiny and the concernabout the fragilities. I've heard no hue and cry on the part ofanybody to do anything about this issue. I would suggest that in thisenvironment we leave it alone, although I could support deleting it ifwe were going to do anything at all.MR. BLACK. Mike, the absence of objections might be becausesome of us have been objecting for so many years with so littlesuccess that we just finally quit out of a sense of futility. But Isee renewed hope, based on what the Chairman said about that. And Ithink it is tied into Governor Angell's point that it's really closelyrelated to what our new procedures turn out to be, if indeed we adoptnew procedures.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Because the sentence really is no longeroperative, as we discussed, I would very, very strongly favoreliminating it altogether. There is another option if we feel wecan't do that: Sort of coupling the third and fourth alternatives withthe word "and" may cover all the circumstances--and indeed are thecircumstances under which we would want a consultation. But I preferdropping it altogether.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. If you have the leeway to call for consultationany time you wish in any case, I don't see that we need the sentenceat all. On the other hand--I'm learning, Bob, about what economistsmean by "on the other hand"--if it is necessary to say something itseems to me that we could use option 4 with one word change. We couldsay: "The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if economic andfinancial developments appear to be diverging significantly fromCommittee expectations." Significantly is a qualitative word ratherthan a quantitative word; substantially is quantitative. And thatgives you complete flexibility to determine that some trend line issignificant or not significant and doesn't in any way inhibit you; andat the same time it does say something if we feel compelled to saysomething. But I could vote for eliminating it completely.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. I think, too, that it has been anachronisticand irrelevant for a long period of time, and my preference would beto eliminate it. But as Governor LaWare just said, if there's aparticular reason to preserve in the record your discretion to have aconsultation, then I think we could fashion language that doesn'treally tie it to any particular economic situation but just gives youbroader authority to call a consultation whenever you feel like it.For example, "The Chairman reserves the right to call for Committeeconsultation when in his judgment conditions warrant suchconsultation" or something like that.11/13/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's very implicit in the currentdirective.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, that's right. It is implicit andthat's why I favor doing away with the sentence. But if anyone feltthey wanted to have language, I would prefer broad language like thatrather than tying it to the funds rate or to economic conditions. Butyou're right, it is implicit.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think this discussion shows that we reallydon't want to face up to the major issues that confront us, because itstrikes me as being clearly a minor issue on our agenda today. It'salso full of irony because if you look at the operational paragraph,it's the only reference to the federal funds rate yet we essentiallypeg the federal funds rate and we are [talking about] eliminating thatreference. I don't think it makes a lot of difference whether we keepit or not. I would think that the most accurate sentence to put inwould be what John LaWare just suggested because that does explicitlykeep in [language regarding the Chairman's] discretion to call forCommittee consultation and it does refer to what we've been using allalong, and that is a fairly wide range of economic and financialvariables. But I'm prepared to support practically anything because Idon't think it makes a lot of difference.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry I brought it up.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. At least we find out what the Committeehas to say. It has been moved and seconded to eliminate that sentencefrom the directive. Are there any comments?MR. BOEHNE. I'd like to make one comment. I wonder if theremight be some merit in making this effective at some future date, suchas the beginning of 1991, so that it takes away from it having anyimmediate significance.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The trouble with that is that if we makean explicit statement that we're leaving it in until the next yearwe're saying it has some meaning.MR. BOEHNE. Yes, but here it is November and we're talkingabout doing it January 1st.MR. MELZER. They're going to be suspicious that we havesomething else in the works.MR. KELLEY. That's why you leave it alone.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's the problem. I couldn't careless what it says because I know what we're going to do anyway. But Ithink there is a problem in that--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We're about to change.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's right. The worstinterpretation would be if we take it out and it leaves the impression-13-11/13/90that the Committee has decided that it will no longer make anyintermeeting adjustments in policy, and--MR. SYRON. Cuts back [unintelligible] on phone calls.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This will not appear in the policyrecord until six weeks after this meeting.MR. KOHN. It will be published the Friday after the Decembermeeting--about the 21st.MS. SEGER. They'll all be on Christmas vacation so theywon't notice!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We will have minutes at that point and Iassume the minutes will explicitly state the purpose of what is beingdone. I don't think it should create a problem unless I'm missingsomething.MR. ANGELL. Well, all the "somewhats" and "slights" and"mights" in the operational paragraph imply that we might dosomething.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Look, we have a motion and it has beenseconded. Is there any further comment?MS. SEGER. Can I just ask one question? I think you saidwe've had this exact sentence since 1982. How many times in that 8-year plus period has the fed funds rate deviated more than 4percentage points between meetings? It cannot be often.MR. KOHN. I doubt there were any such instances.MS. SEGER. I can't think of one myself.MR. KOHN. Since the end of 1982, when we went off thenonborrowed reserve--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would suggest that the motive here isto save money--for example, on the ink that is used on the paragraph.Any further comments? If not, will the Secretary call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Hoskins YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Seger YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It is removed.-14-11/13/90MR. BLACK. That was enthusiastic! It suggests, Mr.Chairman, that if we want enthusiasm on the part of the Committee thatwe should discuss insignificant items.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [We move to] the substance, ladies andgentlemen. Messrs. Prell and Truman are now on the agenda.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll try to sustain thelevel of interest here! [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Questions for eithergentleman?MR. SYRON. At the risk of repeating David's question at thelast meeting--I'm going to make an assumption sort of going forward--let me ask this question. On the basis of having made a forecast thatto me is a little optimistic given no change in policy--and youqualified that in what you said, Mike--I'd be interested in yourreaction as to which way you think the risks are of not coming out onyour forecast. You mentioned, and I'm particularly interested in, thesnapback issue. Given the continued expectation of problems on thecredit flow side, I have a little question about the mechanism bywhich we get a snapback without a change of policy in two quarters.MR. PRELL. Well, the major mechanism is the drop in oilprices that we have assumed. On top of that we get some impetus overtime coming from the recent decline in the dollar showing up in thestronger export growth and the retardation of import expansion. So,that's the major impetus to defining final demand as we look out intothe latter half of 1991. As to the risks: Obviously, they're manyfoldand very substantial. If I had to characterize them for the very nearterm, I'd put a small interval around the minus 2 percent and say thatis what we think is the most likely result. My judgment would be thatthe tail [of the probability distribution] is probably a bit longerand a bit thicker going to the down side but that we have asignificant [mass] of the probability around this moderate drop--Idon't know if a drop is ever moderate--of 2 percent or something closeto the magnitude that we have in the fourth quarter.MR. SYRON. There is never an awful lot of comfort in thesethings, but are you much more uncomfortable in terms of yourdistribution about how long it takes to come back--whether it's twoquarters, three quarters, etc?MR. PRELL. Well, we're sort of captives of our keyassumptions. And oil, given the movement we have forecast, is a quitepowerful influence. So the broad contours here seem right to me inlight of that assumption. Now, as to how one might want to alter thatin light of one's geo-political-military assessments, obviously,there's a tremendous range of possibilities. I think there is a lotof sense to assuming that at some point over the next 6 to 9 months wewill have a significantly lower oil price either after militaryconflict or in the absence of military conflict. But the timing ofthat and what might happen in between is hard to say. So, thatobviously complicates things. As to the credit picture, as we've saidall along, this is just very hard to translate into GNP points. We-15-11/13/90are not able to point to very clear-cut real impacts at this juncturethat we can say are obviously attributable to the credit situation.For example, in nonresidential construction, which is where everyonethought the most direct hit would be, it isn't really obvious thereyet. We can see the contracts and permits data suggesting someweakening, but there seems to be a pretty long pipeline and thereisn't a sign of an enormous drop right now. We're predicting that wewill see some significant weakness in construction put-in-place in thenext two months' reports. But this is hard to predict.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We may be seeing it in declines in someof the prefabricated manufacturing elements that go into the inventorydata prior to going into the value put-in-place figures. The SIC 344--that whole metal fabrication area which precedes the value put-in-place--is beginning to become quite weak. So, we may be seeing it onthe edges.MR. PRELL. Well, I think the evidence is mixed in this area.Last week at a meeting of business economists, a steel companyeconomist indicated specifically that the steel fabrication forstructures seemed to be holding up quite well up through the firstpart of next year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are they talking about the orders forsteel structures?MR. PRELL. This is just what they had booked through thefirst quarter of next year. Now, there's always a vulnerability tosome shift in this; and one company's perspective may be differentfrom another's. We're expecting a significant change in the tenor ofthese things. Also, based on anecdotal information that has come in,there are some areas such as steel and chemicals where perhaps therehas been a bit of inventory building, and we could see production falloff very noticeably in the coming months. Certainly, we have adistinct change in the tenor of things happening right now in thisforecast. And it's a judgment call; it's not something that we cansubstantiate by pointing to clear leading indicators in the data,particularly with regard to the timing and magnitude.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Mike, do you make much of the divergence betweenthe payroll and the household employment data? The household datahave been quite a bit weaker for some time now and I'm wonderingwhether, as we come to understand the recent pattern of the economybetter, that isn't telling us something.MR. PRELL. Well, both of them look weak over the last twomonths and that's the key inference that we're drawing--that there isweakness in labor demand. There have been these divergences overtime, which have not been fully explained. But both series foremployment show weakness recently, and that's one of the reasons we'reputting considerable weight on that information.MR. ANGELL. Mike, on the personal saving rate, how much ofthat oil tax hike was absorbed by the personal saving rate?-16-11/13/90MR. PRELL. The personal saving rate has come down and hasdone so in circumstances where real disposable income has beensignificantly eroded by the energy price increases. Basically, in thevery short run, if these data hold up, what we've observed is thatpeople have not adjusted their spending patterns very rapidly in theface of this decline in their incomes. We're expecting that thisadjustment will occur and that we'll see some movement back up in thesaving rate, particularly because of the general financialenvironment. All that we know about consumer sentiment suggests thatpeople are not necessarily going to want to diminish their financialwealth. They've already experienced rather weak real estate valuesand the stock market hasn't gone up, so their wealth positions justhave not been improving recently.MR. ANGELL. Our analytics tell us that consumer spendingshould be weak. And consumer sentiment looks like it's in a freefall. But the data we have don't yet show it, is that right?.MR. PRELL. I think that's a fair characterization.MR. HOSKINS. Just a follow up on Dick's question again,because I'm not sure I have your orders of magnitude right. Oneconcern that I have is that there's still a reasonable chance that thefourth quarter may not even turn out down. But if I listened to youcorrectly you're pretty confident--meaning 80-90 percent probability--that we're going to have a negative?MR. PRELL. 77 percent! [Laughter.]MR. HOSKINS. That's close enough, thanks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Until you get the retail sales, how canyou feel that comfortable?MR. PRELL. All right, 65 percent. [Laughter.] I'm notgoing to be enormously more confident when I've seen the first set ofretail sales data knowing how much they are vulnerable to revisionsubsequently. But it would certainly help to make the pieces fallinto place in this puzzle that we tried to put together here. We havehad, basically, a very large drop in hours [worked]. Historicallythat has proven to be one of the most reliable indicators at ourdisposal of short-term movements in output. We had discounted thatbecause the drop in the average work week, especially outside ofmanufacturing, was just huge and seems incredible. But even with thatdiscounting, we're off to a very bad start. Initial claims don'tsuggest that the labor markets are firming; we're looking for furtherdeclines in employment and a noticeable drop in hours overall for thequarter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's not that I disagree--actually Iagree with your forecast--but let me play the devil's advocate for aminute. Initial claims are up sharply, but it is the level of theinitial claims not their direction that determines the rate of changein economic activity. And that level is back at the 1986 level, notback to 1982.SPEAKER(?). That's recession.-17-11/13/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And the only hard retail number we haveat the moment is motor vehicle sales; and while they're off a bit,they're clearly not implying anything in a negative direction. Andwhile the data from the October employment report, which picks upwages and salaries, certainly are low implicitly as are the hoursthose data are notoriously subject to revision. I don't know if it's70 or 80 percent, but Lee is not raising a totally illegitimatequestion. [Laughter.]MR. PRELL. [Unintelligible] are still set with a wideconfidence interval. No one could state this with normal certainty.We do know one other thing and that is that motor vehicle productionis going to be down appreciably in this quarter and that alone by ourarithmetic--when you put the cars and the trucks together--probablycuts better than a percentage point off of GNP growth in this quarter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's a difficult call.MR. PRELL. That's helpful in adding these things up. Weknow that, unless something bizarre happens with wages in thisquarter, real labor income is going to be very weak because of the oilprice increase. So then it becomes a matter of how aggressive peopleare going to be about spending what they have. And the Christmasspirit--my predecessor was always inclined to bring that up at thistime of the year--may move people to spend very freely. But we haveto try to make our judgment based on all of the information at ourdisposal. And we don't hear anything that suggests that kind ofpattern emerging at this point. So, we think it's a negative quarter.Basically by going [from a forecast of minus 1 percent], which wasjust slightly different from 0 in our perspective, to [minus] twopercent we're signaling that we think it's going to be a negativequarter and we feel fairly confident about that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Let me just pick up on this. I know we startedsome of this this morning. [Secretary's note: The reference is to abriefing of the Board of Governors by its staff.] We have a strangephenomenon because the auto experience is a good example of theproducers having cut back even though the hard sales data are notdown. And it sounds as if most of the evidence is that the producershave decided, just as our staff has decided, that demand is going tobe down so they started laying people off and started not producing.My guess is the result will be that demand will be down.MR. PRELL. Well, if they are wrong and demand holds upreasonably well, we're going to see a drag on inventories here that'sgoing to give us the possibility of some bounceback in the early partof next year.MR. MULLINS. Well, presumably some of the people laid offwill now decide not to be quite as aggressive as they might have been.MR. PRELL. That's true. There's some income that is lost inthis process.MR. MULLINS. Can we talk about the snapback as well, just toclarify that? The logic is: oil prices went up and that shattered-18-11/13/90consumer confidence. And then when they come down consumer confidencewill be reconstituted with about the same lag and there will besomeone around to finance the increase, this snapback effect, in thesecond quarter of next year.MR. PRELL. Well, some of it is just the straight priceeffects on real purchasing power. But I wouldn't set aside thequestion of confidence. It isn't just an oil price shock; it's awhole discussion of war and peace and one's sense of the stability ofthe world after a very good move that developed because of[unintelligible] in eastern Europe. So, I think with that, plus thedebacle of the budget in Washington, there have just been a number ofthings which seem to have led to an enormous shift in the sentiment ofAmerican households. With the passage of time maybe the budget issuewill be forgotten and something will happen with respect to themilitary situation. I guess it's implicit in this that the risksdon't look worse several months down the road.MR. MULLINS. In fact, it did seem like the budget experiencewas a second impact on consumer confidence.MR. PRELL. My sense is that the polls suggested some loss ofconfidence in our economic policy makers at that point.SPEAKER(?). It's hard to believe!MR. MULLINS. The markets have not been marking up theprobability of war but certainly in the political rhetoric and introop movements there is some suggestion that maybe the probabilityhas gone up a bit. What is the staff's--MR. PRELL. I've tried to puzzle through this. The people onWall Street keep saying that the economy has hit a wall. They thinkthat we're going into a serious recession and that we need dramaticmonetary policy action to cushion the economy. Yet they have not bidthe bond prices up further than they have. I suspect part of that,and I've heard it said, is that people don't want to buy bonds infront of a war. So I think there is a risk premium embedded in thereand it is reflecting this.MR. MULLINS. What is your current scenario of what happensin the event of a war?MR. PRELL. What happens in a war? You mean economically?MR. MULLINS. Yes, economically.MR. PRELL. Well, I don't think we would presume to haveenormous insight. There's a considerable range of things that couldhappen. Clearly, if there were significant damage to the productionfacilities and the transport facilities and so on, we could have aperiod of time in which supplies were significantly disrupted. On theother hand, perhaps in that circumstance we would get the drawdown inreserves and that could be a cushion for a period. There could bemilitary spending consequences if a war went on and utilized a largeamount of munitions that it was felt had to be replaced within ourlifetime. It's conceivable that some things just would not be-19-11/13/90replaced immediately, but the sign there I think is positive--i.e.,that there would be more military spending.MR. MULLINS. But we haven't had many recessions during wars.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In fact, we haven't had many of either.MR. TRUMAN. Implicitly, I think the assumption is that thewar would be short and would have, as Mike said, relatively minorimpacts on the production side. The other scenario, which I think isalso broadly consistent with the oil price assumption but doesn't havequite the same broader psychological impacts, would be just astalemate. And under those circumstances we could have much higherprices. That is, with oil prices that are consistent with existingsupply and demand relations you would find a gradual erosion in oilprices. You can even argue that that's what has happened to someextent over the past several weeks. I don't want to push these datatoo much, but we've had some of both scenarios. So, it's fair to saythat this is not a "long war forecast," if you want to put it thatway.MR. MULLINS. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Ted, in your analysis you referred to a 5percent further drop in the value of the dollar. I presume thatthat's based on the same interest rate assumption: that is, that wekeep the fed funds rate and other rates about where they are.MR. TRUMAN. And it is essentially the drop in the dollarthat has occurred between the forecasts.MR. LAWARE. Okay. Now, the Bluebook refers to a furthersharp drop in the dollar if we go to a sharp reduction in rates. Canyou give us some idea of what that expectation is--what quantificationyou put on that?MR. TRUMAN. Well, the models, such as they are, don't helpvery much in this area. The quantitative history does say 50 basispoints on the funds rate is not going to do much more than 1 or 2percentage points at most on the dollar. What the Bluebook was tryingto point to is that there are things that are [beyond the] model. Insome sense we haven't had much change in interest rates since July.We had an 11-1/2 percent drop in the dollar. So, it really is aquestion of how much more of that there is in the pipeline. As youknow from dealing with economists these days, there are two views.One would be the market view that Sam put forward: that things arevery fragile and [the dollar] could move quite far and quite quickly.The other view, as Sam also said, is a sense that has been partlyarticulated that authorities might take action. But one could evensay--I'm putting words in his mouth that he didn't actually say--thatthere's a sense that the dollar has moved a long way down and,therefore, has created more of an upside potential.MR. LAWARE. All right, but I'm still trying to pin you downa little.-20-11/13/90MR. TRUMAN. I think what the Bluebook was trying to pointout was that there is no significant risk! [Laughter.]MR. LAWARE. All right, let me ask a simpler question. Towhat extent does the current level of the dollar reflect a forwarddiscounting of expectations of further easing--in other words, anotherquarter point on the funds rate?MR. TRUMAN. With another quarter point you're going to getsome [dollar movement], and we saw that over the last several days--though, as always, these observations over the last 10 days or so arecontaminated with things like the Bundesbank moves or other eventsthat happened in the world. But I would say that with another quarterpoint the dollar would move down marginally because it is alreadymostly discounted.MR. CROSS. Based on forward rates and so forth we think thatmost people are expecting it. As I was indicating earlier, thatdoesn't mean that it might not continue to have an effect--maybe notimmediately, but it influences people's views about the next x weeks.MR. KOHN. The authors of the Bluebook had in mind a bit howthe market perceived the Fed's priorities in making this [recent]move. The Fed has been seen as a very reluctant "easer" through aperiod of weakness. If the next move were perceived as changing thepriorities--moving toward [concern about] the real economy and a bitaway from prices, that could have a significant impact. If, on theother hand, it didn't see it that way--. That's why there is thisuncertainty; it's really impossible to answer the question becauseit's a question of the psychology and the perceptions about ourreaction, basically.MR. LAWARE. Yet it's a very important part of making thisdecision today.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to go back tothe discussion that took place between Governor Mullins and the staffwith regard to the plant closings on automobiles and trucks. Therewas some implication that there would be fewer consumer purchasessimply because of that event. It's my understanding that [autoworkers] will continue to draw between 90 and 95 percent of their payduring these one-week or two-week closedown periods. So, there is nota great diminution of purchasing power.MR. PRELL. I think you're right. Under the contract thereare these unemployment benefits. You probably have it nailed downbetter than I do.MS. SEGER. But, Roger, that's not true of the suppliers.That's the Big Three aspect. Between the sub-benefit and theunemployment benefit the auto workers come up to around 95 percent.But everybody who feeds into the auto industry--those producingwidgets and nuts and bolts and all those things--is not necessarilythat protected.-21-11/13/90MR. PRELL. Look through the corporate [unintelligible], ifyou want to get fancy. You would figure that's coming out of BigThree profits, all other things equal, and that certainly affects theshareholders ultimately.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions? If not, why don't wetake a short break.[Coffee break][Secretary's note: Chairman Greenspan called on Mr. Parry tobegin the review of economic conditions and the outlook.]MR. PARRY. The Twelfth District accounts for just under 30percent of U.S. oil production. Higher oil prices have stimulatedvery little additional production in Alaska and California due touncertainty about how long prices will remain high and also due toproblems associated with environmental restrictions. Even at currentlevels, however, higher prices are yielding a windfall of revenues forAlaska's state government and also are stimulating the Alaska economyin a significant way.Home sales have declined sharply and median home prices havedeclined moderately during the past year in California markets. Thesouthern California real estate market is particularly weak; salesactivity is down in the previously hot Seattle and Sacramento marketsand price increases there are moderating. Concerns about overbuildingin nonresidential markets, particularly in southern California, arewidespread; and recent declines in rents and leasing concessions areconsistent with these concerns. After adjusting for the normalrelationship between bank lending and economic activity, lending bylarge banks in the Twelfth District has not been unusually low.Turning to the national outlook, the basic scenario of theGreenbook forecast certainly seems plausible. However, real growthmay be a little stronger and inflation somewhat higher than in theGreenbook, especially if interest rates follow a lower path than thatassumed in the Greenbook. We expect negative net real growth in thecurrent quarter and probably also in the first quarter of next yearrelated largely to the effect of oil prices. As the effects of higheroil prices begin to dissipate when oil prices decline, however, theeconomy should pick up by next spring. Although consumption spendingwill continue to be weak for a while, I would agree with the Greenbookthat net exports will contribute over 1 percentage point to the growthof GNP next year and help to prevent a serious downturn. Theunderlying rate of inflation is not likely to rise significantly nextyear, but I expect that the lower value of the dollar will be a factorcontributing over 1 percentage point to the inflation in GNP pricesnext year and even more to consumer prices. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Economic activityin the Sixth District pretty much mirrors what has been happening inthe rest of the country, as I reported last time. Our retail saleshave been flat on average around the District with noticeable declinesin autos, household appliances, and furnishings. The retailers in theDistrict are very cautious about orders since they're not expecting a11/13/90good Christmas season at all. We have seen discounting already, eventhis early in the season, so it appears that the emphasis is ontighter inventory control.On the production side, new orders have declined in a numberof key industries, especially carpet and apparel. But, as I believe Imentioned last time, those manufacturers who have established exportmarkets are seeing strong sales growth. As a consequence,manufacturing activity overall is continuing to expand although ratherslowly, while domestic sales and employment are falling in those same[industries]. The only other report I heard on strong sales was froma small businesswoman who said she's making a lot of money sellingdeodorant to the government for distribution to the troops in SaudiArabia. On the price front, where we can separate out the oil shockeffects we find very few pressures on prices in the District outsideof medical services. And looking at the oil-producing area, again aswe've reported several times, severe shortages of skilled laborers,particularly welders, are constraining production at the present time.The premium for these workers is now upwards of 20 percent in the lasttwo months, and with that kind of a premium attraction we're likely toget back some of those industry workers who were dropped in the lastfive years.In looking at some of the loan data for banks in our DistrictI was surprised to find that, unlike the rest of the country, ourconsumer loans are weaker than real estate loans. And that patternhas existed from April through September. Real estate loans reallyhave not changed all that much.Looking at the national economy, given all of theuncertainties surrounding these forecasts, my own feeling is that theGreenbook forecast is fairly plausible. We've heard a lot of talkabout whether we're in recession or not; I think that's really anirrelevant question at the moment. The key issue, it seems to me, ishow deep it may be if in fact we are in a recession. And that's thecritical question I have with respect to this forecast--whether thenegative growth in the fourth and first quarters will be as mild andwhether the rebound will be as much as is forecast in the Greenbookscenario. For those reasons, and I'll talk about this later, Icontinue to favor some cushioning of the economy against a substantialdownturn.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the Greenbook's forecast iscertainly plausible and internally consistent, given the kinds ofassumptions the staff is making about policy and the price of oil overthe forecast horizon. But it seems to me that the risk is clearly onthe down side even if one assumes that oil prices will behave as thestaff has concluded by declining significantly. What impresses meabout all the recent data we have received, both statistical andanecdotal, is that it is just universally bad. As Mike Prellindicated a while ago, the worst is the employment figures. But theNational Association of Purchasing Managers' figures don't look good.We got the figures on industrial production and capacity utilizationthis morning and they certainly didn't look good. The Beigebooksuggested that virtually all parts of the economy--in most sectors andin most regions--are experiencing slower growth or even some decline-23-11/13/90in business activity. From our directors and other grassrootscontacts, except for those in the agricultural area, we're just notgetting any good comments at all. At last Thursday's meeting of ourboard, for example, they were more pessimistic than I remember foryears and years; even at the meeting before there were a few brightspots that were mentioned, but absolutely none at this one. We evenhad one letter from an unusually affable former director who is astrong supporter of this System saying that the System really didn'tunderstand how bad it was out there. He was irked by all thestatements that we don't know whether we are in a recession or not andhe proceeded to give me a set of figures that demonstrated to hissatisfaction that we are, though they were hardly conclusive.Obviously, none of this suggests that we're about to fallover the edge of the cliff. But given the state of business andconsumer confidence, which as I assess it is lower than I can rememberfor many a day, it seems to me that there's a better than even chancethat we're going to have a greater drop in GNP than the staff isprojecting. It may well mean also that the recovery is not going tocome as early as the second quarter. Now, I think the downside riskswould increase pretty significantly if the growth in the aggregatescomes in below what is projected, and I'm very much concerned by thisfurther evidence of weak growth in the aggregates. I hope theCommittee is going to take some steps later on to try to get theaggregates more nearly on what seems to me to be an appropriate path.Finally, I would like to say that I sure was happy to see theprojections on inflation that the staff has made for down the road away. It's certainly true that we're going to have some turbulenttimes, but I think we have made some progress toward our long-runobjective of achieving price stability. I'm delighted to see thisreflected in the forecast, and I believe the staff is going to beright on that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As far as New Englandgoes, the economy obviously continues to deteriorate. Bob Parry'sreport sounded like [his District was in] the early stages of some ofthe things we complain about. I'd say that in a sense the rate ofdecline [captured] in the second derivative may be turning a little inthat the steepness of the decline seems to be attenuating a bit. Alot of this is in real estate, obviously. In the residential areawe've actually seen prices decline by probably about 20 to 25 percent;and that is bringing greater activity and activity has sort ofstabilized. The commercial area is still quite poor, with vacancyrates up around 25 percent in the suburban areas. Related to that,we're seeing an absolute decline in hookups for electrical power,which by the way ends up being very coincident with nonpayments orcorporate delinquencies for electrical bills; it's very highlycorrelated with that. We've seen a substantial jump in that and asignificant jump in bankruptcies, particularly among customers ofMassachusetts utilities.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's shocking!MR. SYRON. Well, I want to get a charge out of it; we try tostay plugged in! In our manufacturing sector, demand is weakeningwith a few exceptions; interestingly, net exports now are declining-24-11/13/90for our manufacturers except for a few off the shelf items that haveimproved somewhat in the computer area. The retail area is very soft,with a lot of price promotions. Actually, there are a lot ofcomplaints among retailers that the weather has been too good thus farthis fall and that there really have been soft sales of heavy winterclothing. Retailers say that they're in pretty good shape oninventories, but they're trying to be very, very cautious and push alot of stuff out of the door before the Christmas season. Most ofthem feel that they just don't want to go into December carrying verymuch.The banking sector, I'm afraid we have to say, is trulydismal. Some asset markets just literally have ceased to exist. Andthis is not just in the real estate area; I'm talking about loans tosmall businesses and that sort of thing. As a result of all this, Ithink the good news--and perhaps it's somewhat better than in thenation--is that we're seeing some improved price performance, though[unintelligible].I'm concerned, though, about the implications both for theregion and nationally of all of this on confidence as far as thebounceback goes. I must say with regard to the national economy thatif I thought we could get the kind of result that's in the Greenbookwith the policy implications that are contained in the Greenbook, I'dbe happy to take it in a way. But Mike made the point, and I thinkit's the relevant one, that it depends on what one thinks is causingall this. The forecast seems a little too optimistic, though perhapsmy view is too much influenced by our local situation. But I don'tthink this is all an oil phenomenon; I think it has to do particularlywith the credit situation. I'm also worried to some extent, given theoutlook in Canada and the United Kingdom, just how much export growthwill continue to be a source of strength and bring us out of the weakeconomy here. I must say--and this is somewhat related but notdirectly to what we do in the funds market--I've developed what I'mafraid are [unintelligible] some radical beliefs. I used to think youcouldn't have a credit crunch, as we traditionally found, unless therewas a breakdown in markets. It feels somewhat silly raising this, butI think what is becoming more and more an issue nationwide, and it isfor real, is that we need to take some steps to reconcile ourobjectives in macro policy with what we're doing in the supervisoryarea. I must say I hate to raise that because it apparently goesagainst a lot of things we all believe. But I just can't come to adifferent conclusion because regardless of what we do in policy--andwe're constrained with the dollar on one side of the prospectivepolicy--it would take an awful big move to divert some of the enormousincrease in conservatism and risk premiums by many lendinginstitutions, and not just commercial banks, given the problems thatthey have. There are several actions that we could take in that area,though as I say they're not directly germane to today's [discussion]on what has to be done. But I think we really have to give an awfullot of thought to that as being part of how we proceed--that leaningagainst the wind may apply to supervisory policy in many cases just aswell as monetary policy. I hope that in these observations I'm overlyinfluenced by parochialism, but that may not be the case.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.-25-11/13/90MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I really don't take muchexception to the staff forecast through the first quarter of nextyear. I do wonder a little, as others have, about the bounceback ofgrowth in the second quarter and thereafter on the inflation side. Ihope it turns out to be the way that it's forecast. I guess I haveslightly less optimism in that regard.As far as developments in the Dallas District, it does seemthat conditions down our way, at least on average, are reflecting thesame set of weaknesses that are affecting the rest of the country.Higher oil prices are supposed to improve matters in Texas, Louisiana,and New Mexico but so far we're not seeing any of the benefit. Forexample, neither drilling activity nor employment in the oil and gasindustries has increased significantly. Manufacturing employment isdown; construction is down slightly; employment growth is stalling inthe private producing sectors; agricultural incomes are lower thanexpected because of increased fuel costs. Government is the onlyrobust sector, and to me that's a bit of a negative. Uncertainty is amajor factor that seems to be depressing economic activity in theDistrict. The volatility in the oil markets leaves oil and gasproducers uncertain about the future price of oil and, therefore,cautious about expansion. In addition, there seems to be heighteneduncertainty about the health of the national economy, interest rates,the tax load, and the possibility of war in the Middle East. All ofthese factors seem to be leading consumers to postpone purchases,particularly purchases of real estate and durable goods.Within the District, growth patterns are very uneven. NewMexico, which had been showing the strongest growth of our threestates, has shown actual declines in employment and other economicmeasures through 1990. Louisiana had been laggard in the recovery inthe Southwest but has been showing steady growth and improvement.Texas, particularly in the last few months, seems to be slowing almostto a standstill. We had a joint meeting last week of all four of ourboards of directors and the comments made at that meeting certainlyconfirmed what our statistics are saying. There was very littleoptimism expressed at that meeting. In short, the near-term outlookis on the pessimistic side; but looking further out, we can expect tosee some improvement only if higher oil prices are sustained.MR. BLACK. Is that your unbiased report?MR. KELLEY. Clearly a regional view.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The newest member of OPEC!MR. KELLEY. That's where they learned how to do it.SPEAKER(?). Texas railroad commission!MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, in the District context, I thinkour part of the Midwest is still operating at a better level than istrue of the national indicators. Nonetheless, clear signs ofweakening are beginning to emerge. In the steel business the plantsare operating at a comparatively high level, at about 84 percent ofcapacity; and at this point of the year, the year being really all butdone, they are rather sure that they will see shipments this year ofabout 84 million tons. So comparatively, it's quite a good year. But11/13/90for the first time in quite some while, they're seeing a deferment oforders. Two markets that in particular have this phenomenon are autosand appliances; appliances really have been very, very weak.The price increases that have gone into effect in the steelbusiness certainly are not sticking; competitive pressures, I'm told,have been very tough and, therefore, the price increases really arenot sticking. The automotive sector we talked a little about thisafternoon. An explanation I would offer for the strength in salesrelates to this fleet sale phenomenon. The company that I talked withhas had a very significant increase in the fleet component of theirsales. Going back to 1987, for example, fleet sales were about 27percent of their total volume; this year they are going to be about 35percent. That selling is largely behind [them] at this point of theyear. Therefore, they are reducing their production schedules, whichwe talked about, and they have reduced their sales outlook for theindustry next year--cars and light trucks--to about 14 million units.In the agricultural sector, though obviously we have had agood crop year, the production and sales of agricultural equipment aredown. There is a lot of uncertainty out there in the market becauseof the impact the tax bill is going to have on subsidies. Thatuncertainty has caused farmers to defer major purchases. And in orderto keep inventories in line, some of the major producers are planningsignificant layoffs between now and the end of January so they cankeep inventories low. Heavy construction equipment is declining,reflecting [weaker] conditions in real estate, mining, and forestproducts. And real estate construction, which in our area had beenholding up I think surprisingly well, is now showing signs of softnessin both residential and commercial sectors. Interestingly, I've had achance to talk to a number of different architectural firms recentlyand their business has just absolutely stopped. There are no newprojects coming on line; they're finishing off some of them, but newprojects have just dried up. Retail sales, particularly in thoseareas that are affected by the auto sector, are weak: and homeappliances are pointed out as being something particularly soft.In the financial sector, I think there's still a question butwe are seeing a tightening of credit conditions. The banks haveraised their credit standards and also certainly are raising theirprices for credit extensions. There is a growing apprehension thatthere's going to be a very significant tightness in the markets as weget close to the end of the year. A lot of banks are beginning toplay with [unintelligible] measures to be sure that they get past theyear-end [unintelligible]. Therefore, I think it's the time whencapital ratios could be impacted by year-end transactions that[unintelligible] some measures to control that. With regard toinflation, excluding energy, I sense [price trends] are showing signsof, if not improving, certainly not getting any worse. And given theweakening economic circumstances the [competitive] pressures, I think,are very high. Labor costs particularly are showing similar andreasonable restraint.Now, I don't think anybody is forecasting anything like acollapse; nonetheless, I do think we are seeing signs of weakening andit's perhaps very likely that we're in for a rough quarter or two.Certainly our outlook in a national context for the fourth quarter of-27-11/13/90this year and the first quarter of next year would be consistent atleast in direction with the forecast that the staff has given.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On the national level,given the uncertainties and the assumptions contained in theGreenbook, the staff forecast seems to me as plausible a projection asone could make.On the District level, the economy continues to grow at amoderate pace. Agriculture and energy are giving it a bit of a boost.On the other hand, manufacturing and construction activities aresluggish and actually are deteriorating somewhat. In the agriculturalarea, District farmers are completing the third [quarter]--and maybethe fourth, depending upon the area of the District--of an excellentyear. Farm income will be strong for 1990, although livestockproducers will have a better year than crop producers largely becausethe wheat harvest came in at or near a record, which has depressed theprice. That feeds over, of course, into the [costs in the] livestockarea for finishing off the cattle and hog in the red meat area. As aresult, the livestock producers will probably do better than the cropproducers; but taken in the aggregate the farm sector has done verywell in 1990. There is some concern, as Si Keehn mentioned, about thebudget package as put together and what that will mean for subsidiesin the period ahead. Quite clearly, subsidies are going to be less inthe future than they have been, but [questions about] how they'readministered and the Administration's timing of those subsidies havecreated a lot of uncertainty. And that does feed back into farmmachinery sales, which have been almost at a standstill as far as wecan tell.In the energy sector, because in October domestic oil priceswere roughly double what they were back in June, there has been somemodest increase in activity, principally in drilling. For example, inthe District in October there were 325 rigs working; that was up from305 in September. There has been a modest increase in the nationalrig count, and I'm sure the staff has those numbers.With respect to manufacturing, as I've indicated before,District auto plants are taking one-week or two-week sabbaticals--well, layoffs. There is a shutdown at both the Ford and the GM plantsin Kansas City; neither worked the first week in November and the GMplant has continued to be closed for the second week of November. Onthe other hand, the general aviation industry, which is a fairly largecomponent part of our District economic activity, has begun to reboundalthough the light aircraft sector continues to decline. Sales ofturbo props and business jets are up very significantly and plants inWichita will build the front section of the new Boeing 777 airplanefor which they have substantial orders already on the books. So,there is a very favorable outlook for the period ahead. Inconstruction, both residential and nonresidential contracts awarded inthe District fell in September; they're at levels now about 13 percentbelow what they were one year ago. There isn't really any evidence atthe moment that either of those two sectors will see any revival untilat least the spring of 1991.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.-28-11/13/90MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On the positive side,the District's economy, although spottier than it has been, remains inpretty good shape--especially in the rural areas because agriculture,as others have commented, had a good to very good year at least inmost parts of our District. And mining had a good year; indeed, theyare talking about further expansion in that industry in a variety ofstates in the District and I would anticipate that they're going to goahead with at least some of those plans. Retailers, as best I canjudge, are cautious but not particularly pessimistic at this point, atleast about holiday sales.Having said all that, I think the pattern of activity for thenational economy for the near term, as reflected in the Greenbook witha couple quarters of contraction, is a reasonable forecast. I have avery distinct sense, based on a variety of anecdotal evidence, thatthe weakness we're seeing isn't particularly related to the energysituation, although obviously that's a factor. At least as I get thestory, it's really a combination of factors, some of which were inplace before oil prices ran up. Clearly, the credit availabilityissue has grown in importance as time has gone on. And I have thesense that what we are seeing is not particularly driven by energy,but by a combination of negative factors, some of which have affectedattitudes and some of which simply have cut into important sectors orregions of the economy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think almost everybody in the PhiladelphiaDistrict is dressed up in a bear suit because it's hard to find anyoptimistic note. The manufacturers still talk about downturns, whichwe have had for months. There is a hint that maybe the rate ofdescent is slowing, but that's not much consolation for them.Attitudes among retailers are just terrible; they're very pessimistic.In fact, they're so pessimistic and are following such conservativeChristmas inventory policies that even if in the Christmas spiritthere were a rush to buy, I'm not sure they would have the kind ofstocks that could really turn it into a good season for them. Thereal estate market remains very soft and much of this is spilling overinto the banking system. I think we have some significant problemsahead of us there.On the national scene, I think in some sense what we'reseeing is a typical pattern. We've been debating around this tableand around the country for several months about whether we're going tohave a recession or not. Now most people are convinced we are havinga recession and the debate is about how bad it is going to be. TheFed's job--and we've talked about it around this table--is to buy someinsurance against a deep and long recession. All that is fairlytypical; what I think is different, however, is the condition of thefinancial system, because I think that makes the need to buy someinsurance against a deep downturn more important than usual. If majorcracks develop in the financial system, we're going to end up in apretty bad economic downturn. So, what I see here are some realdiscontinuities. Either we're going to get away with a mild recessionand the financial system is going to hold up generally, or we're goingto end up with a financial weakness and with a very deep and longrecession. It's hard to envision a lot in between. If it weren't forthe constraint of the dollar, I would be favoring today a more11/13/90substantial move toward easing than I think we prudently can do, giventhe dollar's condition. But we're dealing here with a situation thatI find increasingly scary because the risks of a really deep downturn,given the condition of the financial system, strike me as much largerthan I recall [in my years of] sitting around this table.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. In our District for the most recent three-monthperiod the economy is still growing, albeit at a slowing rate. Rightnow if you could measure it, we're probably just bumping along holdingour own. But that performance is somewhat better than the nationalaverage. Payroll employment in that period was up about 1 percent;the gains are in government services; employment in wholesale andretail trade and manufacturing is down about 1 percent. The area thatI hear the most about in manufacturing is the consumer durables area;both Whirlpool and GE have had layoffs that are very much tied intothe housing industry. One interesting note in Missouri itself--andMissouri is the second largest state in terms of automobile and auto-related employment--we had some layoffs by the Big-Three and also atMcDonnell Douglas, but District-wide auto employment in the mostrecent quarter is flat. Basically, what has happened is that theJapanese transplants in Kentucky and Tennessee and their suppliershave really picked up that slack. Finally, construction activity,while it's declining, is not nearly as depressed in our District asnationally. In the first nine months of the year residentialconstruction was down only .1 percent compared to 7 percentnationally, and nonresidential construction was down not quite 4percent. One bit of anecdotal information, which I've heard on acouple of different occasions, is the sense that inventories are beingmanaged more closely. I picked that up from inthe trucking industry: the pattern they're seeing there is one of muchmore frequent shipments of smaller amounts. His generalinterpretation of that is that firms really are trying to manage theirinventories very closely.I still have the feeling that the sentiment is probably worsethan the reality, although I agree with Mike that there is moreevidence of a downturn. In that connection, I think probably the mostimportant factor bearing on sentiment is the Middle East situation. Ijust wonder--and this may be politically naive--whether or not from aneconomic point of view a stalemate situation couldn't be construed assomewhat stable and we could see some drop in oil prices that couldturn that sentiment somewhat.On the national situation, generally I haven't been terriblyconcerned about some of the forecasts in terms of a slowdown ineconomic activity or a recession. That has been based primarily on mygeneral feeling that the thrust of monetary policy has been aboutright as measured by the behavior of the monetary aggregates. Ifthat's the way you look at things, when you see a month like Octoberyou have to be a bit concerned. I'd simply say that at this point Iwould not be inclined to overreact based on one-month's data. I'm notsure that we really have the ability--though I know how much effortgoes into it--to project with all that much confidence what theaggregates are going to do down the road. And, of course, the mostrecent easing really isn't reflected in the aggregates at all.-30-11/13/90The final point I would make is that I don't think there is alot we can do about the availability of credit. We can make sure thatwe provide adequate reserves and that money grows at an appropriaterate, but I think the behavior of credit really is largely out of ourcontrol. I would simply observe that in the months of August andSeptember--we don't have complete data on October yet--short- andintermediate-term business credit was growing at a fairly decent rate:7.7 percent in August and 10.1 percent in September. I think there'ssome evidence that the commercial paper market and finance companiesand so forth are picking up some of the slack from the banking system.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. At the beginning of the year when I was trying toget Mike Prell to tell me why I couldn't see the strength in theeconomy, he sort of suggested kindly that I needed new glasses. So, Ijust wanted you to know that I went to the ophthalmologist two weeksago and got an exam and a prescription for new strong lenses. And nowthat I can read the numbers they look worse! But seriously, I do getconcerned about the numerous signs of weakness in the economy. Iagree with the staff forecast that we should look at things moremodestly than we have been. I hope that the weakness doesn't turn outto be still worse than the staff is showing in the Greenbook forecast.Business is so bad that I noticed that George McGovern, innkeeper,filed for bankruptcy; maybe that's not a function of the economy butmore a function of his competence. Also, Lipton is closing a teabagplant in Texas. And Mr. Forrestal's Peachtree Center in the Sun Beltof Atlanta is being foreclosed on I understand by Equitable. So,there are some pretty scary pieces of news around. Also, the regionalsales numbers really bothered me simply because two major chains thatare pretty strong financially showed sales in October that wereactually below year-ago levels. Even Nordstroms, which is considereda rather superior place and operates in the boom part of the UnitedStates that is Bob Parry's District, is talking in less optimisticterms.I'd also like to put in my two bits worth on the autosituation. I believe what has happened is that the auto sales figuresthat are reported really are distorted by deliveries of police carsand cars for corporate fleets, etc. Most dealers don't see thosedeliveries; they go through just a handful. So, the average dealer islooking at a showroom which is devoid of much traffic. People who docome in are not eager actually to close the deal. And the dealerlooks out the back door and sees all these cars on the acreage thatare not being sold and he is paying interest to carry them. So, Ithink there's good reason for most dealers to be very negative. Andthey are the ones who have to send orders in to the manufacturers orthe manufacturers don't have enough to keep their plants running. Ithink that's what is driving these decisions. They are not madeunilaterally by the car producers; they are based on the ordersreceived from the people out in the so-called trenches. If you lookat inventories that way, we are not in as good shape as the aggregatefigures might suggest.I'm more concerned about the housing situation I think thanMichael is, mainly because housing under construction is the sectorthat really is taking the brunt of the credit crunch, if you care tocall it that. Also, I think there is going to be a growing problem11/13/90coming from state and local governments. Now that the elections areover we're going to see some more honest statistics presented. Theylooked pretty bad even before the election, but now that that's behindus I think we're going to see still more states [and cities] that arein not very good condition. Mr. Boehne's Philadelphia is the greatestbasket case, but it's probably going to have some competition.MR. BOEHNE. We have some company coming along from the BigApple.MS. SEGER. Exactly, the Rotten Apple! Those are some of myconcerns. Putting this all together, I would love to believe thestaff forecast and would love to accept the idea that the improved oilprice situation will turn the economy around in a couple of quarters.But because I don't believe that the oil price hike is the mainproblem, I'm not as convinced that having oil prices behave well willturn things around. I really think we are going to have to deal withthis fragility in the banking system and the credit availabilitysituation or we are going to have something that none of us has seenbefore. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, there's not much more I canadd. It is now clear to me that we have had what I would characterizeas a violent shock to expectations and attitudes. As far as I canpiece together the diagnostics of that, I rather agree with GaryStern's view of it. I think the oil situation and the war issue arein the realm of the straws that broke the camel's back. A lot ofstuff was there to begin with. The budget process hurt a lot. But Imight say in that regard, having now had the time myself to put thatbudget package under a bit of a microscope, I find that there's ahelluva lot more substance to it than I thought there was, especiallyin the out years. But, of course, there too what happened was thatthe process was so long and the near-term deficits were so large thatwhat in fact is not a bad package has just been swept away. I thinkthere's no recognition of that at all.I spoke a few moments ago about the international dimensionof this situation, but I really think it does need emphasis. Maybeanecdotes don't do much, but the fact of the matter is that over thepast, I'd say, four to six weeks I have had literally a string ofpeople whom I consider to be the true elder statesmen of internationalfinance--these are guys who have been around for 40 years in manycases--telling me that they have never seen a situation as delicate asthe one right now. And the focus is all directed at the UnitedStates, with particular emphasis on U.S. financial institutions. Andas Peter said in his remarks earlier, it is by no means limited tobanks. It is across the board and it is indiscriminate; AAA-ratedcompanies are being affected just as much as lesser rated companies.And as I said, I cannot help but take seriously comments like thesefrom people who have been around the track, in a couple of casesalmost longer than I've been alive. I think there is the danger--Idon't want to call it a probability or anything like that--of somekind of a serious liquidity shock originating offshore, And that, ofcourse, makes for a further serious complication in the context of thewhole exchange rate situation, because in the eyes of the rest of theworld these problems are very much linked back to the exchange rate.-32-11/13/90But what we have is something that appears now to be takingon the organic, if not the statistical, properties of a recession.But it's a different kind of recession and this is a little like whatI think Ed Boehne was driving at. If indeed we are in a recession, itwill be the first recession in recent memory that has not beenpredated by a sharp and protracted rise in interest rates and theunderlying inflation rate. I don't know if my history is right but Isuspect that if it is a recession it will be the first in the postwarperiod that will have that trait of not being preceded by a buildup ininflation and a sharp rise in interest rates. In those circumstances,I think that the policy response, as Ed Boehne said, is a helluva lotmore difficult. It is partly expectations to be sure; but at thispoint it's very hard to take exception to the fact that the creditside of the equation is a powerful force at work here. When I look atthat credit side of the equation in kind of snapshot terms, I stillcome to the view that it is not as bad as all of the market forces,press reports, or rumor forces would have one believe. But theproblem with snapshots, of course, is that they are frozen in time andthey don't tell you a lot about the future. And one of the thingsthat has become a matter of some increasing concern to me is that Ican now easily see any number of other parts of the country besidesthe Northeast that could get bitten rather sharply by the real estateproblem that is at the heart of so many of the problems, at least inthe Northeast. And, of course, as Ed was suggesting, if that doesbegin to play out and reinforce itself on the credit side, I think itcan make things a heck of a lot more difficult. In the contextparticularly of the risk--however large or small you may think it is--of some kind of a serious liquidity problem originating offshore andof the sensitivity of the dollar, there are limits at least at thispoint as to how much can or should be done with lower interest rates.That also brings me to the view--not unlike Dick Syron's suggestion orI think implicit in Ed Boehne's suggestions--that maybe we have tostart looking at some other things here. I mentioned this at the lastCommittee meeting and almost got run out of the room--it's not thefirst time that has happened and it won't be the last--but I must saythat despite the political risks I still have an awful lot of sympathyin this environment for thinking about doing something with reserverequirements, even if it had to be watered down and phased in andconvoluted. I think I am fully sensitive to the risks, but I'm alsosensitive to the risks on the other side, which I think are more thananyone knows at this point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, the economy in the Potomacdistrict is decidedly mixed. Real estate is very sloppy with hardlyany construction going on and over 100 houses on the market with nobidders. Retail sales are very soft and gasoline prices are much toohigh.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Which district is this?MR. LAWARE. This is the Potomac district, so it is the 13thdistrict.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's an unlucky number!-33-11/13/90MR. BLACK. That's a subdivision of the Fifth District, Mr.Chairman.MR. KELLEY. It's a zip code.MR. LAWARE. Turning to the national economy, I guess I'm ina policy quandary at the moment. I'm convinced that these gloomyconsumer attitudes will be reflected this quarter in retail sales,with the exception perhaps of the luxury items that will be subject totax after the first of the year and may be moved back into thequarter. But perhaps that argues that the first quarter will be alittle softer. Corporate profits, although they're a little better inthe third quarter than predicted, are still far from robust and arevery spotty. Add to that the problems of the airlines and anybodyelse involved with energy and it seems to me that there is a lot ofpressure there. Capital markets at least in the near term areincreasingly closed to the banks and I think that potentially is goingto create some very severe problems for the banking system, not justin real capital but also perhaps in short-term funding. In allprobability, I don't believe that the banks will lend us back intogrowth at least until they see some improvement in earnings,understand and know how to deal with the current regulatoryconstraints, and feel comfortable with their capital ratios. What I'mimplying is that this downsizing that is being undertaken to eitherget capital ratios to the minimums or to build additional cushions isgoing to continue. And that's not consistent with pro-growth lendingin my opinion. I think recession obviously has real downside risksdue to the often cited fragilities, and I've probably cited them moreoften than anybody. On the other hand, an easier policy would put thedollar at risk, and I'm convinced that the implications of a very weakdollar--a flight from dollar securities--in the midst of this badimage that we have projected of disarray in terms of politicalleadership could have long-term consequences that would beuncontrollable from the standpoint of monetary or even fiscal policy.And I think that the psychological attitudes out there right now,which we hear being expressed not only by consumers but also bybusinessmen and bankers, may prevent any ease from being stimulativein the long run. So, the possible contradictory effects of policymoves in either direction leave me in a quandary as to where to gofrom here. I guess that sums up where I am.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Well, I think we have a recessionary psychologyin full bloom. It has captured the staff and also most businesspeople as well as consumers. Even though the hard evidence is not inyet, everyone is behaving as if we're in a recession. It interests methat in the lending officers survey the primary reason given fortightening credit standards is the condition of the overall economy.Presumably, that was just after the third-quarter GNP number of 1.8percent was released. I think the evidence is fairly clear that thestaff is pretty much right this time. As Jerry Corrigan mentionedearlier, it is a curious recession. It breaks a number of the rules--not only the rule that we usually expect a precipitous spike ininflation and an inverted yield curve. That may be sufficient for arecession but it apparently is not necessary. Another rule we'vebroken, which has been mentioned a number of times, is that we see noinventory accumulation problem; maybe that's a thing of the past if-34-11/13/90people take a different approach toward inventories and we now havethe technology to back up that approach. The other thing which may becurious about this recession is that we may go through it with anunemployment rate that is right around what we used to consider fullemployment. In October the unemployment rate stayed constant despitethe weakness in the report because the labor force dropped by aboutthe same amount as jobs dropped. I think we'll probably not breakthat rule, though, and that unemployment will drift up. But it'spretty much a full employment recession, so far at least. All thosesigns would suggest that the recession should be relatively mildbecause we don't have the imbalances in inventories and we haven't hadthe spike in interest rates. It also suggests that maybe we can makesome progress on inflation. As the staff mentioned, we have a numberof pieces of good news there. I think it's instructive that commodityprices still show no real signs of taking off. Most of the indices wefollow are lower than they were last week, last month, and even lastyear once you take out the energy prices. So, given the increasingslack in the economy, maybe we're making some progress there, althoughit probably would take quite a few months to convince us that wereally have made any progress. It's just better than going in theopposite direction.I tend to agree with the sentiment of a number of people thatthe real problem is in credit markets. I'm concerned with how belowinvestment grade companies get credit. We've seen some widening ofthe spreads; default rates are up in corporate bonds and I thinkthey're going to continue to rise, especially as the big bulk of junkbonds ages and gets to the age where default rates typically go up.It is true, as Tom Melzer mentioned, that we can see people going toalternative paths when bank credit is not available. Commercial paperissuance has gone up and finance company lending has increasedmarkedly. That I think is hard evidence of tightness in bank lending.I wonder, though, whether those channels are sufficient to meet allcomers. Generally, we see a lot of evidence of below investmentgrade, medium grade firms, having difficulties. I think it was Peterwho mentioned that the spreads between high-yield bond indices andTreasuries are now 1200 basis points, which is up from about 400 basispoints. Still, I think the greatest reason for concern is financialinstitutions. I see weakness across the board, not only in thebanking system.Another thing Peter mentioned is what's going to happen atthe end of the year. We continue to hear stories that institutionalinvestors are going to go to great lengths not to show bankingsecurities on their year-end statements, which could give us someinteresting times. We've talked a lot about the banking system, butif you look beyond the banking system you see developing problems invirtually all other types of financial institutions. The "goodthrifts," if that's not an oxymoron, have exhibited deterioratingprofitability in the third quarter. Insurance companies are sufferingfrom asset quality problems. It may be that Equitable has closed onPeachtree Center, but people are closing in on Equitable as well.Securities firms are also not in great shape and are under quite a bitof pressure. There's excess capacity; there's simply no business outthere in mergers and acquisitions or in underwriting. They have sometrouble with asset quality with some bridge loans and the like. Maybesome of those things are getting taken care of, but we hear even thebest investment banks complain about skittishness in the suppliers of-35-11/13/90capital to them; we've heard a lot of that from some of the best ones.The health of the finance companies who are called upon to increasetheir lending is also being called into question. And even thegovernment sponsored enterprises [are having problems]: Freddie Mac,as you might have noticed, has had some difficulties with multifamilyhousing; Fannie Mae has tightened standards; and Sallie Mae also hashad some difficulty. So, when you look across a broad range offinancial institutions you see weakness; and you see a system which isnot in good shape to provide credit to people who need it and who areworthy of it. These sorts of trends are clearly understood by thecapital markets. The long rate has come down substantially,reflecting the slowdown, perhaps 50 basis points or so. And qualityspreads for these financial institutions have widened, giving evidenceto the problems there. In terms of the monetary aggregates I seeseven months where M2 has grown a little less than 3 percent. So, Itend to believe that monetary policy has remained reasonably tightover the full [1990] period. Going from the fourth quarter of 1989it's still above 4 percent; but M2 growth was 7 percent in the fourthquarter of 1989 and 6-1/2 percent in the first quarter of 1990. Whenyou average together the last six or seven months--maybe that's stillnot long enough--even if you take all the components of M2 together,that aggregate has not been growing very rapidly. So, when I look atit, I agree with the projection of a mild downturn; I also agree thatthere's a great risk that the downturn could become much more severeand longer in duration, given the weakness of the financial system. Ialso think there's a credible case that some lowering of short rateswould improve the financial health of these institutions and perhapsat the margin also loosen up some credit and produce a growth rate inthe aggregates that would at least creep back into the lower range ofour accepted policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, by late in the day when it'syour turn to speak, you always run the risk that by then somebodyalready has expressed your view. And David just expressed mine. As aconsequence, I'll try not to be redundant. I've been increasinglyconcerned in recent weeks about the specific composition of what'sgoing on here. We have been going through a series of rollingrecessions in this economy for a decade I guess, and I would arguethat on balance it's been a very positive experience. Industries andindeed all regions have had an opportunity to go through a planneddecline, to restructure, and to come out of it stronger. And they'vebeen doing it against a background of overall strength so that it hasbeen able to be done rather quickly. Although it's never any funwhile you're in it, at least it's about as good a process as you couldexpect and it's rather healthy. But we have two sectors going nowthat seem to me to be rather unique, and they are very interrelatedand very interactive. And, of course, those two are the real estatesector, where we are grossly overbuilt, and the financialinstitutions. David just gave us a good [overview] on that and Iwon't repeat it. But it seems to me that these two in declinetogether have the prospect of having a materially different effect onthe economy than maybe almost any other two sectors that one can thinkof because of all the leverage they exercise on the rest of theeconomy. First of all, they are felt everywhere and are not just in aspecific constrained region or constrained industry; it's a dragacross the board. Secondly, there is the wealth effect on confidence-36-11/13/90and on people that has to have some effect on buying decisions. Andperhaps it will come to have an effect on debt servicing. But it'sobviously essential to the growth of every industry; and there'senormous leverage when credit gets tight, as we all know. Also, thesetwo situations feed on each other. It's going to be interesting tosee how that process exhausts itself. The asset quality of banks isbeing dragged down by real estate; on the other hand, you can't workthrough the real estate recession because the lack of credit ispulling down the ability of real estate to be moved and cleared out.I don't know where else that could occur where we have that kind ofinteraction. We've seen automobiles and agriculture going into thetank and they were not terribly interactive. Energy and textiles weregoing into the tank and they were not terribly interactive. But thesetwo are. And taken in tandem I worry that there's the potential forvery serious mischief. I would hope that we're going to watch thatvery closely and perhaps take out a little insurance against thepossibility that these are the two that could get away from us on thedown side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I've been noticing as I've been listening to thecomments around the table that in reflecting we quite often use thewords symmetric and asymmetric. And I've been thinking that there'ssomewhat of a lack of symmetry in regard to the way we're approachingtwo quarters of expected growth below where we'd like it to be. Ihave a feeling that if we had [in prospect] two quarters of growthabove where we would want it to be, there wouldn't be near the kind ofalarm and the wondering about how we're going to get it down threequarters from now so we only have two quarters of boom. But you can'thave six quarters or seven or eight quarters that are stronger thanyou want and then turn around and have two that are less than you wantand come out with anything like price stability. Some of you talk asif the worst case scenario is that we might not get this recession, ifwe're in one. And I'm about as sure as David Mullins is on that; itclearly is very soft. But some of you are worried that we're notgoing to get out of it in two quarters. The only recession that Iremember that was five or six months in length didn't make a singlebit of difference in regard to the underlying rate of inflation. Thisis not an event induced by a monetary shock event. It might be aculmination of monetary restraint, but it's not a monetary shockevent. And if we try to jab our way out with a monetary reaction, wemight very well find ourselves worse off than we were before. Inother words, I think we have to have more confidence that the systemwill work and that we don't have to have a policy that in a sense iscountercyclical; we just have to avoid policy that's procyclical,because I believe that the recovery forces in the kind of economy wehave out there will be in place. So, I'm a little more worried aboutbalancing our way back out of it before we get the imbalancescorrected. If we're in a recession and it takes three or fourquarters to get out and we get the price level thing together, then itseems to me that we have a much better chance to avoid what we mostwish to avoid.I think the question is: Can we get out of this situationwithout having a downside event? And it seems to me a downside eventis not now in place. It seems to me that we run the risk of havingsome other events take place which could cause destabilization in-37-11/13/90financial markets, and that's when we're going to be in realdifficulty I think. That's why I join with those who worry about theforeign exchange value of the dollar. We are a reserve currencycountry that has a good deal of the world's claims that rest with us.And the global ability to take one's money and go is much morevolatile than I think we've ever experienced before. So, to getourselves in a position in which our rate of inflation is higher andour interest rates are dramatically lower than those of majorcompetitive reserve currency countries--and if we begin to movedramatically on policy in that kind of environment--seems to me ismost likely to precipitate a destabilization of markets. Now, I agreethat the financial situation and financial institutions pose risks andI don't favor interest rate targeting. But clearly if we have an endof the year kind of event, interest rate targeting might be exactlywhat keeps that from getting out of hand in a sense, Mr. Chairman.That is, interest rate targeting in that kind of environment does meanthat we might end up supplying a few more reserves at the end of theyear than we may be anticipating doing. So, my view is that theforeign exchange value of the dollar will be okay even if it driftsdownward in an environment in which price level corrections areevident to all. That is, if we see the rate of inflation reallycoming around and if we have commodity prices that are deflating, thenin that atmosphere I believe we can have considerable ease withoutbeing disruptive. But I think it's pretty risky for us to get toopremature with all that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Well, let me be very brief. The District isnot too much different from what I reported to you last time. Peoplewere pessimistic last time, if you recall, but when I checked theirorder books they also had a reason as to why their own specific firmwas going to do all right. Now we're actually picking up somecancellation of orders to firms and that kind of thing. So, it's alittle softer. But perhaps surprising to some of you is thatmanufacturing employment still is almost at the same level it was whenit reached its high in early 1989. So, there hasn't been muchdeterioration and there probably still is some growth left in theDistrict. Steel, for some very special reasons, is running at apretty good rate. Those special reasons are that the dollar is weakand imports are shut down and Canada, of course, has a steel strikeunder way. So, we're getting some special help there. What haschanged the most is what I would call a loss of confidence by thebankers in the District. It's not so much a view that the world iscoming to an end but just this hunkering down attitude that we'regoing to build a fortress balance sheet and that's the way to survive.That's the nature of what we hear all the time and that's a littledisturbing to me.Switching to the national outlook, I haven't any reason toobject to what Mike has presented in the forecast. I have troublewith forecasts because the errors are really quite large in them. Butthe reason I asked the question was that it seems to me there are twokinds of errors that we can make if we are in a recession or headinginto one. One is that if we try to head off a recession or keep itrelatively short in time or very shallow without having all thenecessary information about where we are in the economy, by anaggressive easing of some kind we could actually cause an increase in11/13/90inflation, notching it up and making ourselves worse off. That's whyI was interested in your confidence intervals. So, it seems to methat one mistake we don't want to make is to ease aggressively, causeinflation to rise, and be caught in that potential trap that Waynealluded to. The second kind of error is the one that concerns me andreally is the subject of Don's talk later on, and that is that we'vebeen pegging the funds rate. If the economy is weak and we're peggingthe funds rate too high, then the aggregates are going to shrink andwe will provide a monetary shock to the economy. And while two monthsdon't make the case, as Governor Mullins pointed out, we've had arather strange pattern in M2. So, I have some concerns about thatrisk as well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Don Kohn.MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions?MR. HOSKINS. Don, how do you get your December number formoney?MR. KOHN. Well, it's largely an assumption. The incomingdata are quite weak. The most recent weekly data actually suggested adecline; I don't have anything new since the Bluebook. Ourpresumption was that, with short-term rates having declined, some ofthe weakness was a bit of an aberration and some of that would levelout and start back up again. So, it's a projection based on pastrelationships and based on the staff's economic forecast which is forweak income growth and still an increase in nominal income.MR. PRELL. I might note that in terms of our forecast,nominal consumer expenditures will grow in excess of 6 percent in thefourth quarter, which would affect transactions demands for money.MR. KOHN. We certainly have projected considerably lessmoney than the models suggest.MR. HOSKINS. No, I was just curious because the model hasn'tbeen performing very well and--MR. KOHN. We've actually allowed a larger shortfall from themodel's projection in the fourth quarter than we've had for the pastfew.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions for Don? If not, let mestart off by saying a little more about oil prices. At thisparticular stage we have an economy where supply and demand have comeinto balance. The Saudis have brought back liftings to a point wherethe shortfalls that occur as a consequence of an embargo are prettymuch closed at this stage. As is typically the case whenever you gethigher prices, all the other OPEC members cheat. You can see it inthe data and you can see that the inventories are no longer underpressures. And there is some evidence that consumption is slowingdown against these higher prices. What we obviously have is a groupof refineries throughout the world that think there's going to be awar and that they don't have adequate inventories; and it's theirbidding in the market for existing inventories which has kept the spot-39-11/13/90crude price $10 to $12 a barrel over its equilibrium position. Thereis some reasonable assumption that at where inventories are now thereare potential storage problems. The evidence is that inventories onthe seas are increasing; the tankers are slowing down again, which isa typical pattern when there's a bit too much oil out in the system.This announcement of no rotation of U.S. troops in the Gulfis a statement that short term, either we are picking up our bags andleaving or we're taking a bunch of shots and then picking up our bagsand leaving. And unless we get severe damage to the Saudi fields atthis particular point or accidents in the refinery systems around theworld including Kuwait, which I think we could probably write off atthis stage, the oil price assumptions in the Greenbook short term aretoo high. In this market it's going to go straight down for a whileuntil we get a readjustment. I'm not altogether certain that that isunequivocally positive. The reason I say that is that we're thinkingthat we're dealing with a symmetrical system in which higher prices--leaving our OPEC members aside--are negative and lower prices arebasically positive. But what I think we have here is a system inwhich, as a lot of you have said, the oil price rise essentially hashad an income effect, which basically we see as crucial at this stageon consumption expenditures.Unquestionably, there is a very large risk premium that hashit the market as a consequence of the Middle East situation. We cansee it in the yield spreads on securities, which have all of a suddenjust taken off; the A1/P1 to A2/P2 spread has moved over allmaturities; everything has opened up. If you take a look at theforward exchange rates that we calculate, the so-called 10-yearforwards--which as a practical matter are a rough cut to get at what'shappening to the exchange rates by subtracting the yield spreadchanges from the exchange rate--what you see is a relatively highforward exchange rate for the dollar in the G-10 currencies, whichholds up until about midyear and then starts to come down; and withthe budget problems and the Gulf problems it just falls like a rock.All of this suggests that we have a very unstable environment--one inwhich the economy is being pressed down by the [adverse] psychology.I think, for example, that the uncertainties and the risk premiumscoupled with the oil tax, if we may call it that, are pushing down onconsumption, opening up savings. And if there were inventoriessitting behind this, I think we would be in a free fall right at thisstage. I don't think the evidence--at least from the initial claims,which are the best figures we have--suggests that the economy isfalling off the cliff as yet; it may three weeks from now, but ithasn't yet. It seems to be crumbling very gradually under thefinancial pressure that everyone has been talking about. What we havebasically is old-fashioned disintermediation; that is, it is not thatthe net underlying credit demands that finance the GNP are collapsing;they seem to be going up slower than they were but we sure enough seemto be seeing that the intermediation system--not only depositoryinstitutions but insurance companies, finance companies, and everybodyelse--seems to be pulling back. And what we are getting is theobvious tightness, which I think clearly is the major factor in acontraction of M2 and which is only one side of the depositoryinstitutions' balance sheets. You can basically see the thingsqueezing down as we get loan officers pulling back.-40-11/13/90The one great advantage that we have in all of this I thinkis that slowing inflation is now finally becoming credible.Certainly, the employment cost index was a very important indicator,and even now there's a lot of question about the zero average hourlyearnings number that we saw in the October release. It is allconsistent with a significant slowing down, which I think is beginningto show up in the underlying price data. Indeed, if you disaggregatethe CPI prices and reconstitute them with the weights coming from GNP--that is, using the fixed-weight PCE deflator--there's a verysignificant lower core rate of inflation implicit in there, whichessentially reflects the problems we are all having with the housingservice component in the CPI. And there you have the very anomalousquestion of the market value of the underlying assets of thisresidential or quasi-residential group. That's going down slightlyand rents are going up. Now, rates of return don't do that. And I'mmerely offering the suggestion that the commodities CPI is under 4percent. If you substitute some reasonable estimates for the servicescomponent for housing, I think we're beginning to get some evidencethat at a minimum the acceleration has stopped. While it's stillpremature, and indeed I think it's potentially dangerously premature,to assume that we have it beaten, I think that for the first timethere are hard numbers that suggest there's something going on. Underthese conditions one would not assume, were it not for the crisisatmosphere, that the dollar would weaken as much as it has because onecannot explain the extraordinary weakness in the spot exchange ratesstrictly by the yield spread differences. In fact, the type ofcalculation that we make, which tries to separate that, clearlysuggests that a very significant part of the weakness in the dollar isessentially a vote of no confidence in the United States obviouslywith respect to the banks, financial institutions, and everythingelse.Under those conditions, it's very clear to me that if we areperceived as responding excessively easily to all of the other signsthat would induce central bank ease, that the risks of the systemcracking on us are much too dangerous. I think we have to be awfullycareful. Nonetheless, I don't think that we have the choice at thisstage of not trying to ease into the markets, being fully aware thatat the first sign that we get of negative response we're going to haveto stop. I don't know whether or not we can do more than a 1/4 pointover the next several months. I would say the economy and M2 and thefinancial markets require it, but we may not have the choice. In anyevent, I would suggest that we do have the possibility here--becausethere is no inventory system throwing us into a potentially sharpdecline--that what we are looking at is a non-inventory shallowcontraction which can stabilize after the saving rate adjustment iscompleted as a consequence of the oil price shock. Even though, as Isaid before, I don't think that the decline in oil prices is going tobe symmetrical with respect to [unintelligible], I still think thatthe oil tax will reverse, but I'm not sure that the psychologicalimpact is going to be readily soothed over, so to speak.So, I think we have a good shot at actually coming up withthe Greenbook's forecast. However, I would read it slightlydifferently; I think that the best thing to do at this stage, whenconfronted with the types of problems which give John LaWaredifficulties, is to remember what a central bank is here for. Acentral bank is here to maintain monetary conditions in a stable11/13/90manner. And I would say that at this moment, if we had a money supplythat was going up around 5 percent, I would be very concerned aboutmoving in the direction of ease even in this context of weakness. Butwith the money supply doing what it's doing and the evidence of thecontinuous contraction that is going on, I would opt to ease 25 basispoints right now and stay asymmetric [toward ease] with theunderstanding that only if the situation continues to worsen and ismanifested in the credit aggregates in one form or another should wemove again. But if there is any evidence of significant weakness inthe dollar, I think we will have to pull back and harbor the thought;it's not inconceivable to me that at some point if we overdo it, wewill have to move back up. Anyway, I would propose that as sort ofthe "least-worst" policy alternative that I can conceive of at themoment. In summary, it's essentially for us to go down 25 basispoints and stay asymmetric and watch the system as closely as we can.Ed Boehne, do you--MR. BOEHNE. I support your least-worst policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I concur with your recommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. I agree entirely, Mr. Chairman, except that Ithink that we also have the possibility of moving another 25 basispoints if the markets don't react adversely. In other words, mypreference would be to do 25 now and then wait for another opportunityto do another 25.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that is basically what I'm saying.But we have to be very careful on how we interpret things; in otherwords if the markets behave at all adversely and we hit them at thepoint when they are marginally adverse, I think there a danger.Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I can live with your formulationbecause it seems to me that you placed the emphasis upon thetenuousness of the situation. And it does not indicate that, exceptunder the best conditions, we would go farther. I would comment inregard to M2 that I could very well support a regime in which youannounce and thus the whole world knew what we were doing with M2 andwould thereby not conceive of it as an easing. Because in a sense, ifwe were on an M2 regime, this would not be an easing. And I think theforeign exchange markets might interpret it as not being an easing. Ihave a little difficulty with--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You lost me on that last lap there,Wayne.MR. ANGELL. Yes, I know. I have a little difficulty tryingto blend this formulation of policy with that one because it's hardfor the foreign exchange markets to know exactly what it is we'redoing. But the bottom line is: I could live with your formulation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.11/13/90MR. PARRY. I would support it as well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. I would also support it. I do have a question,however, Mr. Chairman: Why an asymmetrical directive?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, basically because I think theevidence at this particular stage is that we're more likely to have anopportunity to ease before the December 18th meeting than that a breakin the foreign exchange markets is going to cause us to go in reverse.MR. GUFFEY. I think I understand that we eased two weeksago, and I assume you're proposing under this recommendation to easetomorrow or sometime when it's convenient to the Desk. That'sessentially two easing moves within 2 or 2-1/2 weeks and there may bea further opportunity in the period ahead before the December 18thmeeting. But I would prefer if we're going to ease now--and I woulddelay it for a few days, by the way, and not do it right at thismeeting but wait until we get some additional numbers on retail saleswhich come out tomorrow and do it next week--to accept yourrecommendation and then have a consultation before we ease again. Inother words, it could be three times in something over a month.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me say that I think it wouldbe a mistake, short of some extraordinary event, to move again inanother week or so. I don't think that's a good--MR. GUFFEY. What is the exact effect of an asymmetricaldirective, then?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Personally, I'm saying we're going tohave to go through December 18th. In other words, if a situationemerges in which the economy continues to soften, I would considerthat what we're dealing with is early December, something of thatsort. Let me put it this way: I don't think it would be wise to tryto formulate exactly what would be done. If it is sufficientlyambiguous and a difficult decision to make, I think it would beappropriate to call a telephone meeting and get the advice of thisCommittee. It may not be that way; it may be as it was, for example,for quite a while when we were asymmetric and didn't move for weeksfrom one period to the next. It's going to depend on events.MR. GUFFEY. I understand that, and you have been very promptto call a consultation under the circumstances you've just described.I guess maybe I need some clarification of what a symmetrical andasymmetrical directive mean then. Because if I understood what hasbeen discussed before an asymmetrical directive would give theChairman the flexibility to move without consultation one time in theintermeeting period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I agree with that. The only reason Iprefer the asymmetrical language is that it's my impression of theforces we are looking at that it is more likely that we will be movingdown than moving up. That's all it means. Frankly, I'm not certainthat it really has that much operational significance because if theeconomic events are clear enough, it's not going to matter one way orthe other what that tilt is.-43-11/13/90MR. ANGELL. In a sense you didn't want to change thedirective; you wanted to leave it the way it was?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's correct.MR. ANGELL. But basically, you have a kind of balance inyour recommendation, which is a little unusual.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I support your recommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I support it as well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I support it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. I think it's the least-worst [position] and Isupport it. I'm concerned about the fragility issue, but I'm not sureany greater move would do anything beneficial; it may not.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. My preference would be "B," although I couldsupport this. One of the things I worry about a little is all thisprior unfortunate dialogue and how through comments the Administrationhas made and so forth we sort of have been linked into this budgetprocess. I'd really prefer to do something after more time has passedbecause I think all that runs fundamentally to our credibility. Iguess the reason I'm worried about it is the point Jerry and otherswere making about the dollar. I think we really have to guard ourcredibility because when it comes to defending the dollar we're reallythe only act in town. So, that gives me some concern; but I can livewith [your proposal].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The move we made at the time the budgetagreement occurred was not interpreted as a roaring--MR. MELZER. No, I understand that. I just worry that thismight be interpreted as a second installment, and I don't like thatlinkage.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's right, but when they seethe minutes of the last meeting I'm not--. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I'll support it, although I wish we could go 50basis points, maybe just based on my having a negative--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I'm more in the Melzer-Guffey camp on this inthe sense that the economy does really appear to be softening up, butI think the reasons have to do with structural problems that we've all-44-11/13/90talked about, as well as the oil price shock, not necessarily Fed-typepolicy. I'm not sure there's much we ought to do about that. I dothink we ought to guard against the error of having a continuation ofmoney growth that is so low that we will shock the economy. Now, twomonths doesn't make a trend, but given the other things that peoplehave talked about here in terms of a weak economy and fragility in thebanking system, I can go along with your proposal. I would like todelay it, but I won't make a big issue out of that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. I support it, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. I concur, Mr. Chairman. I do feel a little ofthe sentiment that Tom Melzer expressed.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I support it; I think it's fully consistentwith the reduction in long rates that we've seen.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can the Secretary read the appropriatedirective?MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to decrease slightly theexisting degree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking account ofprogress toward price stability, the strength of the businessexpansion, the behavior of the monetary aggregates, and developmentsin foreign exchange and domestic financial markets, slightly greaterreserve restraint might or somewhat lesser reserve restraint would beacceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserveconditions are expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 overthe period from September through December at annual rates of about"--I'm not sure what--MR. KOHN. 1-1/2 and 0.MR. BERNARD. --"1-1/2 and 0 percent respectively." Therewould be no final sentence.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's no final sentence. Would theSecretary call the roll?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Can we live with saying 1 to 2percent or something instead of putting that 0 in there?MR. KOHN. Zero? Can you have 1 to 2 percent on M2 and justforget M3? The 0 is for M3.MR. MULLINS. How about 1/2?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Say "M2 and M3 in the range of 1 to2 percent" or something like that.MR. KOHN. Just forget about M3?-45-11/13/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Leave M3 out.MR. MULLINS. Don't you think people will read that as M2targeting?SPEAKER(?). As a change.MR. KELLEY. We ought to call all the Fed watchers rightthere.MR. SYRON. Yes, give them two things to talk about: no lastsentence and no M3!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The minutes will have captured thesubstance of these changes; there is no problem.MR. LAWARE. They'll assume that we're going back to Ml.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't know. Don, can you accept 1 to2 percent for M3 as well?MR. KOHN. Sure. I think we won't get it, but that's fine.MR. ANGELL. Why do that?MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Hoskins YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Seger YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next meeting is on December 18th.END OF MEETING