Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeFebruary 6-7, 1990A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, February 6, 1990, at 2:30 p.m. and wascontinued on Wednesday, February 7, 1990, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneBoykinHoskinsJohnsonKelleyLaWareSegerSternMessrs. Black, Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis,and Boston, respectivelyKohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPatrikis , Deputy General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, Promisel,Rolnick, Rosenblum, Siegman, Simpson, andStockton, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1. Attended Wednesday session only.Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Reinhart and Wilcox, Economists, Divisions ofMonetary Affairs and Research and Statistics,respectively, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, T. Davis, Scheld, andMs. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of St. Louis, San Francisco, Richmond,Kansas City, Chicago, and Atlanta, respectivelyMr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof BostonMs. Meulendyke, Manager, Open Market Operations,Federal Reserve Bank of New York2. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussionof the economic outlook and its longer-run objectives for monetaryand debt aggregates.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofFebruary 6-7, 1990February 6, 1990--Afternoon Session[Secretary's note: There is no transcript of the first partof this meeting, which included the Committee's action to approve theminutes of the previous meeting, the election of the Chairman and ViceChairman of the Committee for the year ahead, the selection of staffofficers of the Committee, a review of the various Committeeauthorizations, directives, and other policy instruments, and themembers' questions following the reports by the Managers for domesticand foreign currency operations. The texts of the Managers' reportsare attached. The Committee's decisions on the various matters listedabove, including its vote to ratify the Managers' transactions duringthe intermeeting period, were reported in the minutes for thismeeting.]MESSRS. CROSS & STERNLIGHT. [Statements--see Appendix.]MESSRS. PRELL & TRUMAN. [Statements--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for the gentlemen?MR. JOHNSON. First to Mike: Given the fact that theinflation picture remains stable in spite of slower growth, I waslooking at the profits trend and it's down. There is quite a profitsqueeze going on. If we hold nominal demand pretty much in check,given the profits picture, doesn't something have to give? Wouldn'tyou expect labor costs to come down, maybe through layoffs orsomething? How can those weak profits persist when there's no avenuefor changing them in terms of nominal demand? Shouldn't there be acutback in costs or at least a recession or something?MR. PRELL. Well, there are a couple of pieces to that andthey are both areas in which researchers have argued a great deal andhave not reached definitive conclusions. One is the influence ofprofits per se on business spending. I don't think [the outlook for]that is favorable, and I indicated that profits and the cash flowpicture are considerations in our weak investment forecast. Whetherthat influence should be stronger and we should have an even weakerinvestment picture is an arguable proposition. As it stands ourforecast is considerably weaker than the Commerce Department's P&Esurvey would suggest and weaker than some other forecasts. But thatcrunch in profits, I think, does raise some questions. I would notethat corporations are paying out a lot of their revenue to debtholders. And if you look at the return to capital in forms of bothdebt and equity, this doesn't look as low in historical terms asprofit share alone. But it's a factor that one needs to keep in mind.Now, on the price side and the wage side, I think wages havea considerable momentum. What one picks up looking historically atdecelerations in wages that come with higher unemployment is thatthose are times when typically there is weaker profitability too.Whether there's an independent influence here is the question. But Iwould think that this certainly would steel many managers in theirnegotiations with labor. They want to try to do something aboutimproving their profit margins and one way to go about that is to be2/6-7/90tougher on the wage side. That may lend itself to some contentiousnegotiations in the unionized sector. But in general I think thatwhole complex of weak demand and low profits is going to be puttingsome squeeze on wages. We have a gradual deceleration. It's obscuredin 1990 by the big payroll tax and minimum wage effects; it's less soin 1991. But we tried to take those factors into account.MR. JOHNSON. Okay, thanks. A question for Ted on thedollar, and this is something I raised yesterday too [at the Boardbriefing]: I realize the dollar has depreciated from the peak in 1989,but I don't think it really has depreciated over the whole year.There have been a lot of wiggles since the dollar sort of settled downin 1987. I just have a little trouble with the secular depreciationin the staff forecast. I realize that the external claims issue is atheoretical issue that may support the dollar depreciation, but ofcourse monetary policy may have something to do with that. In lookingat these international trends, even though you're projecting slightlylower inflation for the foreign countries, based on this recent dollardepreciation, than for the United States, what we see right now isalmost complete convergence in price trends. It's prospective, Ithink--going forward to what the inflation trends will be. What I'mstruck by is the lower left panel on Chart 17, which shows that rightnow we have almost complete convergence in prices. I agree thatexpectations play a part in that, but with convergence in inflationrates we still have a slight interest differential advantage. It hasnarrowed quite a bit and I guess you have to look at the changes asone factor. But if prices converge rather than break apart like this,given where interest rate levels are now--we're still slightly higherthan Germany in terms of nominal interest rate levels and we're stillconsiderably higher than the Japanese even though that has narrowed--I'm not sure that dollar depreciation is in the cards. I would saythat, obviously, if inflation diverges again, maybe to the degree youhave [in the forecast], there is some modest [depreciation] in theworks. But what do you say to that?MR. TRUMAN. Well, several things. One point is thatinflation in Germany and Japan, of course, is lower than the averagethat is shown there, so that--MR. JOHNSON. But we're talking about the trade-weighteddollar.MR. TRUMAN. But the relevant interest rates adjusted forinflation, at least the way we've done it, are the ones in Chart 15where real interest rates in the United States are below those abroad.And that is, I think, the question. As we've calculated those realinterest rates, there is some weight given to the forecast goingforward and, equally I might add, to what has happened over the pastyear and a half. To the extent that we have overestimated the declineof inflation abroad, we have overestimated the level of real interestrates in those countries. Now, a lot of the decline comes from Canadaand the United Kingdom, two economies that have moved into a fairlyweak aggregate demand condition. Our projection is that, much as inthe United States but sooner, that will begin to have an impact on theinflation situation. The other part of the decline is more of astatistical artifact and has to do with the fact that a couple ofthese countries--Germany and Japan are two in particular--had asomewhat artificial boosting of CPI numbers last year, which is going2/6-7/90to be wiped out this year. So, you have had either an understatementof real interest rates this year or an overstatement of real interestrates next year depending on what you want to say about that. As Isaid in my presentation of the forecast, the decline of the dollar inthis period is hardly precipitous and does not have a dramatic impacton the forecast on balance. It has some impact on the 1991 level ofactivity and prices and so forth. But in and of itself, given thelevel of the dollar where it is today, it has relatively little impacton the forecast for 1990.MR. JOHNSON. Okay. One last question, Mr. Chairman, on thisrecent turnaround in bond rates: I noticed in reading some of thecommentary that was submitted to the FOMC, and in Steve Axilrod'scomments and some others' too recently, it has been argued that theturnaround in bond rates--since most of it is real and not nominal--represents an effective tightening of policy. I don't know whatpolicy necessarily can do about it, but the fact is that some analystsare saying that it represents a relatively tighter situation, let'sput it that way, in the economy. I just wonder what you think aboutthat. To me that's almost the other side of the coin of the questionI have been asking for a long time here: Given the fact that long-termreal interest rates were coming down, was that stimulative? I'm alittle skeptical about the notion that the [more recent] turnaround isan effective tightening--as much as I was skeptical about thedowntrend in long rates [being an] easing--because the implication isalmost that the funds rate should come down further if we want aneffective tightening. What is your response to some of thatcommentary about the turnaround in the long rates? Suppose most of itis real.MR. PRELL. Well, as we factor all that, there are threethings that have happened on the financial front recently. The dollarhas come down and, for the last few months, the dollar has tended tooutpace our expectations on the down side. Short-term interest rateshave come down and they clearly are a borrowing cost for a number ofbusinesses and households. They probably have come down veryconsiderably in real terms in the very short run. We view that risein long rates as being at least partially a real increase; it is morethan that long-term inflation expectations have risen. GovernorAngell referred to one thing that may have some persistence here onthe energy front beyond just the heating oil crunch in December. But,basically, we've viewed that as being at least in considerable part areal increase, and it has shown through in our forecast, particularlyin the construction area. Mortgage rates, both nominal and real, area factor in this forecast and, certainly, that was one element. So,these things have all sort of balanced out in the greater scheme ofthings with our dollar forecast. It has tended to buoy net exports asa contributor to GNP as we look out, but interest rate movements onnet probably have tended to damp domestic demands somewhat. We'vecome out with essentially the same GNP forecast.MR. PARRY. Isn't there some suggestion that the increase inlong-term rates could be due to higher inflation expectations? I notethat the surveys we have available now cover inflation over a shortertimeframe but are indicative perhaps of a change in thoughts aboutinflation. In addition, some people have been concluding that theprobabilities of recession are somewhat less now than they were amonth or so ago. All of that would be consistent with the idea that2/6-7/90we have upward pressure on interest rates in the long-term end of themarket for domestic purposes as a reflection of changed inflationaryexpectations.MR. PRELL. As I tried to suggest, without putting a finepoint on this, we've assumed that the rise in nominal long rates ispart inflation premium and part real. It has been a big move and Ithink that real part is not insignificant.MR. JOHNSON. It's a difficult question. The move has beentoo sharp. The long-run inflationary expectations surveys have tickedup slightly, but not very much. At least the only one I've seen--Hoey--has hardly moved.MR. PRELL. Well, actually, Hoey hasn't done a survey sincethis recent run-up of the curve. So, for what it's worth, we don'thave that one to look at.MR. JOHNSON. I guess so. Okay. But I think most peoplewould say there's a significant real component to it even if you doworry a little about the upturn in inflation expectations. Oneplausible explanation is that some sort of positive real rate increaseis not necessarily contractionary. There are the developments inEurope; export markets may be looking better.MR. PRELL. That's one of the problems with looking at realrates as a gauge of monetary policy. It's an outcome of both monetaryfactors and expected returns on capital. And, yes, this is a world-wide phenomenon in the sense that you were addressing before becausegrowth prospects and returns on capital may be higher owing todevelopments in Eastern Europe. It's hard to believe that's 70 basispoints worth, but--MR. JOHNSON. No, but a combination of some--MR. PRELL. And with the stronger cyclical indicators--theorders figures and so on--maybe there is some element of elevation inpeople's expected returns on real investment.MR. KOHN. Or [it may reflect] their expectations of what theequilibrium real rate is not only because of Eastern Europe butbecause the stronger data suggested to them that the economy could goalong with sustained growth at higher rates than they previously hadthought.MR. JOHNSON. Right. What I'm thinking is that to the extentthat is part of the story, that's not necessarily a contractionaryphenomenon.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. This was a very complete presentation and I justhad two technical questions. My first technical question has to dowith the composition of auto sales as shown on Chart 5. As you know,we've been hearing for a long time a lot of anecdotal information frompeople in the auto dealership business and usually in the Big Threedealership business. I'm wondering if there's a possibility thatwe're giving that too much weight. Going back to 1987, say, if one2/6-7/90looks at the increase in the number of domestically produced foreignnameplate units--and from what I understand just from reading--in manycases the input [unintelligible], and in some cases engines, areproduced domestically in the United States. It's possible that wemade a little too much at some point of the anecdotal information onthe decline in the auto industry because of our natural instinct tolook at the auto industry as Ford, Chrysler, and General Motors.MR. PRELL. Well, I'm inclined to think that that's true.There is quantitative evidence of the increasing role of foreign partsproducers in providing inputs to the transplants. It has become avery complicated international market. The point I was making wasthat in terms of future employment prospects I don't think the BigThree are stripped down yet enough. They are carrying a substantialamount of excess capacity, particularly at GM. They're not operatingas efficiently as they're going to have to. So, while the transplantsare probably going to be expanding employment somewhat over the nextcouple of years, the net may be a negative from this decline in autodemand because the Big Three really need to shrink some.MR. SYRON. I don't disagree with that, but given thedemographics and the cycle of car financing and so forth, there is aquestion of just how responsive much of this is to interest rates.MR. PRELL. Well, that's true. As I said, I think the stockout there has become relatively ample. There is that financingquestion and the fact that with long maturity automobile loans ittakes a long time to build up any positive equity. So the automobilemanufacturers think that as a short-run factor there isn't theopportunity in many people's minds to trade in as rapidly. Thatshouldn't be a big factor over time in affecting automobile demand.But that is something they worry about; there's no doubt about it.MR. SYRON. Also, if you look at the technical issues onthis, cars are lasting longer as well.MR. PRELL. Average life has been increasing and it may bebecause of improved quality.MR. SYRON. The second technical question, picking up onsomething Governor Angell said, has to do with the outlook on oilprices. On Chart 20, in looking at the price per barrel on oil, whatis the general outlook that you've factored in here in terms ofnatural gas suppliers? I hear from a lot of people that the naturalgas bubble is starting to peter out and that there are concerns aboutpipeline capacity. I thought maybe I should mention this, since we'vehad very substantial cutbacks in interruptable service in theNortheast.MR. TRUMAN. Natural gas belongs on the other side of thetable.MR. PRELL. I was afraid he was going to say that! I mustconfess I have not developed great expertise on the natural gasbubble. Yes, it is certainly widely discussed that the situation ischanging, and in our forecast we have natural gas prices rising 4 to4-1/2 percent per year in 1990-91. There is some firmness there inthe long-run forecast. Fortunately, there are people who provide2/6-7/90inputs to this process who are more knowledgeable than I. I suspectthere are others around the table here who can speak with moreknowledge on that.MR. SYRON. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, Governor Johnson's questioningabout these real long-term interest rates prompted me to look at thefootnotes on Chart 15 down in the lower left-hand corner where thereare three asterisks. That says inflation is estimated by a 36-monthcentered moving average of actual inflation, forecast by staff [whereneeded]. Does that mean that the last figure has 18 months offorecasting in it?MR. TRUMAN. Absolutely. That's what I meant when I said toGovernor Johnson that to some extent the higher real interest ratestoday reflect our assumption that inflation will be lower tomorrow inthe foreign countries. As Mike was saying, there is a certaincircularity in that construction. The historical series gives you anactual centered forecast.MR. PRELL. If you look at the survey-based expectations forthe foreseeable future or at Hoey's last survey, for example, he'slooking at 4-1/2 percent or something like that for 10 years. Andthat would not be grossly out of line with what is built into thesenumbers for the United States.MR. JOHNSON. But I think you could argue that inflationexpectations in those other industrial countries have gone upsignificantly.MR. TRUMAN. Well, that's a possibility. As I said, we areassuming that inflation will be lower. Now, if you add anotherpercentage point to foreign inflation relative to our forecast andkeep oil unchanged, then that differential is going to drop from 150basis points to 50 basis points. [Unintelligible] absolutely. Andthere may be an expectational element built into that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Yes. Ordinarily, for many years, we've had afull employment Federal budget deficit. What is the change from 1989fiscal year to 1991 fiscal year in the full employment deficit?MR. PRELL. I can give it to you on a calendar-year basis.MR. ANGELL. Okay, that's fine.MR. PRELL. The change in the high employment budget was $11billion in 1989 and then we reverse sign to minus $34 billion in 1990and minus $44 billion in 1991.MR. ANGELL. Would the high employment deficit or the actualdeficit be the best measure of fiscal restraint? Now, I ask that,even though I don't understand what fiscal restraint is.2/6-7/90MR. PRELL. Clearly, we'd opt for the high employment overthe actual budget deficit as a measure. But even that number has itsshortcomings--the treatment of interest, for example. There are anumber of things that bother us about that and that's why we investedthe effort in coming up with some new measures of fiscal impetus,which I didn't cite this time. Basically those numbers are headed inthe direction of restraint in '89, '90, and '91 and especially in '90.MR. HOSKINS. Where do you put Senator Moynihan?MR. PRELL. Senator Moynihan?MR. HOSKINS. The fact that you're using high employment--MR. PRELL. I don't know what the net of Senator Moynihanwould be.MR. ANGELL. Do you think of the FSLIC bailout cost as beingdifferent in terms of traditional fiscal effects?MR. PRELL. Well, either the high employment measure or ourown fiscal impetus measures would be looking at national income andproduct accounts data that would abstract the purely financialtransactions. So, that wouldn't be a factor in our thinking.Basically, the $30 billion that I cited is roughly that in eitherunified budget accounting or national income accounting. And that'sin a sense a discretionary budget action and a reasonable measure ofwhat we think fiscal policy is doing independently.MR. ANGELL. Well, these questions are designed to get to thebottom line question which is: With monetary policy and sometendencies toward real interest rates being maintained at a levelconsistent with path and with some fiscal restraint, why does theforecast assume that there's that much improvement in the level ofeconomic activity in 1991?MR. PRELL. Well, basically what we have is high rates andfiscal restraint holding growth below the long-run trend. We'reopening up a gap over that period of time. But we do have the effectsof the dollar working through here to provide some increased demandfor U.S.-produced goods. And that tends to hold [activity] up whiledomestic demand is being more directly affected by the monetary andfiscal restraint.MR. ANGELL. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Mike, I'm not sure I understand your personalincome forecast. If I look at the middle panel of Chart 10, yournumbers for '90 and '91 are comparable with '80, '81, and '82. But atbest it looks like it stays on the weak side even given your modestgrowth path.MR. PRELL. Well, we looked at that and asked ourselves thesame question and, obviously, we ended up with these numbers after allof that. There is a marked slowing of employment growth in thisforecast; we have increases in employment in payrolls of about 1-1/42/6-7/90percent in the two years. We have another negative effect on realdisposable income coming through the terms of trade effect as theprice of imported goods rises relatively rapidly. That tends tocreate some wedge between product prices and consumer prices. It's asmall thing, but it's tending to work in that direction. This is aneconomy in which we have very slow growth. We have some productivityincrease and we think this is internally consistent. But it is a verylow growth and it raises some questions, I think, about how this kindof situation will be perceived by consumers. We have not assumed thatthere will be any extraordinary change in their behavior, despite thisprolonged period of slow growth. One needs to keep in mind throughoutthis, as we look at the future, that to the extent the population isgrowing more slowly we're going to get [unintelligible] too.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions? If not, can westart our Committee discussion? Who would like to start off?MR. BLACK. I think they all want to go home!MR. KELLEY. No comment.MR. KEEHN. Comparing our forecast versus the Board staff's,I must say ours is somewhat stronger. We are looking for an increasein GNP, fourth quarter over fourth quarter, of about 2 to 2-1/4percent. Our differences are not all that large in any particularcategory. But going down the whole list there does seem to be a bitstronger growth in most of the categories. Personal consumption, forexample, in our forecast is higher and I think durable goods are apart of that; I'm sure autos have some relationship there. Businessfixed investment also is stronger in our forecast; our housing numberis somewhat higher. There are no major differences but, as I say, wehave a higher number in most of the categories. But with regard tothis interest rate increase we have had, if that were to continue atits current level for any length of time and become more pervasive, itmight raise some questions about the strength of our forecast.Moving to the District economy, our District continues tohave two economies, really: the auto and auto-related activities, andthen everything else. On the auto side, despite the improvement inthe sales level in January, the attitudes are awfully grim. Plantswere basically shut down in the early part of January; some havereopened since but the schedules for the remainder of the firstquarter are really very low. And the comments about the second-quarter production schedules are very cautionary. Everybody is sayingthat they certainly are going to be higher than the first quarter butlower than the second quarter of last year. But people are unwillingto be much more precise than that. January's sales level has reducedauto inventories to about 70 to 80 days' supply, down from about 100days' supply at the end of the year. Despite that, and this is reallya very difficult issue, the dealers just are not ordering more cars.About half of the dealers, as I understand it, are still losing money.They really do have a grim attitude and are just simply at the pointof not buying more cars. Therefore, we see the risk on the productionside as down and not up. Also, on the outlook for sales of heavy dutyand medium size trucks, they had a bad year last year and the outlookfor this year is pretty grim. Despite that, no one I talk to suggestsa forecast in terms of cars and light trucks lower than, say, 14 to2/6-7/9014-1/2 million units. As I've commented before, yes, that's down fromother years, but comparatively it's still not all that bad.Other parts of the District, I think, are moving along at areasonably good pace. The steel business is surprisingly good despitethis slowdown in auto orders; demand for steel for appliances andstructural items for other sectors of the economy is doing prettywell. The level of incoming orders after the turn of the yeargenerally looks good for this year. And I'm told that in the steelindustry the actual facts are better than the perceived facts.Construction activity in the District is reasonably strong; bothcommercial and residential numbers are higher, I think, than thenational numbers. And we have a surprising number of new officeprojects, particularly in the Chicago area. Vacancy rates are movingup a little but are not yet out of line. In agricultural equipment,business looks good; the expectation is for an increase in unit salesof 4 to 5 percent this year over last year. And in agricultureitself, the outlook is positive. Crop prices are down and farm incomeprobably is going to be down a bit, but if we have a reasonable breakon moisture and some rains this spring and summer, the outlook thereis pretty good. As for retail sales in the District, the results inDecember were good and so far in January they have held up. So, net,excluding autos, we think that the attitudes are reasonably positive.There is no growing concern yet about accelerating risks on therecession side. But having said that, the big caveat is the autoindustry. I think the auto sales will pick up, particularly in thesecond half; if that's not true, of course, the outlook will bedifferent.Finally, on the inflation outlook, our numbers are a littlemore positive than the Board staff's. We're expecting moderation ininflation this year to 4 percent or perhaps even a little lower by theend of the year. The people I talk to say that raw materials pricesin many cases seem to be down. Steel, aluminum, and copper prices,for example, are down. And I don't sense any strong upward pressureon the wage side. Therefore, our outlook for the inflation situationis a little better. That's not to say it's acceptable to haveinflation of, say, 4 to 4-1/2 percent on a continued basis and,obviously, that has some monetary policy implications. But presumablywe'll talk about that later.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, turning first to the nationaleconomy: At current levels of interest rates we would expect real GNPat slightly less than 2 percent for this year. However, we do expectthe composition of growth to be quite different from that in theGreenbook. For example, we are forecasting stronger consumer spendingas a result of past strength in disposable income. Also, we areprojecting a much smaller correction of nonfarm inventory investmentfrom its fourth-quarter high. However, due to a long lag in thedollar's influence on trade, we don't expect significant improvementin real net exports until 1991. With regard to inflation, we expectthe GNP fixed-weight index to average between 4 and 4-1/2 percent thisyear. Mild upward pressure on inflation should come from the price ofoil, previous increases in the value of the dollar, and tight labormarkets. If economic growth is moderate, pressures from the labormarket should begin to subside late this year. But I really don't2/6-7/90expect to see any downward pressures on inflation--certainly on theunderlying rate of inflation--until late next year.If I may turn to the District economy, the economy in theWest continues to exhibit healthy growth. We took a look at theTwelfth District employment growth last year and I think the numbersare really extraordinary. From December 1988 until December 1989 wesaw employment in the District grow 3.2 percent; this compared to 2.3percent growth for the nation--an extremely wide difference. Concernhas been expressed about a collapse of California's real estatemarket. Our admittedly not detailed analysis--but I think it has beenfairly careful--indicates that those concerns probably are notwarranted. The housing market does not appear to be overbuilt inCalifornia. From 1984 to 1988 the ratio of new residents to new homepermits was about 2 in California. The ratio for the nation was 1.1;in New England it's 0.8. The point is that we have had a very largeincrease in in-migration into the state and that has increased thedemand for housing rather substantially. In addition, we have notseen a significant fall-off, at least to date, in home sales. Theyare down a bit from 1988 but not nearly as low as the average for thefive years that preceded 1988. Also, there has been some decline inthe state's median home price but that appears to be a change in thecomposition of homes sold. We're seeing a lot of strength in thecentral valley of California and in the Riverside-San Bernardino area--where the price of housing is quite a bit less--and less strength inthe more urban areas. Meanwhile, the market for single-family homesin the Pacific Northwest is really booming, particularly in the PugetSound area. Bidding wars have become common and home values areincreasing at a yearly rate of 20 to 25 percent in many parts of thatarea. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, if I may start with theDistrict, I would say that the Sixth District's economy is pretty muchthe same as that of the nation--as good or as bad, depending on howyou want to put it. What continues to impress me is the verypessimistic attitude that people I talk to generally have about theeconomy. There's a very pronounced fear of recession and I would saya distressing lack of interest in reducing inflation. The concernabout recession seems to center basically on the auto sector and itseffect on the economy and the weak real estate market as well as theincreasing loan delinquencies and the number of personal bankruptciesthat are showing up. The manufacturing sector in the Districtcontinues to be quite soft, not only in autos but in relatedactivities that are particularly affected by import competition.That's particularly true of the apparel and textile industries, whereactivity is slowing down and inventories are beginning to build. Andin the [unintelligible] and that's for a period of time when importsare usually not high, the end of a year. The petrochemical industry,however, remains a very strong industry in the District, particularlyin the Gulf Coast [area] of Louisiana.The housing market is just saturated with high inventories ofunsold houses. New construction is obviously quite sluggish as aresult. We did get in the District generally an uptick in officeconstruction toward the end of the year, but that was mostly due toactivity in Atlanta. And that gives rise to some concern because even-10-2/6-7/90though we'll get a temporary boost from that kind of construction andan increase in employment, it's definitely going to create problemsdown the line. We have something like 8 or 9 projects in the city ofAtlanta of 650,000 or more square feet and pre-leasing is very, verylow at this time. So I think that's going to be a problem. We've hadsome uptick in the energy sector. Two of the major oil companies areadding platforms and the independents are becoming a little moreactive in domestic exploration and the rig count is up somewhat. Imentioned natural gas before; natural gas production is emerging as asource of strength in the District and that will be a particular helpto Louisiana.The very cold weather that we had in December took its tollin Florida. There was a 30 percent loss in the citrus crop, althoughthe price impacts are being partially offset by imports from Brazil.This is in juice basically. There were fears earlier that the treeshad been badly damaged or killed but that turns out not to be thecase; most of them were not. The winter vegetable situation is moreserious because that sector was hit much more severely than the citruscrop. For tomatoes, for example, where Florida is the major sourcefor the country as a whole, imports from Mexico are not going to besufficient to offset price pressures. And fresh vegetable prices areup by about 30 to 40 percent. If past experience is borne out, thisshould add about .2 or .3 to the CPI on a year-over-year basis. Butin general in the District, we're not seeing any real pressures onprices and we don't seem to have any labor pressures at the presenttime.Turning to the national economy, our forecast in Atlanta issomewhat stronger than the Greenbook forecast. We have growth ataround 2 percent in real terms for both 1990 and 1991. We're somewhathigher in consumer spending but not significantly. The major pointsof difference would be in business fixed investment and also in theinventory correction. We have a somewhat higher inventory formationrate than the Greenbook. Because of that somewhat faster growth ourunemployment rate is obviously a little lower. Unfortunately, ourinflation forecast is pretty much in line with the Greenbook forecast,and I just don't see very much hope on that side. We're seeing thattrend of inflation right through 1991 and I think we continue to bevery vulnerable on the price side. The incoming data for the firstquarter will probably overstate the price pressures but I still thinkthat we're looking--in the services sector particularly--at aninflation rate stuck at 5 percent. So, in terms of monetary policy, Ithink we have a tough road to walk.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, our projections for the Humphrey-Hawkins report are very similar to those of the Greenbook on both GNPand unemployment. We basically agree with what I think the Greenbookis saying: that the economy seems to be passing through an inventorycorrection that's largely centered in manufacturing and that thecorrection ought to be pretty well completed during the first quarterof this year. At the last meeting we felt that the risk of error wason the down side and this time we've shifted to the point that we nowhave a sense that the risks are about evenly divided on each side.We've been impressed by how quickly the domestic automobile industryhas adjusted or moved to adjust its inventories downward, and we are-11-2/6-7/90encouraged by the strength of orders for durables goods and also fornondefense capital goods. So this suggests to us that manufacturingmay be stronger than we thought and also that business outlays for newequipment may be somewhat better than we thought earlier.At the same time, I have to say that I'm really concernedabout these projections for inflation that the staff has for 1991 aswell as 1990. They show, in essence, no further progress in bringinginflation down from the present rate and, in fact, the CPI less foodand energy is shown as actually increasing a notch in 1990 and againin 1991. The same is true of the fixed-weight GNP index. I think,like all of us of course, that that would be a very undesirableoutcome--to put it gently--in view of our stated goal of gettingprices down. I think it's essential that somehow or other we improveon this inflation performance shown in the Greenbook, and I'd like tosuggest that we keep this in mind when we work on our long-termtargets later on in this meeting. We're more optimistic on inflation,I should add, than the staff is.MR. PARRY. What was your estimate?MR. BLACK. We put in 4 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, if I could first turn to theDistrict economy, there is somewhat of a dichotomy in the New Englandeconomy between what statistical measures indicate and the level ofconfidence. In fact, if you look at the confidence survey that theConference Bureau does by census region, there was really a dramaticdecline over the last year: The region went from being the highest inthe nation with an expected outlook of 144 on the index to 72 now.So, we've had a 50 percent decline in confidence in the region in ayear. But according to the recent data that we've actually seen,personal income on a per capita basis grew faster in New England thannationally.As for other closely related regional data, employmentactually increased in the last two months of 1989 after decliningearlier in the year. The unemployment rate in the region now is about4.2 percent and the per capita income is still 124 percent of thenational average, so we were starting from quite a high base. Havingsaid that, we think a softening is inevitable. We do expect that theunemployment rate in the region will go up and will exceed thenational level and that there will be a concomitant decline in therelative rate of growth in personal income. Thus far, thedeterioration has largely been in the manufacturing and real estatesectors, exacerbated somewhat by newly emerging problems of financialinstitutions. If the only problem were in manufacturing because ofthe high-tech adjustment problems, one could be relatively sanguine.But I don't think that's the case. Looking at recent experience, eventhough we haven't had any real reason for boom/bust, we are goingthrough one now in the real estate and construction area. It's to thepoint now where if someone calls a financial institution that theyhaven't had a long-going relationship with to talk about a real estateloan, it's almost like one of these commercials where people on theother end of the line just laugh and say something like: "You must bekidding! We're not doing any more real estate loans unless we have a2/6-7/90well established relationship with you or unless you haveextraordinarily good collateral."So, there is a great deal of doom and gloom. This, ofcourse, has been reflected in retail sales. Our retail sales aroundChristmas were not terribly good, particularly in the durables area.And we have an emerging inventory problem in that area and in autosand other areas. I touched on the banking situation. The increasedrisk premia are having a compounding effect outside of real estate.We're hearing more and more, particularly from small and mid-sizebusinesses, about greater difficulty in obtaining C&I credit. I thinkthat's consistent with what we've shown in the loan officers survey.If you combine all of this with the severe fiscal problems and theessential political paralysis we have--certainly in Massachusetts andyou can see it starting to emerge in Connecticut to some extent--itjust doesn't paint a picture that is consistent with people havingexpectations that are going to keep spending up. Actually, we foundquite a contrast when we talked to our larger manufacturers in termsof their experience domestically, in the region, and internationally.First of all, I should say that from the point of view of a producer,the labor market situation has improved markedly in New England.Turnover rates are down dramatically. Even in our Bank, turnover onthe graveyard shift in the check production area is falling justastronomically.MR. LAWARE. Growth here is a wonderful thing.MR. SYRON. If you're on the buy side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You realize that the labor unions wouldsay that was awful; you say it's wonderful.MR. SYRON. That's right, but we are not in an AFL-CIOmeeting. And they have a little different view than we do on what isconsidered wage inflation as well. In the case of our largemanufacturers, we have an interesting phenomenon going on. Many ofthem are suppliers to both the aerospace and the auto industries, andthey certainly have seen a softening in their supplies to the autoindustry. But you may have noticed that firms like Textron aresupplying more to the aerospace industry even though their autobusiness is off. Big gains in aircraft are helping us out a lot. Interms of forward-looking indicators, we do have a large paperindustry, as you know, and actually that area is somewhat worrisome.Paper and packaging materials tend to lead national cycles somewhat,and the demand for that does seem to be down and capacity utilizationis down. Interestingly, thus far, defense really has not been thatmuch of a drag on the regional economy and that's of course because alot of what we do is in the research and development area. But largeproducers like Raytheon are attempting rather feverishly to diversify.Nationally, our forecast is not greatly different from theGreenbook. It's just about the same in terms of unemployment andinflation; we have slightly stronger growth. But we think the economyhas softened. Where I would have said before that we thought therisks were somewhat symmetric, I think the risks now are on the downside for the economy. Obviously, we'll get into this when we talkabout policy, but I think we're in a very difficult situation in thatwe're walking on this razor's edge. There's a real question of how2/6-7/90long we will be able to walk on the razor's edge before getting cut orfalling off and getting bruised. Perhaps where we sit depends onwhere we stand, but I think this question of financial fragility isreally something that can't be taken entirely lightly. Having saidthat, I think that the arguments about concerns for greater inflationas compared to the softening of the economy can work both ways againstfragility, which puts us in an extremely difficult bind in policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, there's little new to report as far as theDistrict economy is concerned. We've had a modest and sustainableexpansion underway for a long time now. It seems to be continuing andit seems to be reasonably well balanced both by economic sector and byregion of the District for the most part. There is some pessimism andconcern around and that has been true for a while. But for the mostpart that doesn't seem to be reflected in the actual numbers oneconomic performance. In talking to some business people I too hearreports about a leveling off or declines in some input prices,especially materials. But where you don't hear that, of course--and Ithink where the problem is to some degree--is in compensation.Clearly, if anything--at least in our area--it is accelerating. Partof it is the medical cost problem, but I don't think it's tiedexclusively to that. If you look at inflation from the wage andcompensation cost side, that's a distinct problem.As far as the national situation is concerned, as I suggestedwith that question I asked earlier, I think the economy will do a bitbetter in 1990 than the Greenbook suggests. I think the Greenbook isconservative in regard to real disposable income and growth inconsumer spending. As a consequence, I think we'll see a little morestrength there. It wouldn't alter the outlook radically in my view,but I think the economy will do a little better. As far as inflationis concerned nationally, I have been cautiously optimistic for sometime that we were going to succeed in bringing inflation down sometimesoon. I must admit my optimism is fading. I would simply note thatif you look at consumer prices excluding food and energy, the rate ofincrease has been stuck on a fourth quarter-over-fourth quarter basisin the 4 to 4-1/2 percent range since 1983. Actually, I think therewas one year that it was worse. But otherwise, it has been prettywell stuck there since 1983; we just haven't made any further progressover that whole timeframe.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, as far as the national economy goes, Iwould agree essentially with the Greenbook. We come out roughly thesame in terms of inflation and real growth.As for the region, the Mid-Atlantic states are about the sameas the nation as a whole--somewhere in between New England and theMidwest--with New Jersey having a few characteristics of New England,but not anywhere to the same degree of severity, and with Pennsylvaniaand Delaware being closer to the Midwest. Attitudes vary depending onwhere in the District and in what industry the people you talk to are;but if there is a majority attitude, I think it can be characterizedas somewhat more concern about economic prospects than, say, 6 monthsor a year ago. But there is a general expectation that the slowing-14-2/6-7/90that we're going through and the economic problems that we have arereally a brief interlude, just a pause. It's almost as if theexpansion of 7 years that we've had is so ingrained that people justthink it's going to carry through into the future. Looking beyond thenumbers and these current attitudes, I must say, as I listened to thechart show and leafed through these charts, I got the sense that thisis a forecast waiting for something to happen. Essentially, whatwe're doing in the real sector is keeping the inflation rate aboutsteady with subpar growth. That's not terribly satisfying; maybe it'sthe best we can do. Then, there's the whole business of financialfragility. For those of us sitting around the table what isespecially frustrating is that our room to maneuver is really very,very small. In that context I think this kind of muddling through isprobably about the best we can do, but it's not terribly satisfyingintellectually or otherwise.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. In our forecast we have inflation about the sameas the Board staff's forecast and somewhat less real growth--actually relatively weak real growth--and somewhat higher unemploymentas a result. I would characterize it, just because of the approachused in our shop, as the lagged effects of prior monetary restraint.In that connection, last July and then a year ago when we did theforecast and had to make an assumption about what we considered to bean appropriate monetary policy, it was rather a stretch in the sensethat money growth was so weak. We were trying to assume somethingreasonable in terms of 4 to 6 percent growth in narrow aggregates sothat it was difficult to see then how that would actually be realized.In contrast, this time around--for what it's worth--I think it's alittle easier to make the assumption, with which I agree, thatmonetary policy looking forward is on a more or less reasonable coursefrom the St. Louis perspective.As far as the District goes, again looking back, our regionaleconomy was considerably weaker in the first part of last year thanthe national economy. But in the most recent quarters, andparticularly in the latest three-month period, our employment is rightin line with national averages in the nonagricultural area andreflects almost identical weakness in the manufacturing area. We'vehad gains in medical and business services, finance, insurance andreal estate, and in construction. And the declines--and this has beenthe same pattern we have been seeing--are in electrical equipment,fabricated metal products, and transportation. Maybe the addition tothat list would be the fabricated metals as the weakness in autos hasfiltered back.You all know in the consumer durables areaI asked him not long ago whether hethought easier monetary policy would really help the problems in thatindustry and the answer was "no". He perceived the problems asdemographic, which is the same thing that's affecting housing. In theauto area we've all read that Chrysler has announced the shutdown ofthe No. 1 plant in Fenton. That will affect 4,000 workers, 2,000 morethan had already been laid off; the second shift had been laid offindefinitely. That closing will occur in September. And I think Imentioned in the past that at the No. 2 plant that produces mini-vans,where they're running just two shifts now, there had been a proposal-15-2/6-7/90to add a third shift. But there are different [union] locals at thesetwo plants and the local at the No. 2 plant didn't want to hearanything about integrating some of these other workers to put on athird shift. So, I don't know where Chrysler will pick up thatcapacity. There also is an expectation that Ford is going torepatriate some truck production from Brazil to a plant in Louisvillelater this year.In terms of the residential [construction] area, activity inour District has been essentially flat most recently compared todeclines nationally. There have been reports in the press of whatpeople characterize as very heavy traffic in January and somebetter-than-expected sales. In reports I've read, Si, we don't pickup quite the same negativism in terms of auto dealers; they were morepositive about what went on in January and the prospects there.That's just another perspective. Nonresidential construction has beenespecially strong, largely because of the large paper mill inArkansas; it's a $300 million facility where the contract was let inDecember. Finally, just a comment on the defense area: McDonnellDouglas is our largest employer and two defense programs are scheduledfor cancellation; the Defense Department has put out the F15 and theAV8. But generally the expectation is that McDonnell Douglas willmake this up with some aerospace contracts that they have and inaddition--and I guess you can afford this, Bob--with moves inproduction from California to the St. Louis facility. So right now interms of McDonnell Douglas there is not a lot of negativism about howthe cutbacks in defense will affect the local economy, although thereis indeed some uncertainty.The last comment I would make is that I've read some reportsand I heard some comments the other day that lending standards clearlyare being tightened as a result of developments in the S&L industryand elsewhere. One person who is in the business of arrangingfinancing for smaller companies mentioned to me that there's a viewthat the regulators are overreacting. Now, I suspect the regulatorsare being used as scapegoats by lenders who may not want to make theloans, but that tap dance is beginning to develop a little out there.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I'm running the risk here of being labeled thegloomy Gus of this organization, but my outlook is a bit gloomy. Isee manufacturing employment declining almost on a secular trend; theconstruction industry is hurting in a lot of regions; the automobileindustry is a hospital case--they're almost on a life support system--with incentives being pushed to try to push automobiles out ofinventory; retailing is rather soft and I think deeply troubled by theproblem of some of the bellwether companies in the industry being inbankruptcy and all the uncertainties that ride with that; corporateprofits are selectively dismal; and consumer attitudes and consumerwherewithal are certainly not expansive at this stage of the game.And while the trend is more positive, the level of both corporate andhousehold debt remains very high and I think that injects an elementof ominous fragility into this system. The capital markets arecertainly somewhat demoralized on an individual firm basis as well asin general terms. In the face of all that, I wonder if we aren't alittle overconfident in not expecting some further stagnation in theeconomy. Add to all those factors a troubled banking system and a-16-2/6-7/90real estate market that is laboring under the overhang of the RTCinventory, and I guess I'm just worried that we're sliding toward arecession. And because of the external factors we may have our handstied and not be able to do anything very substantial about it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. We have a forecast that's slightly strongerthan the staff's forecast, particularly if the current monetary growthrate of M2 remains near the upper end of the range for the rest of theyear. Around the District the slowdown in automobile productionobviously has hit us fairly hard, but it has not spilled over intoanything that we can find. We're also fortunate to have sometransplants that do quite well in the area. Capital goods and capitalspending are on a solid growth path according to our contacts--companies like Timken, Eaton, and Inland Steel. Our stainless steelmeasure that is drawn from the orders for stainless steel strip whichgoes on all consumer products is below last year but higher than thecompany expected. So that has turned up even though it's still atlower levels than it was last year at this time. And steel producerssay that first-quarter orders have picked up even from the autoindustry. I'll mention another set of forecasts, for what it's worth.We have a Fourth District round table meeting quarterly, whichinvolves economists from the financial as well as the manufacturingsectors, and their outlook for real growth is 2.1 percent withessentially the same monetary policy as in the Greenbook.For all these reasons, we think the risks remain on the highside of the outlook for 1990. Having said that, and taking account ofGovernor LaWare's and others' concerns, I remind myself that theforecast error of plus or minus 2 percentage points is certainlyenough to result in a recession, given the Greenbook forecast. So, Ishare the concerns. I also share Bob Black's concern that we havemade no progress with respect to inflation. And I think we shouldkeep that in mind when we set the targets tomorrow.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I'm in a bit of an unusualposition of being more optimistic than the Greenbook concerningdevelopments on the real side of the economy. I see real growth thisyear coming in at 2.1 percent--I don't know what that means--andconsiderably more inflationary pressures. I am very pessimistic aboutthe inflation outlook.Our District economy has been improving recently--actually toa greater extent than I had anticipated. We thought that the weaknessin the national economy would depress growth in our District more thanit has. To our surprise this has not happened, which seems to showthat there may be some underlying strength down our way. Ouremployment gains have exceeded the national rate during the last fewmonths for which data are available. That may not be sustainable,although we do have some anecdotal evidence that suggests that theattitude in this regard has shown improvement. In agriculture, we'restill reeling from the freeze. The lower Rio Grande Valley really hasbeen devastated. The citrus damage I think was greater than inFlorida, although we do have some insurance that will help tidegrowers over and cover some of that damage. The retail sector is not2/6-7/90robust but it has had a reasonably good year; there are year-over-yeargains. Our national retailers show much better gains in the Districtthan in the rest of the nation. Manufacturing is not doing very much.We have a little concern about the anticipated layoffs in the defense-related areas. Construction seems to be stabilizing and there is talkof the first signs of liquidity coming in. We were told that some ofthe Houston improvements, certainly in real estate, probably havemoved up our way. We've been told that raw land is actually sellingin the Dallas-Fort Worth area primarily for residential development.The energy situation is pretty stable, with possibly some improvementthere. I'll sum it up by saying that in our District, at least, theoverall outlook is improving. I can't resist saying, in listening tomy friend Dick Syron--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Try!MR. BOYKIN. I remember several years ago I gave a verycomparable report and my good friend Ed Boehne leaned across the tableand said "Boykin, that's a Texas problem." So, maybe that's just aNortheast problem.MR. SYRON. Now people in the rest of the country, instead ofsaying we're not another Texas, are saying we're not another NewEngland!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With regard to theforecast over the upcoming forecast period, for 1990 we're very closeto the Greenbook forecast--a tick stronger in real growth and veryclose to the projection for prices. There is very little differencein the CPI less food and energy.Turning now to the District economy, as I think all of youknow, agriculture has been on a recovery path now for a year and ahalf except in those areas where there have been dry conditions. Theconcern was that we would start a third year of drought there. Muchof that has been relieved with snow and rain across much of the WheatBelt, although the sub-soil moisture reserves are still very low.They will need more moisture to produce this wheat crop, apparently.But, given the moisture that has already fallen, there are somebrighter prospects there. Grain prices have slumped because of themoisture that has fallen but also because of improved soybeanconditions in South America and a backlog of corn-laden ships inRussia, all of which have begun to dampen commodity prices. On theother hand, cattle prices are virtually at an all-time high and, giventhe selloff, there's a good outlook for the agricultural sector in theperiod ahead.Energy prices, as everybody is aware, picked up in bothDecember and January because of the cold weather. Most of theoperators in our area believe that's only temporary and it has notencouraged them to expand their projections for additional drillingexploration or pumping from existing resources. As a matter of fact,the District rig count fell about 10 percent in December from 337 to303, if those numbers are to be believed. The manufacturing story isthe same in the Tenth District as it is elsewhere, particularly withrespect to the auto assembly problems. We are heavily involved with-18-2/6-7/90auto assemblies in the District. There had been temporary layoffs andI'm told that a relatively new, about a 3-year old, General Motorsplant in Kansas City will lay off an additional 700 at the end ofFebruary. One plant has been closed, though not this year;nonetheless it has taken its toll in that community. Unit sales ofgeneral aviation aircraft increased about 45 percent nationwide in1989 over 1988, but most of that increase--and we're fairly heavilyinvolved with general aviation aircraft manufacturing in the Wichitaarea--has been single-engine piston driven aircraft and fewer largejets. As a result, the value of shipments is down from 1988. Theconstruction industry, both non-residential and residential, isdepressed in each of the major cities in the area. There isn't agreat expectation for that to come back in the period ahead,particularly in the residential sector, as evidenced by the fact thata third fewer housing permits actually have been granted forresidential construction. As a result that sector is kind of on itsear. On the other hand, in each of the major metropolitan areas inthe District we have an unemployment figure that is less than thenational average. That does say that there is some income beinggenerated; [unintelligible] we probably will drag well behind thecontinued recovery on the national level.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, in terms of theoutlook, our staff forecast is virtually identical with Mike's andTed's both for this year and next. The only difference is that wehave domestic demand in 1990 a shade stronger. The wage/productivity/price components are for all intents and purposes identical to thesecond digit. As a matter of fact, in looking at the two forecaststhey're so close I'm inclined to think it raises the probability thatthey are both wrong!On the more anecdotal side, in talking to business people inboth small and large businesses, the impression I walk away with isthat if you nudge them a little or maybe twist their arm a littlethey'll buy into that kind of forecast. But I think the nagging, ifnot growing, sense of unease is that things might not turn out quitethat way. There has been a lot of talk about autos and real estate.I get the impression, reinforced by the earlier conversation abouttransplants, that there are a number of people who are beginning towonder if the auto situation is simply an inventory adjustment or ifthere might not be something more permanent there. The real estateside--and the Second District is small geographically, but there arestill a lot of people and a lot of buildings there--I would say is notby any stretch of the imagination in a calamitous state. As Ed said,New Jersey and I think especially maybe northern New Jersey--MR. BOEHNE. Central and northern.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. --is bordering on New England-typeconditions. But as far as New York is concerned, including LongIsland and upstate, that would not be the case at all. The generalimpression I have is that the residential market, including theupstate market which in people terms is big, is holding up okay withthe exception of the very high-end segment of the market--the $2million condos and the $1-1/2 million houses in Rye. And as far ascommercial real estate is concerned, again, we have not had even in-19-2/6-7/90New York City anything like the extent of the overbuilding problemthat characterizes many other major cities around the country. So,while there's some overhang of office space in New York City, it ismodest in comparison to many other cities around the country. Whileit's not going to be a source of strength by any stretch of theimagination, I think the real estate market, with the exception ofnorthern New Jersey, is probably not going to be any significant dragin terms of the overall national picture of the real estate sector.I did want to mention a point that Tom Melzer mentioned.There clearly is a pervasive tightening in credit standards indepository institutions of all sizes. And, Tommy, whether it's validor not, there is absolutely no question that lenders are alleging thatthey are being pounded upon by examiners. Some of what we're seeinghere may reflect that. Again, I can't tell whether it's giving them aconvenient excuse to say "no" when they were looking for an excuse orwhether there's something to it. But certainly that is what one hearsmore and more from institutions, large and small.There's another development that is somewhat noteworthy andthat is in the retail sector, which I think has been brought more tothe fore by the Campeau situation. It is very clear to me fromcomments by both suppliers and major retailers, includingthat have some debt service problems of their own butare clearly not in the camp of the Campeau group, that supplierproblems and even trade finance arrangements for these major retailersare now becoming a problem. While they kind of "snuck through" theChristmas season, we are beginning to hear a lot of commentary fromboth sides, including at the very big chains, that they're terriblyworried about their ability to get inventories into the stores for theEaster buying season. Easter, of course, is nowhere near as big asChristmas but it is not trivial in relation to the total amount ofretail sales from soft goods stores for the entire year. Now, whetherthat problem will begin to straighten itself out remains to be seen.But the commentary that I get, in the context of the Campeausituation, is that it's going to take a long, long, long time for thatto get unscrambled. And as long as it is not unscrambled,notwithstanding the theoretical protections to suppliers that grow outof the bankruptcy proceeding, getting a steady flow of merchandiseinto these stores except [by paying] cash may not be the easiest thingover the period ahead and possibly for an extended period of time.That, of course, bears a bit on the other situation that Ithink accounts for some of this sense of discomfort I referred toearlier, and that is the very obvious and continued shrinkage on WallStreet. Again, in one sense it's a relatively small sector of theeconomy, but I think it does have some psychological overhang in othersectors as well. Now, if any of you have read, as I have recently,Barbarians at the Gate you might be inclined to say that thatadjustment is overblown. Be that as it may, I think that toocontributes a bit to this sense of uneasiness I mentioned before.Having cited those factors that I think do account for thatsense of unease, I myself still think that the likely outcome issomething like the staff forecast. One thing consistent with that isthat we are getting reports that exports, especially of high valuespecialized goods, are holding up quite well. Indeed, I draw at leasta small sense of comfort in that regard from the most recent set of-20-2/6-7/90business statistics. So, I guess the bottom line is that I thinkwe're okay, but it's going to be a close call.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I also think that the Greenbook forecast is areasonable forecast. It's closer to my view of the world than it hasbeen in a long time. I am a little more hopeful on the inflationfront, although I think the Greenbook scenario is plausible. Amongthe reasons why I'm a little more hopeful are some of the concernsthat people--Jerry and Governor LaWare and others--are sharing aboutthe real estate problems and debt problems and the restraint that thatis going to place on overall inflationary behavior. It bearswatching. I think there is a sense of unease, but I don't seeanything systemic to that, certainly not at this point. That'sprobably one reason I'm a little hopeful on inflation. I also thinkthe problems are [unintelligible]. So far the dollar does appear tobe stable to slightly weaker, but I think the weakness is more aspecial D-mark problem associated with the optimism in Germany andEurope than anything else. Commodity prices have been stable toslightly weak, although the oil situation is an uncertain issue. Iactually think the turnaround in bond yields bears watching. I thinkthat is to some extent a perception of a bottoming out of the economicconditions and some optimism about Europe and the Soviet Union. So,to some extent it could [reflect] an improvement in perceived realreturns, which may not be a contractionary force but a positive one.It could also be, partially, some inflationary expectations surfacing;but that's not necessarily borne out in some of the other financialmarkets. Certainly, it's enough of a development for us to be verycautious and it certainly bears watching. I'm generally optimistic inthat I can start to see the light at the other side of the slowdown.But I think this is a period to be cautious if we're going toconsolidate what I hope are gains on inflation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. My number for real GNP is right underneath thestaff's at 1-1/2 percent real growth, but my nominal number isconsiderably less [than the staff's number]. I put nominal GNP justbarely above 4 percent, so that gives you some indication of how Ibelieve we can get a pretty narrow squeeze if we do not get betterimprovement than the staff has forecast on inflation. The pricepicture is really pretty mixed at this point. I do not see that we'vereally had much of a downward move in commodity prices other than forindustrial metals prices. For the most part, commodity prices arepretty well holding steady at a relatively high plateau. If thosecommodity prices stay at that plateau, I think the chance for animmediate PPI and CPI movement downward, which would boost the bondmarket, is not going to come as early in 1990 as might be desirablefor real output reasons.But even though commodity prices don't show that muchbrightness, I do believe the whole price picture is in a positionwhere it can move pretty fast. Several of you have mentioned some ofthese developments, but I want to refocus on them. Even though houseprices nationwide are not in a deflationary mode, the fact of thematter is that the majority of homeowners do not have much expectationof appreciation. That has been a factor driving household wealth; and2/6-7/90it's a factor that I think has artificially depressed the householdsaving rate. Consequently, I tend to feel that the household savingrate may very well respond and, contrary to what we're seeing, may notbe an interlude but may be somewhat longer-lasting. I believe that inthis rolling adjustment that we've been in, a lot of people haveexperienced severe burdens of debt. It happened in the farm sectorand they haven't forgotten; it happened also in the oil sector andthey haven't forgotten. It has happened in nonresidential real estateand I don't think they've forgotten; and it has happened in LBOs. Andhouseholds are not in a position to pick up this gap. The changes inthe tax laws plus more restrictive lending standards can have quite animpact. I think households have just realized that that tax reductionfeature is no longer there. And since home equity lines are not aptto be expanded in a flat real estate market, the home equity linedoesn't provide as much opportunity for low cost or tax deductiblelending. It seems to me that autos financed out of nondeductibleinterest payments would be a rather severe burden, so I just don't seeany outlook for autos and perhaps other household durable goods tocome back as fast as maybe the Greenbook implies.However, I do believe that if we don't tip the economy over,there are some underlying positives. I agree with those who see the[outlook for] merchandise trade exports as being somewhat optimistic,as I think even the staff forecast shows. But I might expect slightlymore optimism than that. The foreign tourism factor particularly isnot a minor factor and I just can't but believe that that willcontinue. I think also that the undergirding factor in here is thatwe have had rolling recessions throughout the economy, so it's not asif we have been in a stage in which every sector has been in a boom.Consequently, I think we're not as vulnerable to downturn forcesbecause, as Bob Boykin mentioned, in Texas energy is actually in arecovery mode and agriculture and agricultural machinery are insimilar recovery modes. My forecast is for a much brighter pictureexcept for the CPI; I only have the CPI down 1 percentage point fromthis year's level. So, I'm not expecting as much gain in the CPIbecause at this point in time I consider the greatest danger to thissustained expansion is through a financial problem for the dollar, andI'm not as optimistic about the dollar as I have been in previousyears. Of course, my optimism about the dollar last year was that thedollar would be pretty stable and I think it behaved that way. Ithink that's our razor's edge; if something happens there, that couldupset things. So, under the assumption that we're not going to cutthe fed funds rate 25 basis points and drive long bonds up another 50basis points, I think there's a reasonable chance that that will beokay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, let me put on the tablesomething that I know everyone here is very aware of but that I don'tthink has been explicitly mentioned yet, and that is that we areliving in a time right now of really incredible, momentous events inthe world. I won't try to run the litany and I don't want to be toodramatic. But I think we may very well be in a time where there is asea change going on that happens rarely in history. I think it'svery, very important that we have a reasonably comfortable economy forthe Administration to operate in, given this environment and thisgeopolitical era that we're in. And I think so far we have it. As I-22-2/6-7/90listen to the reports and read the statistics and read the Beigebook,indeed, I think the forecast that we all seem to share quite closelyis satisfactory and meets that criterion. But I also share a lot ofthe concerns that the two gentlemen on my left and right mentionedwhen they spoke. I don't know what has happened to this corner overhere, Mr. Chairman. Maybe you should separate us! But I share theconcerns about what could happen and I think it's very, very importantthat we keep a weather eye out, particularly in the kind ofenvironment that we share right now in the world.As far as monetary policy goes, I agree with everyone elsehere that it's essential first of all that we not allow [inflation] toincrease, and indeed that we knock it down and make some progresstoward stable prices over time. Hopefully, we're doing that right nowand can do it this year. But I must say that, in economic terms, Idon't think it's terribly shabby that we're holding [inflation] steadyin the strong economy that we have had over the last couple of years,coming off of the kind of history that we've had over the course ofthe last ten years. In historical terms and in politicalterms--political in the big good sense of the word political--I thinkmaybe we should be willing to accept some risk that this is the bestwe can do right here rather than be too terribly macho in thedirection of trying to knock inflation down very rapidly atconsiderable risk to some other issues that may be larger.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. John LaWare stole my script. We're at the sameend of the hall, so I'm a gloomy Gussie. I will add just a couple ofitems to his sad tale. One is that I really think the problems in theauto industry are more extensive and more permanent than a lot ofpeople realize. I don't think we're going to have layoffs for acouple of weeks and then a pop back. If you look at even thetransplant numbers carefully, I believe you'll see some adjustments.For example, Mazda has cut back on its pace of production--and that'sacceptable Japanese, not American junk. So, I think one has to payattention to that. Also, I don't believe that the weakness indurables manufacturing is limited to autos. Caterpillar Tractor, forone, is experiencing declines in orders from just about all categoriesof customers. They are below the peak levels. Also, appliances and[other durables], again these are not auto [unintelligible].I'm getting more and more concerned about creditavailability. I think I mentioned a couple of meetings ago that partof [the stringency is due to] the overreaction of examiners; they arescaring the heck out of bankers. But, in addition there's the problemin financing developers, and I mean the good developers not the scabbytypes. They are having problems getting financing from the S&Ls andtheir old sources because of these limits on loan size. [Regulators]have taken the national bank limitations and placed them on S&Ls andthat's giving developers real problems. I think we're going to seethis impacting the housing numbers more and more. Also, in certainparts of the country I think there is a problem simply in dealing withsick thrifts. I've been going back and forth to Arizona to check onmy mother and out there 60 percent of the S&L assets in the state arenow under conservatorship. When the grey panthers are talking aboutthis kind of thing, you know it's a serious problem. And dealing withthe overseers at these thrifts and conservatorships is different from-23-2/6-7/90dealing with other kinds of managements. They have a differentoutlook. Just the decline in real estate values is something that'svery significant, and I don't believe it's going to go away soon.Many of the gains in employment are in jobs like bankruptcy lawyersand "undertakers" hired by the RTC, etc. So, I don't find all thatgrowth an optimistic story at all. I'm certainly not eager to see arecession but I really feel that over the next couple of quarterswe're at risk. I hope I'm wrong. Thank you very much.MR. ANGELL. Did you forecast a recession?MS. SEGER. No.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Hopefully without precipitatingunnecessary debate, could I just make a quick comment on this recentrise in long-term interest rates? I may be missing something, but Idon't find it all that hard to explain at all, and I think some of itis temporary. But abstracting from that, it seems to me that as longas we're in a situation where we have to attract $100 billion or morea year from the rest of the world and we have been through a period inwhich our interest rates have been falling and interest rates in thetwo massive surplus countries, Germany and Japan, have risen sharplyin recent weeks, either one or two things are going to happen. Eitherwe're going to see upward pressure on domestic rates here or downwardpressure on the exchange rate or both.MR. ANGELL. Or we're going to see a decrease of theinflation rate in the United States to equal or below those of theother two countries.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, that is another possibility,although I have a little trouble seeing that in the immediate term.MR. ANGELL. But you would agree that that is a third option?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But looking at it in that light, itseems to me that what we're seeing is a rather vivid illustration ofthe box we're in with respect to the interactions between domesticinterest rates, foreign interest rates--in the surplus countries inparticular--and the exchange rate. It really illustrates howdifficult the policy environment is.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think that's a good way to endtoday's session.MR. BOEHNE. Really end on an upbeat note!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We reconvene at 9:00 a.m.[Meeting recessed]-24-2/6-7/90February 7, 1990--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. Mr. Kohn is onthe agenda for the initial discussion on long-run ranges for theaggregates.MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Kohn?MR. SYRON. Don, you already mentioned it. I was going toask on the M2 forecast which way you thought the risks were or whetherthey were symmetric. You said they were a bit on the down side?MR. KOHN. I think they are. The forecast that we gave youis our best guess. As the Bluebook noted, it lies in the middle ofthe range of the model forecasts. But I think there's some chancethat offering rates on deposits might be somewhat lower than themodels would judge from past history. As I noted in the briefing, Ibase this on a couple of things. One is that we see bank credit asrelatively moderate and we see banks acquiring a lot of core depositsfrom thrifts as they shrink and as the RTC shuts them down. Inaddition, if the RTC gets active again and starts putting out morefunds for thrifts to pay off high cost liabilities, thrifts mightstart shrinking their core deposits a little more--reducing the ratesthey offer. And that would put downward pressure on offering rates.So I think the risks are weighted a little more toward 6 percentgrowth than 7 percent growth on M2.MR. SYRON. That's good, too. A follow-up question on that:On balance, if commercial banks also were to decide to grow moreslowly in this emerging caution that we see and decide not to fund[growth] in wholesale markets and people see some signs of lessaggressiveness in the retail markets, would that work in the samedirection?MR. KOHN. That would obviously work in the same direction.We put in fairly restrained bank credit growth, given that we do havethem taking over, in effect, a chunk of mortgages from the thrifts--not literally. In some cases they might do clean bank deals in whichthey would acquire these thrift mortgages. But we see them, as theyhave been in the last several months, a little more active inacquiring mortgages, secondary mortgages essentially. But evenallowing for that we have fairly restrained bank credit growth. If itwere even more restrained, then I think the first option [for banks]would be to reduce their managed liabilities and to rely a bit more onretail deposits, which have a more stable base. So, I'm not sure howaggressive they would be in reducing that. But if they really gottheir managed liabilities down very far then they could[unintelligible] into the core deposits.MR. PRELL. President Syron, if you carry that generalphenomenon far enough in terms of greater credit rationing effects andsome contraction in credit availability, then you begin to affect thegeneral interest rate level; presumably, that's consistent with thegiven growth path of the economy.MR. SYRON. Sure.-25-2/6-7/90MR. PRELL. And then that tends, presumably, to work in theother direction. We've built in only a modest amount of that sort ofadditional restraint in the forecast. That's probably consistent withwhat most of you, I would judge, think is likely to occur. So, thereis a possibility of something more of a constraint.MR. SYRON. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Two questions referring to page 8 [in theBluebook]: The tentative range for M2 is not only consistent with thebaseline throughout the entire period but it also provides theflexibility that if one wanted to be somewhat more aggressive intrying to reduce inflation it is in some respects even more consistentwith that outcome as well. Is that correct?MR. KOHN. That's correct. Because we're expecting M2 growthat the top of its range there's nothing preventing you from beingtighter than the expectations in that regard. I saw the tighter rangeas in some sense forcing the FOMC's hand and then signaling itsintentions. But you're absolutely correct.MR. PARRY. Well, the second point is that with regard toalternative III, which is the 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent range, you citein your remarks the advantage of following the precedent of trying toreduce the [ranges for] growth of the aggregates 1/2 percentage point.It looks, based upon the record, that we ought to forget about that ifreducing [the ranges] 1/2 percentage point in the future is somethingthat we probably can't live up to. And perhaps we ought to recognizethat as soon as possible.MR. KOHN. I don't have any quarrel with that statement.MR. PARRY. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That depends to a large extent on theaccuracy of the Phillips curve type of model.MR. PARRY. Oh, sure.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And to the extent that the process mightaccelerate, as indeed it has in the past, we might find that--youknow, it says 1990 to 1994--they might not be full years. They may be10-month years and the thing can actually accelerate. I think wecould probably play it by ear, but what this does tell us is that ourability to play the game of just going down, down, down without making[others] fully aware of the consequences has to be rethought.MR. PARRY. Even in 1990 I think we perhaps would get someadvantage by publishing a 1/2 percentage point decrease. But it thenruns the greater risk that we're going to tell the market at the endof the year that we have missed.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I know that several times in the past we havetaken into account how well we hit the targets in the previous year,-26-2/6-7/90in terms of whether we should adjust for a miss. Now, on M2 we camein about 1/2 percentage point short of the midpoint of the range. Isthat a close enough hit that it doesn't really enter into thisconsideration of what we set for '90?MR. KOHN. By and large the Committee has not adopted apolicy of explicitly taking account of where the end point is. Ithink implicitly, though, it does that. That is, presumably theeconomic and financial conditions you're facing as you make thisdecision are partly a function of, or at least involved with, where M2ended up last year. So, I think the Committee's point always hasbeen: Where are we right now? What are the conditions we wish tofoster from here on out? Wherever we ended up in the range last year,we can assess the situation right now. So, the Committee generallyhasn't chosen to worry explicitly about tying one year's range towhere it came out in the previous year or intended to come out.Rather, it has said: Here's where we are; let's go on from here. Theaccusation has been made that, in effect, the Committee has allowedmoney to drift up more than down over time, although I'm not sure thatwe haven't corrected some of that upward drift over the last fewyears. The previous thought was that the Committee tended to allow itto go up, but I think in the last couple of years the ranges have beentaken from the [actual fourth-quarter level in the previous year],which had come in at the lower part of the range. The point is thatyou look at where you are and see where you want to go forward fromwherever you ended up last year.MS. SEGER. I know we discussed this in the past withouthaving an explicit policy for dealing with it. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I notice that even in your tighter scenario,the M2 growth rate for 1990 is still higher than the midpoint of thetentative ranges. You have 5-1/2 percent and I think the midpoint onthe tentative range is 5 percent. So, as Bob Parry is saying, thatscenario is fully accommodated within the tentative ranges. But aquestion that I have relates to your comment that real interest rateswould have to be slightly higher over time to reach this 5-year path.Do you have any estimates for that or--MR. KOHN. We have real interest rates rising about a pointin the baseline and maybe 1-1/2 points in the tighter scenario. Iwould caution you that that's well within the margin--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So nominal stays constant?MR. KOHN. Well, actually, nominal goes up. But to get thereal interest rates up because of the momentum behind inflation--.Let's take the tighter scenario since it illustrates the point alittle better. That has nominal interest rates, say, the nominalfunds rate, going up this year and next but only to about 9-1/4percent, something like that. So, it's only a matter of--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is this the tighter or the baselinescenario?-27-2/6-7/90MR. KOHN. The tighter one. Under the baseline we used therates in the Greenbook forecast for this year and next, which only goup very marginally; and then we'd have another marginal increase in1992. But you do have to have some increase in nominal rates becauseyou can't get the increase in the real rates, given the momentumbehind inflation, without some increase in nominal. But then theycome down in the later years. As inflation comes down, nominal ratescome down with it, leaving real rates a bit higher in the tighterscenario.MR. JOHNSON. It is a problem. I agree that that's the wayyou have to look at it. But, as the Chairman said, if inflationaryexpectations are just a little better than you anticipate, thatdoesn't necessarily imply a rise, or at least a substantial rise, innominal rates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, Governor Seger raised aninteresting question about base drift. I've been very much concernedabout that problem over time. I had felt that the best way was somekind of point target, and I even thought of going with some range formissing above or below. But the way we do it, if we end up expectinga rate of growth for the next year from some point other than the onewhere we are at year-end, it's very difficult to explain to thepublic. I don't know exactly the way around that unless we move tosome kind of point target. But it's very confusing. If we're wayover, even those of us who are the most hawkish are reluctant to votefor something like a 2 percent rate of growth to counterbalance someof the overshoot, because that would seem rather extreme to the publicwho would just pick up the 2 percent and not realize that it came froma different base. I think it's a problem we ought to try to deal withsomewhat differently from the way we're doing. But I don't reallyhave the best answer as to how to do that. I do have a lot ofsympathy for some kind of point target way out there, a multiyeartarget.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's another thing that I suspect allof us have in the back of our minds and that is that somewhere in thistimeframe there is [likely to be] a recession. And the ability tolock onto an appropriate money supply target in a recession improvesvery dramatically if you [unintelligible] right. So it's not asthough we have to focus on calibrating literally to this type ofenvironment outlined in the Bluebook strategies. We may be fortunateenough in fact to be looking at 5 years of continued growth on top ofwhat we have already had and it would make the job a little easier.But I think the probability is that somewhere along the line we'regoing to get a shot at it. And that may in fact be the easiest way tobring price stability in the 1994-1995 period.MR. BLACK. It would certainly be good if we could do thatsince our [Congressional] testimony--that of the four Reserve BankPresidents and yours--of course suggested it. If we thought this werea real possibility within a 5-year period, the only scenario here thateven comes somewhat close to that is strategy II.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but none of these is a likelyscenario.-28-2/6-7/90MR. BLACK. Probably not. I hope we have something betterthan anything that appears in any of them actually; but I think itwould be rather optimistic to expect that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Mr. Kohn?Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Don, following along through strategy II, I geta [growth rate for] dollar GNP under strategy II of 5-1/4 percent. Isthat right?MR. KOHN. In 1994?MR. ANGELL. In 1990.MR. KOHN. Yes, you're right.MR. ANGELL. I didn't have my calculator with me.MR. KOHN. [Unintelligible.] But anyhow, you're right: it'ssomething like that.MR. ANGELL. Okay. Then that implies a V2 of zero.MR. KOHN. Right.MR. ANGELL. That doesn't seem to me to quite fit under thatscenario.MR. KOHN. In effect, what's happening in that scenario isthat the decline in interest rates from the end of the last half of1989 tends to push up M2 and push down V2; and then the rise ininterest rates in the tighter scenario tends to exert the oppositeforce and they about offset. So, you get essentially no change invelocity for the year.MR. ANGELL. The velocities that I calculated on strategy IIwere zero in 1990 and in 1991 and plus one in 1992. It seems to methat that tightening scenario somewhere in there is apt to have adeclining velocity.MR. KOHN. A declining velocity? Because of the drop in theinflation rate, you're saying?MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. KOHN. It does in the out years. Once that inflationrate goes down and we start seeing that in nominal interest ratesunder that strategy--in 1993 actually and in 1994--then you get thevelocities you're looking at. So, it's a question of how fastinflation comes down. Under the Chairman's thought that you might getfaster 10-month years it would bring that forward. But you don't getit for a while because you have to get those real interest rates upand keep them up, in the conventional wisdom of the model, to induce agap in resource utilization to get the inflation headed down.MR. ANGELL. But those of us who believe that the Phillipscurve model is not as accurate as the commodity price-V2 relationship-29-2/6-7/90position would tend to see the timing of that as being a littledifferent. That is, it seems to me that the strategy II scenariowould be associated with declining commodity prices sometime in thesecond half of, say, 1990. I just can't help but believe that thatwould tend to take velocity down with it; and there's some risk, itseems to me, that velocity could be somewhat lower than anticipated.MR. KOHN. If the declining commodity prices tend to take theprice level and price expectations down with them so that nominalinterest rates could fall, then I think you're right. That's the wayI would think through your scenario-MR. ANGELL. Yes, that will happen as gold prices decline!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mr. Kohn? Canwe start the general discussion? I'll start very quickly. I feltthat this simulation out to 1994 was very useful. It gives us a realshot at the meaning of what it is we're voting on. And it pretty muchsays to me that the general recommendation of alternative II of 3 to 7percent on M2 probably gives us about the flexibility we need. Iguess on M3 it's just a mechanical adjustment and the same is true ondebt. But on the impression that I originally had--which I think anumber of us had--about the need to calibrate down, I think this hasgiven us a somewhat different focus at this stage. I'd be curious toget anyone's impression of this. Bob.MR. PARRY. I would be for alternative II; it not onlyprovides an alternative that is consistent with our baseline but italso gives us the flexibility, if we wish to exercise it, to embark ona more aggressive policy to reduce the rate of inflation. I think ithas a significant advantage over alternative III because I'm concernedthat alternative III--though it has the advantage of maybe signalingour intentions--might set us up for failure in terms of not being ableto adhere to it. So, I think this alternative is just what we need toaccomplish not only our objectives for 1990, but potentially it setsus on the right path for subsequent years as well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I agree with that. For M2, alternative IImakes perfect sense. It's consistent with this strategy II of gettinginflation down over time. I wouldn't mind at all going with thealternative III ranges for M3 and debt. But for M2, certainly,alternative II makes more sense to me. And I would think that thestrategy II scenario is consistent with the alternative II ranges--even though those may be the actual inflation trends--moving downtoward 2 percent over time, assuming that that's the trend. Whatcould accompany that downward trend is actual inflation expectationsthat really could achieve what the Chairman has described as pricestability anyway. Obviously, there may be a lag in adjusting theactual inflation rate. But over the '80s we had a consistentdowntrend in 10-year or long-term inflation expectations. And evenmore recently, those long-term increases have moved below the 12-monthinflation rate. So, it's quite possible that inflation expectationswould be lower than the actual inflation rate along that path and thatwe would be accomplishing a lot of what we are looking for.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob Forrestal.-30-2/6-7/90MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too found thisvery, very helpful; the outlining of the strategies is great becauseit gives us a longer-term outlook. In looking at those strategies, Irealize that this is a fairly long timeframe here and we probably willnot be able to adhere to any particular strategy. But starting out Iwould hope that we would adopt the baseline strategy I and not be tooaggressive in moving toward price stability because I think the riskof recession in the second alternative is too great. And if we dohave a recession, we'll then have to ease until we get back into thissort of stop-and-go kind of policy stance. So, I think that strategyI is the one that we ought to pursue. That means logically then thatwe favor alternative II for M2--that 3 to 7 percent range--given wherewe are with M2 at the moment. I think that's the logical one. Wecould move the M3 range down; I wouldn't mind having that moved down.We'd get a little announcement effect, I suppose, from that. I don'tfeel very strongly about M3, though I do think the M2 range should beat 3 to 7 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. For 1990 I'd just keep it simple:alternative II for the reasons that you and Mr. Parry have stated.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I agree with those who support alternativeII, and I also think it is helpful to have this longer-term view ofwhat these strategies mean. But as important as that is, we stillhave to live through 1990. And I think the questions that we have toask are: How much risk of a recession in 1990 are we willing to bearin order to keep inflation from accelerating? And how muchflexibility do we need in 1990 in these long-run ranges to deal withthe threat of recession, should it get more serious? I thinkalternative II also encompasses the right balance for 1990 as well asfor the longer-run outlook. Alternative III simply doesn't give usmuch flexibility in that regard and alternative I takes us in thewrong direction on inflation. So, both for the immediate year, 1990,as well as for these longer-run considerations, alternative II makessense.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I share your enthusiasm for thematerial contained on page 8 because I think strategy II clearly isthe sort of thing that we really want to get, at a minimum. And eventhat strategy has inflation coming down only 2 percentage points overa 5-year period. In contrast to that, which seems to me to be theminimum progress that we ought to aim for, the baseline would have uscoming down to an inflation rate that is still more than 3 percent in1994. I part company a little with you by thinking that alternativeIII is probably a better way to go. But I realize that there arepolitical problems. We did go with 3 to 7 percent tentatively as therange for M2 last time--although I argued forcibly, and I thoughtextremely persuasively, that it ought to be 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent butlost that battle--and it is very difficult to bring it down. But wealso have to think about the risk of not doing something to lower theinflation over time. And that risk bothers me when I look at strategyII because it has the unemployment rate going up to 6 percent; I'm-31-2/6-7/90sure that bothers everybody else in the room too. But, as GovernorAngell said, this is a Phillips curve type model and the Bluebookpoints out, I think wisely, that a more restrictive policy might wellchange expectations and increase the credibility of our efforts andreduce the cost of getting there. So, the tradeoffs might not be asunfavorable. Finally, beyond that, I would say that we need to givesome consideration to the risk associated with an outcome like the onein the baseline simulation. The inflation rate is still above 3percent in 1994 and we've all said, as embodied in the NealResolution, that 5 years seems to be a reasonable length of time towork the inflation rate down gradually. If we had 3 percent thatlate, I think observers would pretty well conclude that we had thrownin the towel. We can certainly do what is compatible with strategy IIwith alternative II instead of III, and I certainly wouldn't dissenton it if I were voting. But I do have some preference for alternativeIII because I would like to send that little signal to the market thatwe still have the long-run objective of reducing inflation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that we really should make up ourminds to live within the ranges. I would be more inclined toward arange that we can live within than I would to get a little too machoand then find ourselves deviating from it. I could live withalternative II provided we take quite seriously that 7 percent isreally a desirable top. When we look back to the last deflationaryperiod, we let M2 get to more than 9-1/2 percent, so it would beconsiderable progress from 1986 when we had 9-1/2 percent if this timeit were 7 percent. It does seem to me that V2 could well be as low asnegative 2. And if nominal GNP were in the 5 percent range, I thinkthat over a period of time would be effective restraint. I would alsoprefer to wait to cut the ranges until we can cut them a fullpercentage point. I think it would be nice to make the cut from 3 to7 percent to 2 to 6 percent. I just don't feel that that's a verylivable cut this time. So, I would prefer alternative II. But Iwould prefer, Mr. Chairman, that in your Humphrey-Hawkins testimonyyou make it very clear what our strategy is and why it is that we donot believe in a steady process of decreasing the ranges but that wethink significant range decreases will come during the next period ofinterest rate increase. If we have that kind of strong statement Iwould like that better. I would share with Governor Johnson somepreference for moving down at least the debt aggregate. It seems tome that 5 to 9 percent on debt could be a livable range within thefuture. Even though the thrift situation might bring back highergrowth rates in M3 in 1991, I would expect debt to work in a 5 to 9percent range.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, I'm concerned about all'these choices andthe circumstances we find ourselves in. I'm not worried at the momentabout how we're going to get to price stability; I'm worried about howwe're going to start to bring inflation down to what I think ought tobe a somewhat more modest objective. And it seems to me to be one ofthe [unintelligible] in M2 growth. If you look at the recent historyof M2, as Don pointed out, it has been running the last 3 years withincreases of 4-1/4 to 5-1/4 percent per year. Even allowing for someslippage, that suggests to me an upper limit on the M2 range in 1990-32-2/6-7/90of about 6 percent. I really am concerned that anything above thatwould represent, obviously, some significant acceleration over itsrecent trends and would not help us on the inflation side. In my viewit would make it more difficult to bring inflation down in the future.I really think we're placing an awful lot of emphasis on the precisionof these relationships in these alternatives and strategies; I findthat very difficult to accept. So, I personally think that somethinglike an M2 range of 3 to 6 percent is appropriate here. And I guessI'm not really concerned about M3 and debt.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It seems to me thatthe critical question for this Committee at this juncture is whetheror not we're really dedicated to bringing inflation down to zero orits equivalent--to achieve price stability, whatever its definitionmay be--or whether or not we're simply willing [to accept] and behappy with having inflation where we find it now. I look at theexercise--and I think it is helpful to go out to 5 years--but the factof the matter is that if one considers the cost of taking action tobring inflation down from the current level, none of these strategiesgives me very much comfort. That is to say, we're not making muchprogress against inflation or toward price stability, given any one ofthese three strategies. As a result, I would have to conclude thatmaybe our best efforts should be to cap inflation now with the thoughtthat the only way we're going to get inflation down is with arecession and that quite likely a recession will occur within the next5 years--particularly if we hold growth below the trend line for thislong a period of time. I don't think there's a time in modern policyhistory in which we have gone for that length of time with growthbelow the trend line without falling into recession. So, I thinkrecession is a real possibility in this timeframe. As a matter offact, it may be something that gets us toward price stability. So,alternative II for the upcoming period is the most appropriate one, inmy mind. And that says, really, that we're preparing in the nearfuture to cap inflation and that the Committee hopes there's someexogenous event that causes a recession and we won't get blamed for itand yet we capture the progress toward price stability. The otherthing about alternative II is that the reduction of M3 seemsreasonable to me. It does show the flag a bit in the sense that wehave taken a step in reducing the ranges of growth in M3 and debt.You can make whatever you want of that; it isn't much, I think.Nonetheless, for some people hearing your testimony it may beworthwhile.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I lean a little toward alternativeIII. Governor Angell's comments appealed to me strictly in terms ofthe Humphrey-Hawkins testimony and a careful explanation that wereally are not willing to settle for what we have and we're not losingsight of our objectives. With that kind of assurance, then I canaccept alternative II. I also liked Governor Angell's point on debt:that probably a little further reduction on the debt figure would bepossible. That had some appeal to me.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.-33-2/6-7/90MR. MELZER. In terms of the broader strategies, I don't haveany trouble at all identifying with strategy II, the tighter option.As I look at the baseline, I think the progress toward price stabilityis really minimal over 5 years. If you accept the P* model, it showsthat when we get down to 3-1/4 percent or so we're stuck there. Underthat type of program I just don't see how we can get any benefits ofcredibility, assuming there are some benefits of that in reducing thecost. I also think that we're unlikely to be able to sustain aprogram--and I know this is just a projection--of trying to keep theeconomy below potential for an extended period of time. So, I favorthe tighter approach there. And, as the Bluebook observes, thatlogically leads one to alternative III in terms of the ranges.Obviously, we're in a very tricky period here. But, first of all,along the lines of what Gary was saying, I think the upper end of thatrange should be more than adequate to support positive real growth.And I think it signals our intentions in terms of really moving towardprice stability relatively gradually. I think the 1/2 percentagepoint reduction in the M2 range conveys that. We moved the ranges apercentage point a year ago. I guess we're trying to trade off theperceptions of a number of different audiences here, but I think themost important audience--and the audience that is really going todetermine what we're able to do or not do--is the market. What Ithink is important is the markets' perception more broadly, includingthe foreign exchange markets, along the lines of what Jerry was sayingyesterday. If the perception is that we have thrown in the towel interms of progress toward price stability, I think we're going to bedealing with much more difficult problems in the coming year than maybe possible if we maintain that credibility. I still feel that ifcircumstances develop where we're forced to violate the ranges becauseof some very adverse developments on the real side, we can do that andmaintain credibility. So, I would opt for alternative III.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I completely support all of thethinking that has been presented on alternative II and identify withthat easily. But I'd like to suggest that we consider leaving theranges at the tentative rates that we set last summer, whichincidentally are the same rates that we had in 1989. The differencesare in M3 and in debt. M2, importantly, is the same in the tentativeranges and in alternative II; the other measures have technicaldownward adjustments in alternative II. As we look at criteria forthe selection of ranges, I think it's important to try to projectforward as much stability as we can, as much continuity of policy aswe can and, insofar as we're signaling the market, as much clarity aswe can. I'm concerned that, if we make these small changes to two ofthe three tentative ranges and leave one the same, we may beprojecting that there's some deep subtlety that really doesn't exist.The message would be clearer and the policy would be in substanceessentially the same if we left the tentative ranges in place.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I am very attracted by alternativeIII for the signal that it sends, and yet I am concerned that, if thestaff forecast is correct, we don't have much room in the M2associated with that range. Consequently, I'd like to split my ballot-34-2/6-7/90here and cast a ballot for alternative II for M2 and alternative IIIfor M3 and debt.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. A lot of what we're talking about here relates toperceptions, which are hard to know. And that always makes thingsvery difficult. I'd like to associate myself with two things: Gary'scomment about not being so worried about achieving zero [inflation]and holding where we are right now in the short run; and theconsistency of that with your point that probably none of these thingsis going to happen over the next 5 years because of the interveningevents. So, I think we have to look at the longer-run ranges in termsof their consistency with where we want to go in the short run. Interms of signal effects, like Governor LaWare, I had some sympathy for[unintelligible] going to 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent on M2. But then as Istarted to think about it, I viewed that as a balancing of risks--thatthe risk of not coming within the upper part of the range transcendsthe early benefits we get from having a signal. And if we're going tostay with M2 [of 3 to 7 percent], I would be inclined--this is aquestion of market perceptions and I think most of the market looks atM2--to leave all the ranges the same rather than have the marketsaying: If they came down on M3 and debt, why didn't they do somethingon M2? I'd also like to associate myself with Governor Angell'sstatement that this requires quite careful explanation--a fulsomeexplanation, perhaps is a better way to put it--in your testimony.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I would also be in favor ofalternative II, which seems to me to be consistent with the baselinestrategy, i.e. reasonable growth or at least not unreasonable growthwith some progress on the inflation front at least over a longerperiod of time. My hunch is that if the growth rate, particularly inthe early years, comes in as low as the strategy would suggest thenit's low enough or far enough under the growth potential that in factthe inflation results may be better than suggested. In terms of M3and debt, I don't have a particularly strong feeling, but I would bein favor of 3 to 7 percent and 6 to 10 percent as outlined inalternative II. Those seem to be reasonably technical adjustments forus if we were to go forward even more. Alternative III, I think,would perhaps be more of a message than we'd want to deliver.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. It was interesting to see these longer-termprojections, but I'm extremely skeptical about our ability to getexact projections out that far. In looking at the more near term,whatever ranges we select, we have to make sure first of all that themonetary growth we achieve fits in those ranges. Secondly, I thinkit's very important to allow ourselves some maneuvering room in 1990just in case the optimists here are wrong and the nervous Nellies areright about the strength of the economy in the next couple ofquarters. I was impressed by something that Don Kohn wrote on page 16of the Bluebook which suggests that a 1/2 percentage point shortfallin aggregate demand in the first half of the year would require 7-1/2percent M2 growth for the year in order to achieve the fourth-quarterlevel of real GNP in the staff forecast. And it seems to me, if I'm-35-2/6-7/90looking at these ranges correctly, that alternative II would nothandle that. So, I would like to vote for an alternative that doesn'teven exist, which is the alternative I version of M2 (3-1/2 to 7-1/2percent) and then for M3 and debt I'd keep the tentative ranges thatwe adopted last July, just to give us running room through 1990. Itdoesn't mean anything in terms of my longer-term commitment to pricestability.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. In terms of long-term strategies, I'd preferstrategy II or something better--or tighter, should I say.MR. ANGELL. We knew what you meant!MR. HOSKINS. Mike Prell might point out that in these long-term strategies that we're looking at, we're talking about apercentage point difference in the three strategies. And thatprobably is well within our ability to miss. I understand what thestaff is doing: They are trying to be reasonable because we're allreasonable people around the table. But as the Chairman hasindicated, probably none of these outcomes is what we're going toachieve. I might suggest that we be unreasonable once in a while andlook at what could happen and take a tighter policy to get to where wesay we're going to go, or we shouldn't be saying it's where we'regoing to go. And I don't mean zero inflation. There are many peoplewho don't want to be nailed to that cross and I understand that. ButI do think the statement that Gary Stern made is an appropriate one,at least the way I interpreted it. You may have to clarify thisbecause I interpreted what you were saying as something different thanDick Syron said, and that is that you're not comfortable with theprogress in this scenario--that you want lower inflation and we havenot made any movement toward lower inflation.MR. [STERN(?)] We don't have a difference in interpretation.MR. HOSKINS. I might also point out in terms of long-termstrategy that the only one that has 3 percent growth in 1994 for thereal economy happens to be the tighter policy. And isn't that wherewe want to be? In some sense it seems to me that a tighter policyover that 4-year period or 5-year period is really what we ought todo. We averaged 4.6 percent monetary growth in the last three years.I don't see any reason why we should raise that in the next 3 years or5 years, since that would be giving up some gains that we foughtpretty hard to get. As I look at what has transpired inmacro-economic theory in the last 20 years, it seems to me that theone thing that tends to come out is that policy ought to bepredictable and it ought to be credible. I don't know what else wecan say about policy than to make it predictable and credible. And itseems to me we're trying to do this backwards: We're trying to saylet's get lucky and have the monetary growth rates fall out low andthen we'll move our target ranges down to match it. That to me is notpredictable and credible policy.Just as a side note: As many of you know, I received a letterfrom the ABA group of economists that suggested we have a range for[M2] of about 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent. So, I don't think the marketswill be unduly shocked if we come out with a range of 2 to 6 percent.2/6-7/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But they also talked about a lower fundsrate.MS. SEGER. They're also not going to be held accountable.MR. HOSKINS. I understand. All I'm suggesting is that thereare some people out there who happen to believe that a predictable andcredible policy might be important. In terms of the alternatives, Iwould like to see a 2 to 6 percent growth rate for M2. I don't careabout the other two, i.e., M3 and debt.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the best way to proceed is tohave alternative II moved and seconded and then to open up thediscussion to amendments on changes in both M3 and debt. So, if theSecretary will read--. I beg your pardon, I'm sorry. Are you okay?MR. ANGELL. I'm ready. I move 3 to 7 percent for M2.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Alternative II is moved and seconded.We're now open to amendments on altering the ranges for M3 and debt,sequentially. So, if anyone would like to--MR. ANGELL. Yes, I would.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You can't move and--MR. ANGELL. Oh yes you can.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You can't move to amend your own--MR. ANGELL. You can move to amend, that's right. Mr.Chairman, the reason that I wanted to be earliest is because I reallyhave another suggestion. And if my suggestion gets a second, we can[be done] with it. The suggestion is that we show our seriousness bygetting down to one target, M2. So what I'm suggesting and I'mwilling to move it if someone would second it, would be that we nothave targets for M3 and debt--just as we abandoned Ml. And thatplaces us in a much more credible position. I believe that with a 400basis point range for M2 that makes more sense. It is the onevelocity we think we know more about. And so I would prefer and wouldmove, Mr. Chairman, that we--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just suggest to you that that isa major move which, frankly, I would just as soon not have discussedor voted on unless we had a paper on it. This has a lot ofimplications with respect to our relationships with the Hill and avariety of other things. Obviously, if you want to move forward, wecan discuss it. I'm not saying I disagree with you; it's just that Ihate to make that type of move without a significant amount of thoughtabout it.MR. ANGELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, under those circumstances Iwould be open to waiting to consider this issue.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we have Mr. Kohn provide somepros and cons on this and circulate that to the Committee? I don't2/6-7/90think we're equipped at this stage to think of the various secondaryor peripheral implications. Nonetheless, it has something to be saidfor it.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, excuse me. I was just going to saythat I'm very sympathetic to what Governor Angell has said, but Ithink the Humphrey-Hawkins Act says we have to report the rate ofincrease or diminution of the monetary and credit aggregates. Andusually, I believe--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We would be required under thoseconditions to explain in some considerable detail why we dropped thetwo of them, and I--MR. BLACK. It was just the plural on "aggregates" that mademe hesitate, because I really support what he says if we could getaway with it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Can I go back to a different issuein the context of M2 or M3 and debt?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let's remember we're now in aposition where alternative II has been moved and seconded.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I want to make a comment about debtthat actually goes back to something else Governor Angell said. As Ithink about it here, I must say that I have some sympathy with theidea of making the debt range, within the framework of the motionthat's on the table, 5 to 9 percent. I think Don's observation isright that it's likely to come in somewhere around 7 percent. Thatrange has some appeal to me for both the cosmetics and the substanceof being able to say that we think the growth rate in debt has at lastsubsided--in a context in which in the minds of a lot of people thegrowth of debt has been symbolic of some of the excesses of the past--and of being able to point to an adjustment in the range of debt from6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent all the way down to 5 to 9 percent.MR. ANGELL. I would second that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't you make that as an amendmentand [Governor Angell can] second it. Why don't we vote on--. Well,first there has to be discussion. Does anyone want to discuss thisparticular amendment? Then, why don't we vote on it. All in favor ofthe Vice Chairman's amendment please raise your hand. Opposed? Canwe do that again? There are a lot of people who have not [raisedtheir hands!] [Laughter.]MR. ANGELL. Well, we call the roll anyway for the record,don't we?MR. HOSKINS. He wants a straw vote.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We can do this in a number of ways. Wecan vote. It is clear that we all have different views on M2, M3, anddebt. I think the simplest way, from what I've heard, is to have whatwe now have on the table: alternative II, which has 3 to 7 percent forM2, 3 to 7 percent for M3, and 6 to 10 percent for debt. Myimpression, basically, is that there is a consensus for M2; and,2/6-7/90therefore, I've asked for amendments to see whether those ranges wouldpass for M3 and debt. Jerry has raised a specific amendment toalternative II which would strike 6 to 10 percent for debt andsubstitute 5 to 9 percent. And that will be voted either up or down.MR. FORRESTAL. You're looking just to voting members?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, voting members only. But I don'tthink we have enough. As I counted, not all voting members voted.MR. ANGELL. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's call the roll on the ViceChairman's amendment.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Hoskins YesGovernor Johnson YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Seger NoPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It clearly carries. Would anyone liketo offer an amendment for other than 3 to 7 percent on M3?MR. JOHNSON. Since I was the first one to say that eventhough I supported alternative II on M2 I thought the range inalternative III would be appropriate for M3--given what's happening inthe broader aggregates and given the staff's forecast, which is evenin the lower [part] of the alternative III range--I'll make the motionthat we go to alternative III for M3, 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent.MR. BLACK. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I just ask a question of where theforecast would show M3 in 1991?MR. KOHN. We have 5 percent in 1991 because we have therunoff of thrift assets slowing down as more thrifts meet theircapital requirements.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, in effect, there is no evidence atthis particular stage that were we to move in that direction we'd haveto reverse and move it back up in 1991.MR. KOHN. May I make another statement at this point, Mr.Chairman? There is some risk [on debt]. Although we have 7 percentdebt growth for 1990, that is on the assumption that the RTC is offbudget and not in the federal government sector. That would add afew--2/6-7/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the way to handle that is tomake that assumption and be explicit in the Humphrey-Hawkins report;we will stipulate that.MR. KOHN. The point I was going to make is that if growthcame in a little low on M3 that would balance off by being a littlehigh perhaps on debt, if that's the way that came out.SPEAKER(?). I'm ready for lunch!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think we have to be very clearon what definition of debt we're using and not merely allow ourselvesto be moved by an arbitrary bookkeeping arrangement.MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, I might note on M3 that in ourflow-of-funds forecast we're still assuming that there is some degreeof restraint on thrift institution asset expansion and on thataggregate as a whole. If you look at the long-term trend, it is oneof a velocity decline. So it does raise some question, if you have6-1/2 percent as the top end, whether that would be sustainable overthe longer run unless we did get nominal GNP moving down into the 4 to5 percent range. So, that's a possible reason for a precaution in howaggressively you move the M3 range.MR. JOHNSON. But it seems to me that this is not the time toworry about that. The time would be '91 to worry about stabilizingthat range and maybe carrying it forward.MR. PRELL. Well, I was addressing the concern that theChairman was raising.MR. JOHNSON. Yes.MR. PRELL. Again, these things could be explained at each--MR. JOHNSON. I agree that that may be the significant issuethe next time we meet over this range.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any comments?MR. SYRON. May I ask a question? If we're going to move thedebt target down a whole point and leave the M2 target the same--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. SYRON. Given where the M3 target is about to come in, isthere some value of parallelism in the sense of people not seeing toomuch fine tuning in it and also going to 2 to 6 percent for the M3target? I'm coming back to [the question] of whether we're doing thisjust for this period, this year, and not looking out beyond it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We're essentially doing one year. Anyfurther questions on Governor Johnson's amendment? It has beenseconded. Will you call the roll?MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan Yes-40-2/6-7/90Governor Angell NoPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Hoskins YesGovernor Johnson YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Seger NoPresident Stern YesMR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, this is something I've never donebefore but in view of the way this may be interpreted I would like tochange my vote, if it's going to be recorded, because I don't want toexplain this little bitty thing. I would prefer not to go with thehalves but I don't want to explain that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Consider your vote changed.MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, I recognize the parliamentaryprocedure that you were using with these amendments but, in light ofwhat Governor Angell just said, I wonder if we do want this kind ofprecision of votes recorded in the minutes. I would much prefer tohave an overall vote that says whether we accept alternative II asamended and consider these largely straw votes and then let peoplevote up or down on something more substantive than these kinds offractions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would agree with that. There's reallyno reason to use up all our paper in trying to do that.MR. ANGELL. Well, but Mr. Chairman--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You can change your vote again if youwant.MR. ANGELL. Well, a procedural point: It seems to me that itmay have been well for us just to have a consensus move on these; butonce we took a vote, not to put it in the minutes offends my notion ofaccuracy of [minutes]. Is Virgil here?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Remember, we are in fact recording andvoting on the total. In other words, we are reflecting our viewsoverall.MR. ANGELL. Yes, I know. I'm just saying it's a matter ofprocedure. Roll-call votes are ordinarily recorded. I think it wouldbe well for us not to have roll-call votes on these kinds of--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sometimes it is easier just to find outquickly what the view is rather than segregate voting from nonvotingmembers and worry about who is for what.MR. ANGELL. Well, what's Virgil's view on this?MR. MATTINGLY. Well, it seems to me that if the Committeehas taken a vote that that should be recorded in the minutes. You canvote to rescind that vote.-41-2/6-7/90MR. BLACK. That wouldn't be good.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I just wonder if we're getting carriedaway here with this procedure.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, we are.MR. BOEHNE. My interpretation, Mr. Chairman, of what we didis that we took a straw vote and instead of doing it by raising handswe used our voices. And I view those two as largely equivalent.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I agree with him.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me suggest that we completethis and then we'll put on the table a rule in which this Committeecan make that judgment as to how we record this. I assume, Counsel,that we have that capability?MR. MATTINGLY. Yes sir.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Alternative II has been moved, seconded,amended, and is now subject to a vote.MR. BERNARD. Do you want me to read it, Mr. Chairman?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I think you better read it.MR. KELLEY. You can't describe it as alternative II anymore.MR. BLACK. I hope so.MR. BERNARD. I'm reading from line 59 of the draft directiveor from page 24 in the Bluebook: "The Federal Open Market Committeeseeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster pricestability, promote growth in output on a sustainable basis, andcontribute to an improved pattern of international transactions. Infurtherance of these objectives, the Committee at this meetingestablished ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 3 to 7 percent and 2-1/2to 6-1/2 percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of1989 to the fourth quarter of 1990. The monitoring range for growthof total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 5 to 9 percent for theyear. The behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to beevaluated in the light of movements in their velocities, developmentsin the economy and financial markets, and progress toward price levelstability."Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Hoskins NoGovernor Johnson YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Seger NoPresident Stern No-42-2/6-7/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The vote is complete. Now, wouldsomebody like to move that the minutes not record the preliminaryvote--rather, the vote on the amendment to alternative II?MR. LAWARE. I'll move whatever you said.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll second it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. All in favor please raise your hand.All opposed? The vote is--MR. BOYKIN. I just wanted to ask about the wording in thedirective. In the first sentence in that wording we had pricestability first. In the last sentence in the directive we have pricelevel stability last. I would suggest that we move the progresstoward price level stability up to the first item in that lastsentence, for reasons of substance as well as consistency.MR. BLACK. What lines are you on, Bob?MR. BOYKIN. I'm on page 24. This is on the 1990 ranges.The first sentence says: "The Federal Open Market Committee seeksmonetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability,promote growth" etc. The last sentence on that page says: "Thebehavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated inthe light of movements in their velocities, developments in theeconomy and financial markets, and progress toward price levelstability." I'm suggesting that we say "The behavior of the monetaryaggregates will be evaluated in the light of progress toward pricelevel stability, movements in their velocities, and developments inthe economy and financial markets."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In other words, you're trying to--MR. BOYKIN. Yes.MR. ANGELL. I would agree with that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So would I.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I take it that you're moving that andyou're seconding it. Yes?MR. ANGELL. I suggest we might not want to record it, Mr.Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think the edge--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What were you about to say?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think Mr. Boykin's suggestionmakes good sense.MR. ANGELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do I hear any objection? If not, I findthat that is the consensus of the Committee.-43-2/6-7/90MR. ANGELL. That's it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Record the dissents. I think thatbrings us to Mr. Kohn. Why don't we have his comments and perhaps wecan break for coffee at that point.MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. JOHNSON. I think that's a very good explanation; atleast that makes sense to me. May I ask one question that has poppedup in my mind over the last couple of days? In the paper this morningthere was talk of Germany going for a monetary [union] between Eastand West Germany. It appears that the Bundesbank is a littleconcerned about this. The political events are moving faster than thecentral bank in Germany would like. Now, I noticed that the dollarhas depreciated a little more against the DM, possibly showing someanticipation of a big surge in demand for marks because of thismonetary union. I've read some comments that the government ispressuring the Bundesbank to provide DM at a conversion rate for GDRmarks that is well above the market exchange rate. That worries me,and I think the Bundesbank is worried about maybe having to convertGDR marks to DM at an exchange rate that is not appropriate to themarket. If that were a big concern in the market, it seems to me thatthere would be a depreciation of the DM rather than an appreciation.What is going on there? Do you know any more than what is in thepaper?MR. TRUMAN. I don't know much more than what is in thepaper. I think several things are going on here. One is that thepolitical forces are seeking to do something--as political forces tendto do, if I may put it that way. I think the Bundesbank's resistanceto that, which I gather is shared by financial people in Bonn as well,is that this is dealing with the symptoms rather than the cause. Youcan't automatically exchange--well, you can do it--but you can'texchange x number of East German marks for West German marks and thensay that the world has changed and we'll all go on. The question is:What comes next? You haven't done anything just through the currencyexchange.MR. JOHNSON. I can see going to a DM standard, but I can'tsee exchanging--MR. TRUMAN. Moreover, it may make things worse in terms ofthe workings of the economy. The resistance from the Bundesbank comesprimarily from the view that--I'm repeating myself--doing this isdealing with the symptoms rather than the causes. On the other side,I would agree with your analysis that it is not so much the conversionin and of itself [that is a problem], because I've seen calculationsthat if all the [East German] currency were converted into West Germanmarks, there would not be a big change in the level of the moneysupply.MR. JOHNSON. I have seen some reports of 3 to 4 percent.MR. TRUMAN. Well, it's something like 3 percent, which istrivial in the sense of what you're dealing with, because it makessome sense to have a new transactions currency. There may be concern,looking down the road, that there may be more to it than that. If you-44-2/6-7/90think of what adjustments have to made, initially it would bestraightforward. Everybody's wages would be changed. If [theexchange ratio] were 3 to 1 and you were being paid x GDR marks perhour, you would now be paid a third of that per hour in West Germanmarks. And that probably won't work. Moreover, the price levelspresumably would adjust up to West German prices. And that's why itwon't work. Then you might get the secondary impact on the Bundesbank[unintelligible] inflate. And I would argue that you are right--thatone would be looking ahead, under those circumstances, to a moreinflationary Bundesbank policy and would end up tending to think thatthe deutschemark ought to depreciate rather than appreciate. So, thedeutschemark probably was responding to what is happening in Moscow,with all the fighting and discussion that has been going on between[unintelligible]. An interesting fact--and this is based really onone conversation--is that the East German financial people whommet with yesterday agree on this point. They agree thatthis conversion, without doing anything else, is likely just to makethings worse rather than better, even in this period running up--MR. JOHNSON. [Unintelligible] calls from a lot of veryimportant politicians wanting to do this.MR. TRUMAN. Well, that does happen.MR. CROSS. Well, I certainly agree with Ted. I think whatis happening in the market reflects the view that Gorbachev is incharge and things are likely to move ahead in a stable rather than anunstable way. The market is reflecting the value of the mark in thatsense. Beyond that, the market is probably thinking that theBundesbank and the Germans are not going to do something totallystupid in moving into this "markization," or whatever it is, of theother part of the German economy. And I think they are furtherthinking that to the extent there may be genuine costs to the WestGermans of making this move, which may mean higher interest rates andmore borrowing by the Germans, that that may not be altogether badfrom the point of view of the value of the D-mark--if the Bundesbankwins.MR. JOHNSON. If they win, yes.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Further questions for Mr. Kohn?President Parry.MR. PARRY. Don, I have a question about the consistency ofthe short- and long-term [alternatives] with regard to M2.Alternative B seems to me quite consistent with the alternative thatwas chosen for the long term. Obviously, M2 [growth] ends up highwell into the '90s. On the other hand, if one were in favor ofalternative III for the long term, that seems to me consistent withalternative C, and alternative C really is not consistent with thealternative that was chosen for the long term. Is that correct?MR. KOHN. I would agree with half of the statement but notnecessarily the other half, partly based on what you said earliertoday, President Parry. That is, alternative B is in a projectionsense consistent with the 6-1/2 percent [staff forecast] for the year.We're assuming for the year essentially no change in interest ratesunder "B." We would expect [M2] growth in the first half of the year-45-2/6-7/90to be stronger than in the second half of the year under thosecircumstances and to run along the top part of the range rather thanthe lower part. By the same token, if you had adopted a lower range--the alternative III range--which you didn't do, you would be hardpressed not to begin to lean a little toward "C." But to echo whatyou said earlier today, I think having adopted alternative II doesn'tmean you can't lean toward alternative C and tighten because there's alot of room on the down side. Alternative II does not get in the wayof running a tighter policy than assumed by the staff. It might getin the way of running an easier policy.MR. PARRY. Well, I agree with that. But someone who wasstrongly in favor of alternative III probably would be more inclinedto follow "C."MR. KOHN. I agree. If you were in favor of "III," you'd bemore inclined to "C."MR. PARRY. That's all I wanted to know. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Bob raised my question in part, but let merephrase it. If we were centering our ranges for the year, that wouldimply a 5 percent monetary growth. What kind of interest rateincreases would we have to have to generate that?MR. KOHN. Relative to the staff forecast of 6-1/2 percent[for M2 growth] you'd have to have an increase of about 1-1/2 pointsin interest rates in the first half of the year to get [M2 growth]down to 5 percent for the year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions?MR. BOEHNE. I have a question. What would a 1-1/2percentage point increase of the interest rate mean for the realeconomy, Mike?MR. KOHN. That's for Mr. Prell; he's in charge of the IScurve!MR. PRELL. I think moving that rapidly would make a materialdifference. We can probably infer something from the simulations thatwere presented earlier--that a 1 percent slower M2 growth adds only1/2 percentage point to the interest rate level. And you saw theconsequences in terms of GNP growth. So you'd be enlarging that. Itwould make it a much closer call as to whether we had any significant[economic] growth this year.MR. BOEHNE. In other words, it probably would bring on arecession, to be blunt about it.MR. BLACK. No growth.MR. PRELL. A no-growth scenario.MR. ANGELL. But there are some unknowns here. If we were totighten short-term rates, long-term rates might reverse-46-2/6-7/90[unintelligible] take the last reductions. So it seems to me that onemight make a case that long-term rates would be lower rather thanhigher.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That would follow from the crash--MR. JOHNSON. --in the stock market.MR. PRELL. Well, that's all off the baseline in the model.Clearly, there are different views about underlying forces. You mighthave an entirely different conclusion about the ramifications of thattype of move.MR. ANGELL. Well, I would think an increase of 150 basispoints in short-term rates probably would not be expected to befollowed by future increases. Consequently, I'm sure long bond priceswould rise and long-term interest rates would fall. But I don't knowwhether that mix will work very well or not.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Mr. Kohn? If not,why don't we break for coffee at this stage and come back to this.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me start off by making some commentsabout what I think is going on and what I sense are the issues that weall are concerned about. For analytical purposes and policy purposesI think it's probably well worthwhile separating, to the extent thatone can, the physical aspects of the economy--more specifically, theincome and product accounts analysis--against the balance sheets ofthe financial system. If you look strictly at the movement of income,consumption, inventories, investment and the like, it is very easy tomake the case that we may in fact already have seen the weakest pointin [activity]. The very sharp reduction in motor vehicle assembliesin January coupled with an acceleration of motor vehicle sales[resulted in] a fairly sharp--close to 300,000 seasonallyadjusted--decline in passenger car inventories, and there is evidenceof some stability in the order pattern for capital goods, if noincrease. In short, just going through the sort of simple evaluationand balance problem, it's probably likely that industrial production,after falling sharply in January--well over a percent--has reboundedin the early weeks of February. In a sense, with housing startscoming back--considering the permits backlog--one can very readily seea process of very modest acceleration going on. Initial claims, whichwill be published tomorrow, come down under our seasonals from theirsharp peak of the week before, although insured unemployment for theweek ended January 13 was up, clearly reflecting the layoffs thatbecame fairly extensive early in the month, specifically in the motorvehicles area. So, if one were to look only at those data, the senseof having come through this deterioration and perhaps seeing it at anend seems somewhat positive.Unfortunately, running simultaneously with this is whatappears to be a general, continued financial balance sheetdeterioration. It started perhaps with a related sort of halffinancial, half physical volume type of phenomenon--profit margins--which continue to erode. And it is very difficult to make the casethat unless and until profit margins bottom out and turn back up that-47-2/6-7/90we will have anything resembling a semblance of business expansion.But, with prices defined in terms equivalent to profit marginsincreasing at a relatively stable rate excluding the energy and foodexplosions, what we are looking at is stable price inflation withfalling profit margins, which implies that underlying unit costs aregoing up at a rate that is higher than the underlying inflation rate.And that suggests that we still have not yet seen any evidence of adecline in the underlying rate of inflation. On the contrary, asprofit margins stabilize and rise, we're more likely to see pressureworking in the other direction before we get inflation moving down.But, just as important in that whole process is clearly the overallsense of fragility, which Jerry Corrigan and John LaWare werediscussing yesterday. We are getting some evidence of creditrationing in some form within the banking system, although I think arecent study--I've forgotten who did it--suggested that there's lessthere than usually meets the eye when one looks at processes similarto the one we see at the moment. You didn't read the study, Mike?MR. PRELL. I'm not sure what study you're referring to.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It was one of the things that slippedthrough my in-box and that I read as it was going to my out-box. Thegeneral thrust of the piece--. As I recall it was not contemporaneousbut was basically a study of the extent to which credit rationingtends to go on and what its effect would be. I have trouble with thisbusiness of the extent to which banks are pulling in when that's notreflected in interest rates. There's usually more talk about peoplenot being able to get loans; and if interest rates don't reflect it, Itend to be more dubious than not. Leaving that aside, there is noquestion that there has been some softening in real estate values,although on the basis of a report--which I'm sure you did see, Mike,because I know you were involved in writing it--the evidence ofdeterioration in real estate values, certainly in the residentialarea, is mixed. I think it's fairly heavily localized in a number ofareas. And while it may be spreading, the anecdotal evidence probablyis more negative than the real world. In a sense, that's what oneoften sees.But, the crucial issue that we're dealing with here is thatwe have an international system that is creating significant problemsfor us. I think there is a severe threat to the Japanese stockmarket; there is a general threat to the level of our interest rateshere. And as a consequence of that, one concludes that while on theone hand [economic conditions] seem to be improving on the side of theincome and product accounts--pretty much in line with what theGreenbook in fact is saying--the underlying risks, which are verydifficult to model, clearly if anything, are getting worse and notbetter. How important is that relative to the other? I don't thinkwe can readily make clear judgments on it.In my judgment, one thing that comes out of all of this isthat clearly, at this particular stage, making any significant movesin monetary policy probably would be ill advised, because to theextent that we can contribute anything to the outlook, my suspicion atthe moment is that the most important thing is a sense of stability.I'm not certain, using Wayne Angell's rule, that if we were to lowerrates at this particular stage that we would not find that we werecreating more problems rather than less. On the other hand, I'm not-48-2/6-7/90certain that I agree with Wayne's view that if we were to move ratesup we could get long-term rates down. If that were guaranteed I'd bethe first in line--second behind you. In any event, I think that atthis stage policy is partly blocked. I don't think that we candiscuss, at least publicly, some of these problems because to theextent that we communicate to the markets that our ability to leverthe outlook is becoming increasingly less forceful, I think we can setoff some unfortunate instabilities.In any event, I come out at this moment in favor of nochange. I have no strong views about whether or not we should staysymmetric or go to asymmetric toward ease. If we were to change overthe next intermeeting period, the odds are strongly likely that wewill find reasons to move down rather than up. But frankly, myexpectation and suspicion is that we probably will find that the leastworse policy will call for more of the same--that is unchanged,alternative B. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your analysis. Iwould favor "B" symmetric. That would be my preference even though Ithink that a large increase in the fed funds rate would cause longbond prices to rise. I believe there are many other factors thatwould make it unwise to do that, not the least of which would be theimpact upon the yen. It seems to me that any tightening that we didat this point would be most apt to cause the Bank of Japan to make amove. Consequently, I would see it as somewhat frivolous in regard toits benefits and would believe, with you, that stability is the bestpath. Even though I wouldn't admit it outside this room and eventhough I like to talk about other factors like energy prices and oilprices, I think the fact of the matter is that the Federal Reserve isnot in a "pushing on the string" era; we are instead in an era inwhich we're out of rope. And somehow or other, if we are going to getwater out of the well and we don't have enough rope to reach it, wedon't have as much power as we would like to have. I agree with yourdecision but I would very strongly favor symmetry because I would likea directive that would give the members of the Committee a chance tolook at the impact of any intermeeting adjustment on the M2 growthpath. It seems to me that it should be somewhat more of a major stepthan it might be otherwise.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I also would support alternative "B" andsymmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Yes, I agree with your analysis of the problem.That problem is, if I read your analysis correctly, that we have areal economy that looks like it perhaps has been through the worst interms of the numbers that we're reading, and that we will get thegrowth that Mike and the rest of the Committee essentially forecastedyesterday. I also agree that there's fragility out there. We hearthe same stories that were repeated the other day about creditrationing, and people want me to express concerns in this meeting thatsomething is going to happen in 60 days unless the banks start lendingagain. [That type of comment] comes in a lot. So, I agree that thereis fragility. But I don't think we can deal with that concern as-49-2/6-7/90directly as we might want--or at least that's my view. I think itdepends on the measures of policy that one uses. If you argue thatinterest rates are the measure of policy, then I think your analysisis appropriate; that could upset the wagon. If you argue that themeasure is stability in monetary growth rates over time, then I thinkwe're running the risk of upsetting the apple cart or the wagon byallowing M2 to grow 6-1/2 percent for this year. It has beenaveraging 4.6 percent for three years. It seems to me the midpoint ofthe target range was about an appropriate place to be. Now, I don'tthink we can get there by raising rates 150 basis points now becauseI'm not willing to run that risk. But it seems to me we need toindicate to the public that we want to make progress toward reducingthe rate of monetary growth closer to the midpoint. So I'd becomfortable if we could make some moves in the front half of thisyear, maybe 50 to 75 basis points, that would produce a slower growthrate in the second half of the year. And I think the strength in theeconomy, if I remember your forecast correctly, is in the second half.MR. PRELL. Well, really, the first and second halves averageabout the same.MR. HOSKINS. They average the same. So, we run the samerisks in terms of weakness, I suppose. But we might have a bettergrip, certainly, by then on the fragility issue. So, I think itreally boils down to what our measure of policy is here. What do wethink is driving us in terms of economic activity? I tend to comedown on the side of monetary growth rates, so I would be in favor ofalternative C.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I agree with you, Mr. Chairman. Yourprescription of the situation is pretty much in accord with mine. I'mstarting to see, I think, positive signs in the leading-type data thatshow the economy may have reached its weakest point. Going forward Ithink we are going to see some improvement, although I also agree thatthe situation is fragile and that there certainly is credit rationinggoing on. That may grow as a problem and affect attitudes andexpectations as time goes on. So, we ought to be very careful abouthow we position ourselves. I'm also perhaps a little more optimisticabout the future on inflation than some others. I noticed that lastJuly our forecasts for 1989 indicated increases of 5 to 5-1/2 percenton the CPI and in fact the CPI came in at 4-1/2 percent. I don'tthink anybody was too confused about what special factors were at workon the inflation rate at that stage. Everybody knew in July that wewere getting some benefits from the exchange rate and some otherthings, yet we still thought inflation was going to come in at about5-1/2 percent for 1989 and it came in significantly below that. Inotice the central tendency for 1990 is now running at least 1/2 pointbelow what we estimated it to be for 1990 back in July. I thinkthat's improvement. Our own expectations have improved whether wereally think inflation has or not. The [forecasts] show that. So, Ithink what has happened is that our standards have gotten tougher aswe've moved along. I don't think that's bad; it's probably good. Itmeans when things work out a little better we can stay tough and getto our goals that much quicker. I agree that the news on inflation isgoing to get a little worse before it gets better because of some ofthe short-term pressures, especially the January numbers. But I-50-2/6-7/90think, or at least I hope, that the year is going to be fairly good.From my perspective, the situation calls for alternative B; I alsoprefer symmetric language even though there are some potential risksassociated with the credit situation spreading. I think that'sbalanced by the slightly more positive leading data on the economy.So, that leaves me somewhere in the symmetric category.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I agree with your analysis, Mr. Chairman. Ithink we ought to stay where we are. I would state the case forstaying where we are somewhat more strongly, I think, than you did. Ithink it would be counterproductive for us to change policy at thispoint. The forward-looking indicators do suggest that the economy isbottoming out and we've prided ourselves in staying ahead of the curveover the last year or so. And I think this is a good time to payattention to those forward-looking indicators. On the financialfragility, I think lower rates would not help the credit rationing.What will help the credit rationing is when confidence begins to growagain about the economy and the risk of recession fades into thebackground. I'd also put more emphasis on the international side. Tolower rates now would be counterproductive in terms of internationalflows and I think it would be counterproductive in terms of long-termrates. So, I feel quite strongly that we ought to stay where we areand for that reason I would like a symmetrical directive. To try tomove away from a "no change" policy is a very major decision and itought to require a full discussion of the Committee before we do it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, I also favor no change in policy at thisjuncture, largely for the reasons that you and Ed Boehne haveexpressed. I don't see much of a case for any change. As far as thereal economy is concerned, even if it's starting to improve, it'slikely to remain sluggish for another quarter or two anyway. I amsensitive to how rapidly the money supply, M2, grows this year, but Idon't have any sense of urgency that we have to start doing somethingabout it on the basis of the projection that has been presented sofar. Experience, it seems to me, has taught us that these growthrates can wander around substantially over periods as long as sixmonths or so. So, as I said, I don't have a lot of urgency about thatat the moment. I also would favor symmetric language for the reasonsexpressed and also because it doesn't tie our hands.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think your analysis is righton the mark. I perceive that the economy is doing somewhat better butI think what we really need at this point is stability, not only onthe domestic side but, as Ed Boehne indicated, for internationalreasons as well. We have made some progress on inflation and from mypoint of view inflation is still too high. We need to keep our eye onthe goal of price stability, but I think we need to recognize that inthis kind of an environment it's going to take us a long time to getthere. So I would not want us to move aggressively in the otherdirection. I think that staying where we are is the important thingright now for the markets. So, I would favor alternative B withsymmetric language.-51-2/6-7/90If I can just add a footnote to a comment that was madeyesterday on credit rationing: I'm hearing from a number of bankersthat the credit rationing situation is being exacerbated by theregulators. Now again, this may just be the defense on their part.The regulator is translated in my District as the Comptroller of theCurrency. I'm hearing this view quite a lot, and I think there's aconcern among national bankers about the aggressive stance that theregulator is taking.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. "B" symmetric. Looking at things overall, Iagree with your analysis. I would like to make more progress againstinflation, but in terms of moving now the international problem wetalked about argues against that. I am concerned about the financialfragility and do agree that a little lowering in rates isn't going todeal with that. But a little lowering in rates could have some effecton the overall economy. So, balancing these two things out, I comeout with the view that we should stay just where we are, particularlywith the move that we're making on the long-term side and what theChairman is going to be announcing in the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony.I think that's consistent with just being right down the middle of nochange.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I believe that we cannot change basic policy andI would favor "B," symmetric. Instinctively, I would like to havemade a case for asymmetric language toward ease, but I think that ourhands are completely tied by the international situation and our long-rate situation. So, I feel that that would be inappropriate and wouldsupport "B," symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "B," also symmetric. This has allbeen said, but in this intermeeting period I think the chances are atleast 50/50 that we will see some further increases in interest ratesabroad. There is some danger that that could result in a realwatershed situation either for domestic interest rates or exchangerates or both. But that really does put me squarely in the symmetriccamp.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I came to the meeting with the viewin terms of policy moves that we've really done quite a bit in thelast 6 to 8 months, that it will take a while for all this to workthrough and that, therefore, this would be a very appropriateopportunity to simply stay where we are. Therefore, I'd also be infavor of alternative B and symmetric language. My hunch is, given thelength of time between this meeting and the next meeting, that therewill be an appropriate opportunity to have a phone call.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I would still prefer some modest degree ofeasing. From where I sit or stand, I don't see that the slowdown that-52-2/6-7/90we've had in either autos or housing is completely wound up and I dobelieve that some drop in interest rates, even modest, would help.Looking at autos first, the dealers are very reluctant to add to theirinventories. One of the reasons is the cost of floor planning them.One half of 1 percent may not sound like much to us here, but it'sreal money to those folks. So, I think that would be significant. Ithink that housing is very sensitive to the level of interest ratesand that the credit availability issue is especially critical--not infinancing Mrs. Jones who wants to buy a condo but in financing thebuilders themselves. That doesn't show up in these spreads betweenmortgage rates and T-bills or anything else because that's not whatwe're measuring. We're talking about loans to contractors. So, Ithink that somewhat easier conditions would help both of thoseindustries.If we should tip the economy into a recession, CongressmanNeal may still be holding hearings on the need for zero inflation but434 other people in Congress in the House and 100 people in the Senateare going to be dragging us down there to explain why in an electionyear they're facing rising amounts of unemployment back in theirdistricts. And Congressman Neal--frankly, I don't know thecharacteristics of his district--may even get some calls. Who knows?But I don't think there's that much at risk for this kind of move andit could help in the immediate future. On the matter of inflation, Istill maintain that we are not able through monetary policy toinfluence all of the sources of inflationary pressure and that we hadbetter spread the responsibility for fighting inflation over moregroups, including the folks under the dome down the street. They do alot of things that contribute to inflation and I don't see how we canoffset here all the bad policy moves that come out of the Congress.It may sound macho to beat our chest and pretend we can, but I thinkthe cost to the economy of doing this is going to be very, verysevere. So, I vote for "A."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I favor "B," symmetric. There's no expectationof an easing of rates out there now and I don't see what we gain bycreating one again.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. "B," symmetric, Mr. Chairman. I really have nonew thoughts to add to those that have already been suggested.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I come out somewhere between "B"and "C," as a matter of fact, recognizing all of the concerns thathave been expressed: Financial fragility--we've experienced some ofthat; credit rationing--we've experienced some of that, and we'restill there. Granted, the players sure have changed.MR. BLACK. Some of you are still there!MR. KELLEY. Some of you are still there!-53-2/6-7/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That booming District of yours isturning your head!MR. BOYKIN. If our view is right--and obviously we're anoutlier on the up side--that there's probably a little more strengthin the economy than the consensus feeling, and given that we're notquite as optimistic on inflation as the staff is, it does place mesomewhat in a dilemma. If we wait until we get confirmation of whichway it's going, obviously, it's always too late. In trying to figureout what I would do in this kind of situation, I guess alternative"B," [is appropriate]. But when we start talking about thedirective--and this certainly would be somewhat of a nuance--I wouldbe inclined to go asymmetric on the side of greater restraint.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further comments? President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I share fully Lee Hoskins'assessment of how we ought to measure the impact of monetary policy.And that puts someone who believes that in a very difficult positionbecause what we have to do is to pick out of the air, as it were, someborrowed reserve target that will create some federal funds rate thatwill enable us to predict the demand for money. I'm very skeptical ofour ability to do that in the short run, and I always have troublewith this particular part of the meetings for that reason. My guessis that the caveat Don Kohn threw out is probably right and that we'reprobably going to get a slower rate of monetary growth with existingmoney market conditions than shown in "B." That's a pure guess. Butfor that reason I would stick with "B" because I think the rate ofgrowth we may get on M2 may be closer to that shown for "C."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. "B," symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we have a significant majorityfor "B," symmetric. The Secretary will read an operational paragraphencompassing that and I will entertain a motion.MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. Taking account of progress towardprice stability, the strength of the business expansion, the behaviorof the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange anddomestic financial markets, slightly greater reserve restraint orslightly lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in theintermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expectedto be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period fromDecember through March at annual rates of about 7 and 3-1/2 percentrespectively. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if itappears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditionsduring the period before the next meeting are likely to be associatedwith a federal funds rates persistently outside a range of 6 to 10percent."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move that?MR. LAWARE. Move it.-54-2/6-7/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Who seconds?MR. JOHNSON. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would the Secretary call the roll?MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin NoPresident Hoskins NoGovernor Johnson YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Seger NoPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that completes our business fortoday.. Our next meeting is on March 27th.SPEAKER(?). That's right.MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, do you want to say a little, ormaybe I can say it, about how we plan to run that meeting? The taskforce report on System foreign currency operations is--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're talking about March?MR. TRUMAN. March, right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't you talk.MR. TRUMAN. The report is due at that time and we plan toget the associated papers to you, I hope, 10 days to 2 weeks inadvance of that meeting. Given your conference afterwards, we decidedthe best way to try to handle this would be to start at 9:00 a.m. and,especially if we finish [the Committee's regular business] at 12:00noon, then run through the last hour and into the lunch period todiscuss the task force papers that are being presented to you in thatorder. We figured foreign exchange goes better over tuna fish than"A," "B," and "C."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is that satisfactory?MR. PARRY. When is the planning meeting?MR. TRUMAN. My understanding from talking to Ted Allison isthat they are a little flexible about whether the planning meetingstarts at 2:30 or 3:00 p.m. It would be whenever the discussion--MR. JOHNSON. We're free.MR. HOSKINS. Will the papers be distributed before?MR. TRUMAN. Oh, yes. Actually, drafts are already in theReserve Banks.-55-2/6-7/90MR. HOSKINS. Yes, I know.MR. TRUMAN. We will polish them up and get them out to you.They are rather thick, I fear to say, but I think actually they'rerelatively accessible. We tried hard to make them accessible and wewill try to get them out to you in an orderly manner and have a verybrief summary--a reader's guide for them.MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, do you view this as a generalintellectual discussion or do you view it as more than that--assomething leading up to an action of some kind?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, it depends very concretely on thenature of the discussion. I don't have any particular action in mind.I think that what we are doing is probably about the best we can doconsidering the nature of the circumstances. But I certainly think itrequires a general review. If there are other alternatives that theCommittee decides it might want to consider, they can be put on thetable.MR. HOSKINS. I think the answer to Ed's question depends onwhat is in or not in the papers.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there 11 or 12 papers, Ted?MR. TRUMAN. If I'm not mistaken, there are 11.MR. CROSS. Eleven papers so far.MR. KEEHN. By doing it at lunch, is it clear that it's not apart of the Committee meeting?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, it is part.MR. TRUMAN. It is part of the Committee meeting.MR. KEEHN. It is part of the Committee meeting but at lunch.MR. TRUMAN. Well, from whenever you finish the main part ofyour meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, the meeting will stay in sessionthrough lunch.MR. ANGELL. But it's not a recorded vote.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not unless the Committee rulesotherwise. Anything else? If not, let's adjourn. We are earlierthan I expected and sandwiches will not be here for another 35minutes, so we're all on our own.END OF MEETING-56-