Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeAugust 21, 1990A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 21, 1990, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneBoykinHoskinsKelleyLaWareMullinsSegerSternMessrs. Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, Alternate Membersof the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis,and Boston, respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Kohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Lindsey,Rosenblum, Siegman, Simpson, andStockton, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMr. Monhollon, First Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of RichmondMessrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, T. Davis, and Scheld,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofSt. Louis, San Francisco, Richmond, Kansas City,and Chicago, respectivelyMessrs. Fieleke, Meyer, Miller and Ms. White,Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofBoston, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and New York,respectivelyMs. Rosenbaum, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bankof AtlantaTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofAugust 21, 1990CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. We'll startwith a controversial issue: approval of the minutes.SPEAKER(?). So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Sam Cross.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Sam?MR. HOSKINS. Sam, was the unwinding of the DM warehousingrelated to any collateral problems that we have with respect to notes?Why did the Treasury do that? What reason did the Treasury give?MR. CROSS. Well, I think the Treasury is interested, as weare, in not having these [warehousing] amounts continue indefinitelyand be too big. So, when the conditions were such that it waspossible to make some arrangements in order to bring those holdingsdown, they were not reluctant or hesitant to do this. It's notenvisaged as a continuous or perpetual facility.MR. HOSKINS. Are we looking to bring ours down?MR. CROSS. Our mark holdings?MR. HOSKINS. Yes.MR. CROSS. We don't have any plans at the present time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Sam? This isthe first time I recall in an extraordinarily long time when therehave been no transactions. When was the last time there were notransactions during an intermeeting [period]?MR. CROSS. Well, I don't think we had any interventiontransactions in the last period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We had to ratify some.MR. CROSS. I'd have to look it up, but there hasn't been anyexchange market intervention for some months.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, of that I'm aware. But quitefrankly, it's the first time I recall in a very long time that therehas been no [need for] ratification.MR. CROSS. We'll check the date.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The same, of course, does not apply toPeter Sternlight's [area].8/21/90MR. STERNLIGHT. Shall I proceed?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, please.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Sternlight?MR. PARRY. Peter, what do you think the number of primarydealers will be a year from now? What is basically happening? Iassume these pressures are not likely to get any better in terms ofprofitability.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, the experience of the opening five orsix months of this year is a little better than last year. I wouldn'tbe surprised to see some further decline of several dealers. Thereare still more than enough, certainly, to serve our needs and theneeds of the market. We got along nicely for a decade or so with anumber that varied in the mid-30s, and I think that would be a verysatisfactory kind of number now.MR. PARRY. So we may get back to that?MR. STERNLIGHT. It's possible that we'll have some furtherdecline [in the number of primary dealers], yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions? If not, may I have amotion to ratify the transactions since the July meeting?MR. SYRON. So move.MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We'll now move on tothe staff report on the economic situation. I'd like first to call onMike Prell.MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, I was away the last three weeks andmissed much of the excitement. For that reason I've asked DaveStockton, who was here for it all to reach the exciting conclusion, topresent the domestic side of the outlook.MR. STOCKTON. Thank you. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Questions for Messrs.Stockton and Truman?MR. SYRON. In Part I of the Greenbook you talk about therevision in your inflation forecast and say that it's primarilybecause of the oil outlook. I was just wondering, since we did havesome other figures that came in before that--this is an exercise ofspeculation, I realize--if you had been redoing the Greenbook and [theinvasion by] Iraq had not occurred, what rough estimate would you havehad in terms of the forecast for the change in inflation?8/21/90MR. STOCKTON. I think we were going to estimate somethingroughly on the order of .1 or so higher price inflation both in 1991and 1992 as well, if we had not made other changes to the outlook pathto offset that. The dollar obviously was going to be providing alittle more boost to domestic prices. And the downward revision Imentioned that we have made to our estimate of potential output, andpart of that is a downward adjustment to trend productivity, alsowould have implied a bit more pressure on prices than we previouslythought.MR. SYRON. Can I just follow up on that, in terms of thedownward revisions? You revised down by 1/4 point, I guess, yourestimate of potential. But the revisions we saw in the actual datawere pretty disturbing to say the least. Were there any specialfactors that caused you not to revise down further? Or was it justthat your model came out with about 1/4 point decline in potentialgiven the data that we have? I was a little surprised that therewasn't a greater decline in potential, given that the unemploymentrate remained the same.MR. STOCKTON. This is a very imprecise calculation. But theimportant point to remember about the downward revision to potentialoutput is that we extended that downward revision to potential outputall the way back to 1980. Therefore, the cumulative effect on thelevel of potential output by the time we get to 1990 is quite large.Essentially, what we're trying to do is this: Every year when wereceive the GNP revisions we try to feel around to [determine] whatsort of underlying trend productivity would best explain the course ofactivity over the entire business cycle. In the absence of anyparticular reason for assuming that there had been a pronounced breakin the growth rate of potential output just in the last two years, weessentially adjusted the entire path down extending all the way backto the previous peak. So, in terms of the level of slack one ends upwith, while it appears to you that we just have revised down 1/4 of apercentage point in the last two years when the real GNP figures wererevised down much more, that might have implied that even then therewould have been somewhat greater slack. The cumulative effect ofhaving revised that trend down over 10 years implies that [when] weget to the end the slack is not too much different, but we've--MR. SYRON. How sensitive is your model to short-term changesin demographics--the composition of the labor force?MR. STOCKTON. It's not sensitive to that at all.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What is a concern in a sense is thatthere's very little chance that the demographics are wrong in that youget pretty much the same pattern if you [unintelligible] the laborforce or if you construct the labor force out of the payroll data andthe insured unemployment. They both show the degree of tightness thathas been exhibited by the sample surveys which, from the evidence thatwe see, suggests that this is not a statistical anomaly that's goingto get revised next year.MR. PRELL. We will be taking another cut at this when we getthe revisions on the employment data next month. We may havesomething additional to report then.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.8/21/90MR. PARRY. I have two questions. Dave, at the FOMCinformation call Ted Truman gave us some useful rules of thumb aboutthe effects of a change in the price of oil on real growth and also onthe CPI inflation. It seems to me that the effects on inflation arerather substantial; I was struck by what you show as a very sharpdecline in the fixed-weight deflator for the fourth quarter from 4.7to 4.0 percent. I know the impacts on the fixed-weight deflator aredifferent from those on the CPI. But even taking that into account,it seems to me that that is a very low number. Could you explain thatand indicate what contribution oil is making to that number?MR. STOCKTON. For the fourth-quarter fixed-weight number?Well, the principal reason the fixed-weight deflator does not show aslarge an effect as the CPI is that, while obviously we consume moreenergy than we produce, the weights for energy are several percentagepoints different in the CPI and the GNP fixed-weight. And that is theprincipal reason for the difference. There may be some slightdifferences in what we assumed about the fourth quarter as well. Wehave a very low increase from the federal sector in the fixed-weightdeflator in the fourth quarter, which is helping to pull things down.MR. PARRY. So, it's just across the board--smaller increasesin quite a few sectors?MR. STOCKTON. I would say that's true, with the differencein weights between the energy share in the CPI and the energy share inthe GNP being the biggest factor.MR. PARRY. Yes, I heard. The second point is that I wasreally struck by the Commerce Department revisions of compensation permanhour in the nonfarm business sector for 1989. In the period from1984 through [the end of] your forecast the lowest compensation permanhour, excluding 1989, is 3.7 percent; in the forecast it's about5.1 or 5.2 percent. During the whole year [1989] the increase was inthe 2 percent area. It just seems very difficult to understand whathappened in 1989 that would make those numbers believable.MR. STOCKTON. Well, the first thing to mention is that, asMike pointed out, we have not yet received benchmark revisions to theemployment or hours data. We'll receive those in September.Typically, those [benchmark revisions] occur in May and June and bythe time the revised compensation per hour figures would come out [theCommerce Department] would already have incorporated those revisions.They had to. And as a result, we really didn't even wish to discussthose figures in the Greenbook because we think at this point they arepretty meaningless.MR. PARRY. Okay.MR. PRELL. We don't want to offer you the great hope thatthat's going to eliminate all of the peculiarities in these numbers.This series just seems to move in ways that are inexplicable at times.And we think the ECI data are a more reliable guide than--MR. PARRY. It certainly seems to be that way at this point.8/21/90 -5-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The ECI data are far more comparablewith the monthly average hourly earnings numbers; both the numeratorand the denominator are comparable.MR. PARRY. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I guess the revision would be horrendouson the compensation numbers.MR. PARRY. I think so. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Let me compliment you on your report. I thinkyou and Ted did an excellent job on what is a difficult situation toget a hold of. Our whole approach has been one of gradually openingup some excess capacity and hoping that that will dampen prices. Todate, at best we've kept prices from accelerating. But if wedisaggregate prices, we find more progress in the goods sector than wedo in the services sector; and the goods side of the economy is moreresponsive to monetary policy. That raises a very fundamentalquestion as to how much excess capacity one really has to open up inthe economy to generate the kind of anti-inflation progress [we hopefor] on the services side. I'm wondering, now that we are, say, ayear and a half or so into this strategy, if the staff has given anythought to whether the whole thing is just more complicated than thisfairly simple notion of opening up some aggregate excess capacity--that it may not be all that simple and that the fundamental strategymay have some flaws to it.MR. STOCKTON. I guess my basic reaction, of course, is toagree with your statement that the process is considerably morecomplicated than just opening up slack and having inflation change insome mechanical way. The labor markets are extremely complexphenomena, so it is going to be more complicated. On the other hand,I would look at events of the last several years as more aconfirmation of that basic underlying paradigm than a contradiction.That is, wage inflation in particular had been on a downtrend through1986 with the unemployment rate above 6 percent--really in some senseit was somewhere in the 7 to 6 percent range. As the unemploymentrate moved below that, wage inflation turned around. And over thelast year, we've had the unemployment rate at 5-1/4 percent and we'veseen some mild acceleration. We have yet really to create, at leaston the labor market side in our view, any slack that would besufficient to reduce those trends. Now, another point that you madethat I think is correct is that we have seen progress in moving[inflation] back down again on the manufacturing side as slack appearsto have opened up in terms of capacity utilization. So, I think therecent events have been relatively kind to that particular paradigm,recognizing that there are developments in the agricultural sector,the energy sector, and movements of the exchange rate that at timesclearly influence the pattern of overall price developments. But atthis point I wouldn't see any compelling reason to abandon the basicparadigm while recognizing that the confidence [intervals] one canplace around the estimates of what slack is or what any particularlevel of slack might actually lead to are quite wide.8/21/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, actually, the error here is inparticipation rates in the labor force. If you substitute historicalforecasts of labor [unintelligible] participation rates, theunemployment rate opens up with the same growth. Presumably, the wagerate following previous patterns does precisely what the model wouldsuggest. So I think the problem we're looking at in an arithmetic/analytical sense is: What is going on in the participation rates inthe labor force that we do not understand? I'm not saying that's thesole issue but, unless we can answer that question, we're caught inthe dilemma whereby at these growth rates we don't get any looseningin the system.MR. PRELL. We also have to keep in mind the possibility thatsome of those phenomena that might be affecting labor forceparticipation suggest that the unemployment rate may not capture allof the elements that are affecting wage behavior. If labor forceparticipation is falling off because people don't feel the jobopportunities are there, that's a somewhat different kind of slack inthe system that could moderate wage increases. So, it's a verycomplex system. But I would underscore the point that there doesn'tseem to be evidence contradicting the basic view that slack willdiminish inflationary pressures. Indeed, there are few other channelsavailable to us that would seem really to affect the inflation rate.MR. BOEHNE. Well, there's a fair amount of history in thiscountry and other countries [suggesting] that a recession will bringnoticeable relief on inflation. But there is not a lot of evidencethat suggests that this gradual approach of opening up slack but nothaving a recession will result in very much.MR. PRELL. That's true because we haven't had extendedperiods of slow growth. So the question is: Is it the slack or is itthe sudden shock of a decline that one sees in a recession that reallyexplains that?MR. BOEHNE. Right.MR. PRELL. We noted that fact last fall when we had apresentation on inflation--that there was uncertainty about whetherthere was some sort of nonlinearity in the system.MR. TRUMAN. I wouldn't want to overinterpret theinformation, but the current Canadian experience is that they have hadslow growth for an extended period of time, not a recession, and theirconsumer price inflation has begun to bend down. The year-over-yearrate has declined by about 1/2 percentage point. They have beenhelped, if you want to put it that way, by a depreciating dollar. I'mnot sure how accurate that [linkage] is, but it is an example where abasic strategy that is essentially the same--maybe a little moreso--seems to be producing some results along those lines.MR. FORRESTAL. How long have they been following it?MR. TRUMAN. They've been at it for, depending on how youcount these things, about a year and a half or so.MR. FORRESTAL. Longer than us?8/21/90MR. TRUMAN. Yes, a little longer. They've had slowergrowth; they have come down from a higher growth [rate] to[unintelligible]. So in some sense there has been more decelerationof growth in the period and their unemployment began to turn up inabout the early part of this year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But their unemployment rate was muchhigher?MR. TRUMAN. Well, as I said, I don't want to overinterpretthis. It is generally accepted that they have a much less flexibleeconomy than ours and, therefore, their natural rate of unemploymentshould be higher. Their market mobility and so forth is tighter andthey have complicated laws; that is one explanation for why theystarted out with a somewhat higher inflation rate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. The budget deficit numbers that Peter mentioned,particularly the $300 billion, are a little higher than I had heard.That is a combination of lower revenues and higher expenditures, Ipresume. On the expenditure side, is it mainly the RTC-relatedexpenses or are there other categories that are also going up? If youtake that higher number, is there any way that we can finance thatwithout having big upward pressure on rates?MR. STERNLIGHT. Maybe I shouldn't respond because I haven'tseen official estimates on that anywhere in that area. But as I said,that assumes a soft economy--skirting along the edge of recession orin some of the private estimates an actual recession--so there isdefinitely a weakening of revenues. No budget package had the thriftbail-out expenditures greater than in this current fiscal year.MR. PRELL. Let me try to put this in the perspective of ourforecast. For fiscal 1991 we have a $35 billion deficit reduction.That's smaller than the $50 billion they still are talking about butperhaps some of the people who are concerned by recent developmentswould think that maybe even $35 billion is in question at this point.As Dave indicated, just before the last meeting all the talk wasleading us to think that maybe $35 billion was too pessimistic. Atthis point, it looks like a healthy adjustment given the politicalsituation. But if you take some of that out, we could begin to movecloser to a $250 billion deficit, including $70 billion of RTC-related[expenditures] in fiscal 1991. If you overlay on that a weakereconomic picture--say, with no growth or a mild recession over thenext year--then it could easily move toward the $300 billion level.So this discussion of a $250-$300 billion deficit is not inconsistentwith the kind of picture that we've depicted in the Greenbook.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Si Keehn just asked my question aboutthe budget, but perhaps I could also ask Ted about the $25 oil priceassumption. Does that assume increased production by the Saudis?MR. TRUMAN. Yes. As Dave said, we assumed essentially ashortfall of 4-1/4 million barrels a day from Iraq and Kuwait. Andthen we assumed an offset of 2-1/4 million barrels a day. Partly just8/21/90because we felt it was useful to write down figures so we could insome sense check our assumptions--and I emphasize assumptions--lateron against the realities, we assumed 1-1/2 million barrels a day inSaudi Arabia, [300,000] barrels a day in Venezuela and 200,000 barrelseach, I think, in UAE and Nigeria just to spread it around.MR. FORRESTAL. Also, in your description of the real GNPtargets, you said something about a 50 percent decline in--MR. TRUMAN. No, 50 basis points.MR. FORRESTAL. I'm sorry, a 50 basis point decline in thefunds rate. I didn't quite catch what you said. Could you say thatagain?MR. TRUMAN. Well, in order to achieve this real GNP target,the model made us, if I can put it that way, reduce the funds rate by50 basis points in the third quarter. That was sustained and thengradually the gap between that and the baseline [unintelligible]. Ishould emphasize [unintelligible] we're dealing in a quarterly model,so we moved Iraq back to [3.0 million barrels per day] in some sense.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Let me go back to the budget. In looking atdevelopments in Iraq and Kuwait and trying to understand the economicconsequences of that in the forecast, the one thing that surprises meis that I, at least, don't catch anything on the military outlays andwhat that is likely to mean for the outlook.MR. PRELL. Well, I think you're correct. There isn't muchin here. We have really a trivial increment to defense spending inthis forecast over the next few quarters, partly consistent with theoil price assumption that things are presumably--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, one thing that is happening is anincrease in the cost of fuel and bottled water.MR. STOCKTON. Some chartered airline flights as well.MR. PRELL. I think there is also some effect on suntanlotion prices--the sunblock effect! At this point, it seems largelyto be a matter of taking some things out of inventory, shiftingexpenditures, and so on. If this results in major deviations fromwhat we had anticipated in overall personnel and additional munitionsand [supplies], if we maintain a significant presence in the MiddleEast over the coming quarters, then we might begin to talk about atleast several billions of dollars. One could read into comments madeby the President yesterday that some of the defense reduction thatpeople had been looking for might not be achieved. That then perhapswould begin to chip away at our fundamental fiscal assumptions. So,there is clearly upside potential here on the fiscal front for somelesser restraint than we have embedded in this forecast. I thinkthat's a clear risk.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.8/21/90MR. MULLINS. Your answer on the defense spending is that theincrement is less than a couple of Texas S&Ls, presumably?MR. PRELL. That's true.MR. MULLINS. I'd like to get some insight, Dave, into yourview of consumer spending. You mentioned that the second-quarterretail sales were a lot better than we initially had thought and thatone reason was that when you start from a small enough base it looks alot better when it comes up to--I guess it was minus .9 for thequarter and was marginally positive in July. You mentioned in theprojection that household real consumption will fall but not quite asmuch as the reduction in real income. Why did you make thatassumption and how do you feel about the impact of this event onconsumer confidence and whether consumers view this as transitory ormore permanent?MR. STOCKTON. At this point we made the assumption that mostbut not all of the decline in real income is reflected in theconsumption in the second half because we assumed that some householdswill be uncertain about the permanence or transitory nature [of thedecline] and probably will be assessing and adjusting theirconsumption plans accordingly. That is, some households clearly willthink that this is transitory and others that it is permanent and thatcombination will result in only a partial reduction in consumption inresponse. I should say that the reduction in the saving rate that wehave as a consequence of this is pretty small; we have taken most ofthe reduction in real incomes out of consumption. On the goodsconsumption side, things have been quite weak and we expect them toget weaker in the second half. If you look at the past year and takethat as the underlying trend relative to the second half--which showsthe averages through the ups and downs of the automobile sector in thethird and fourth quarters of last year as well as early this year--theplace where we would expect to see a particularly sharp hit is in theautomobile sales area in the second half of the year. The onlysupport that we really are getting in consumption is on the servicesside, where in our view it's a little harder in the short run forhouseholds to adjust consumption of housing services or medicalservices to fluctuations in income. And that in essence providessomewhat of a base on the consumption side on which we get relativelymeager increases--about a percentage point in the second half--inconsumption growth.MR. MULLINS. What are the chances that this, on top of theother shocks we've had to consumer confidence in residential realestate values and the like, really could cause consumers just to puttheir pocketbooks away for a while?MR. STOCKTON. I guess that is clearly a risk in terms of theprojection. As we reported in yesterday's briefing [to the Board], wedid receive some weekly information from the University of Michigan onconsumer confidence. That showed a very precipitous fall-off in thefew days right after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and then somerebound throughout the course of the last couple of weeks to a levelthat is still below where it was prior to the invasion. But it is notan astronomical fall-off at this point.8/21/90MR. MULLINS. But do you think that evidence would be roughlyconsistent with what you forecast in the Greenbook or marginally morepessimistic or--?MR. STOCKTON. Given the accuracy with which one can usethose survey data to predict consumption--and the link is very, veryweak--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You do have a proxy that is almost asgood and probably even better than that, which is the 10-day [auto]sales figures. In a period like this, to the extent that you getconsumer shock, it is going to show up in those numbers. Indeed, ifyou believe our seasonals, as distinct from BEA'S, there was reallyquite a significant fall from the last 10 days of July to the first 10days of August. Was it 6.1 on our seasonals?MR. STOCKTON. 6.1 or 6.2. The 10-day auto sales figureshave the advantage of being very timely. They have a disadvantage, ofcourse, in that they can move around for reasons of seasonaladjustment problems or other reasons that make them a little difficultto interpret. We did call around to auto dealers in the wake of theprice increases and didn't pick up any major stories about asignificant reduction in showroom traffic, so--MR. PRELL. There has been a consistent drop-off from thelast 10 days [of a month] to the first 10 days in these seasonallyadjusted figures.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [On our] seasonals?MR. PRELL. I think on ours as well. I just don't thinkwe've found a way of capturing the pattern, particularly in thetransplant sales. They have this tendency to be very strong in thefinal--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I'll wait for the second 10 days.MR. MULLINS. I think it's pretty reasonable that peoplemight not want to buy a car.MR. PRELL. Well, it's not entirely clear. We have looked atthe historical evidence on these oil prices, and whether people don'tbuy cars or whether they shift the kind of cars they buy is not asclear as one would think.MR. STOCKTON. One of the reasons that we delayed thefall-off in auto sales in the projection is that we think, almost nomatter what happens to automobile demand, that the auto makers at thispoint will make it through incentive programs [unintelligible] toclear out the 1990 models. And that helps hold up sales a little inthe near term; but by the fourth quarter we show a bigger fall-off.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They don't have much inventory.MR. STOCKTON. They don't have much in inventories and that[unintelligible) they won't have any buyers. Our current assumptionis that there isn't going to be a precipitous fall-off in sales in thenear term that would require them even to have to go through some kind-10-8/21/90of major increase in incentive programs. But if that were to occur,it seems quite likely that they would use incentive programs to [workoff] whatever inventories they needed to.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Yes, I want to get back to your simulation. IfI understand it right, you have a neutral policy going forward togenerate essentially the same nominal GNP. It's just that thecomponents would differ; you would have lower output and higherinflation. You open up slack in the economy and the inflationarysurge is temporary. You say that you don't take account ofexpectations; you haven't talked much about that. I think one couldargue that with interest rates going up around the world--every place,really, except the United States--we could see a deterioration ininflationary expectations. My question is: What do you think aboutthat? And secondly, what does that do to your real forecast?MR. TRUMAN. Obviously, the neutrality of oil prices is afeature of the model. Whether or not it's a feature of history, atleast it's captured by the model. And there's no particulartheoretical reason why that necessarily has to prevail at least to thedegree it has; maybe it [unintelligible]. As far as the model goes,you're correct that there are not forward-looking expectations in themodel, though it's not quite clear to me in this world with which weare dealing what you would ground forward-looking expectations onbecause you have to have expectations about, among other things, theoil price scenario itself. And, as has been discussed, that could goa variety of different ways. When we ran the simulations, we didadopt at least, again as a mechanical feature, slightly differentmonetary policy assumptions abroad. And that does produce somedepreciation of the dollar and gives us some impetus to consumer priceinflation from that source. So it does wash through this way; youdon't get a very dramatic impact. As I tried to lay out our judgmentabout policy responses, I'm not so sure that other than in Japan weare going to get any particularly pronounced policy responses. Ithink it is true that the market is expecting a more--and I shouldunderline "a more"--vigorous resistance to inflationary impulses fromthe Bundesbank at this time. Our judgment is that the market is wrongor maybe overdoing it. And in some sense, that's what we built intothe forecast. To the extent that we do get more [policy restraint]abroad, then we would have a more vigorous resistance to theinflationary impulses from higher oil prices. I think that wouldmanifest itself in the first instance in exchange rates, and thatclearly is a risk to the forecast.MR. HOSKINS. Let me follow up: Assume that inflationexpectations got worse and go back to the real side of the economy.Presumably, you'd be forecasting higher unemployment?MR. PRELL. Well, it depends on your--MR. HOSKINS. Right. Well, suppose we don't accommodatethose expectations.MR. PRELL. In a sense, the only thing that would change isinflation expectations and that would drive down perceived realinterest rates. That would affect demand for goods and services in a-11-8/21/90stimulative way, conceivably. It's a very complex process and it'sgoing to depend on your response to those--MR. TRUMAN. Well, I think the point you're getting to isthat if you drove that process far enough, that would be oneinterpretation. It might even be minor. But in the 1970s process itwould result in circumstances in which, although in the short run themechanics of the model would generate lower real interest rates and soforth and so on, in the longer run you would have a higher built-inlevel of inflation and all the associated dislocations that we believeunderlie that. So it could get us on a higher plateau of inflation[and a lower] long-run potential of the economy under thosecircumstances [than we] would assume, even though in the short run itmight have stimulative effects as Mike described.MR. PRELL. I think the third alternative illustrates this toa degree by showing the higher level of inflation that we would have.MR. TRUMAN. So it's relatively optimistic because, as Davesaid and as President Boehne's question implied earlier, in some sensethe fundamental forecast accepts that the amount of slack that's builtin the underlying forecast--given no further shocks from further oilprice increases--is enough to begin to bend down inflation. But it'spostponed and it's at a higher level.MR. KOHN. If you moved to contain nominal GNP growth underthat alternative, two things would be pushing up nominal GNP growth--both prices and output. And if you tried to hold nominal GNP growth,then you'd have more price with the adverse inflation and[unintelligible] less real growth for that nominal GNP growth.MR. HOSKINS. Well, I agree with what you said. I guess whatI'm getting at is that markets may now behave somewhat differentlywith respect to expectations perhaps than they did in the 1970s inthat they in fact are not fooled. And when we have higher real rates,the implication seems to me to be higher unemployment quicker. And ifwe want to avoid going back to the 1970s [experience], one policyresponse would be to signal the markets that we're not going toaccommodate it and in the long run that could lower our costs[unintelligible].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I have a different question about what I guess Iwould call a worst-case scenario or "what if" games. Did you try inyour model to see what the impact would be if we had one of thesehorrendous sequesters that I hear kicked around town--if they knockoff $100 billion and send pink slips to the federal employees andthings like that?MR. STOCKTON. We have not yet run through the modelsomething as acute as a sequester of the size that could occur undercurrent legislation. The reason we have not yet done that is that thedislocation would be so enormous that at this point it's verydifficult to imagine politically in the weeks before the election thateither the Administration or the Congress would wish to have asequester of $100 billion, which is about the size that we're talkingabout here, go into effect. In fact, at the mid-session review Mr.-12-8/21/90Darman issued a report outlining all the things that would occur ifthis sequester were to go into place, including that 30 percent of theprison guards would be sent home and people would be let out of jailbecause there wouldn't be public defenders and they couldn't getaccess [to the courts]. It just seems so extreme that I guess we feelfairly comfortable that something will occur in the time [before] thesequester to delay, if nothing else, our decisions until after theelection.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You will admit that the government wouldimprove under such conditions! [Laughter.]MS. SEGER. What is the decision date for this? Is it byOctober 1 that something has to be done under Gramm-Rudman? Is thatthe magic time?MR. STOCKTON. By October 1st they have to issue theirsequester report and by the 15th, I think, the cuts actually have tobe in place.MS. SEGER. With the existing Gramm-Rudman law, what would ittake to derail it? Is it a forecast of two quarters of real GNPgrowth below 1 percent?MR. PRELL. A forecast of recession or the experience of twoquarters of less than 1 percent growth.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And we're not going to get less than 1percent for Q2 and Q3.MR. PRELL. Either OMB or CBO, I believe, can make thatforecast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are you sure about that? Are you surethat CBO could unilaterally, by just an arbitrary forecast of arecession, derail Gramm-Rudman?MR. STOCKTON. It doesn't derail it; it simply allowsCongress--MR. PRELL. It allows for a suspension.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In other words, it automatically puts avote on the table for suspension?MR. PRELL. I'm not sure that it's automatic, but it doesprovide for the Congress to temporarily suspend [the Gramm-Rudmancuts]. They have to make that decision.MS. SEGER. My second question in regard to worst-casescenarios involves oil prices. Having remembered the difficulties ofthe 1970s and 1980s in getting even the direction of oil prices right,what would be the impact on the economy of, let's say, a tremendousadditional acceleration in oil prices to $35 a barrel because theIraqis also take over Saudi Arabia or some other major producer? Haveyou tried any of these scenarios in your model? I'm not saying theseare terribly likely outcomes or high probability assumptions but---13-8/21/90MR. TRUMAN. Well, there are some nonlinearities involved inthis, but in that range the models will tell you that you would getproportionally the same kinds of responses or a little more. Insteadof losing 1/2 percentage point of growth, we would lose another 1percentage point plus of growth over the next four quarters--at leastabstracting from the dislocation effects, which I would argue and Ithink you would argue probably would be there. So, the models wouldsuggest that a $35 oil price rather than a $25 oil price for asustained period is going to cut another percentage point or more offof growth. And given the level of growth that we have, that would putus near zero or below. We all know that when we make up numbers, asmooth forecast will show something like zero but that probably isgoing to mean several quarters of negatives--on that order ofmagnitude.MS. SEGER. What else could we face that would throw ourforecast into the trash can?MR. PRELL. Put it in the file cabinet? [Laughter.]MS. SEGER. Trash can is more appropriate.MR. PRELL. There always are innumerable uncertainties. Ithink we've just layered over the normal ones. There are some very,very big imponderables at this point. I might just say--and thismight seem silly normally, but just to close the loop entirely on thisGramm-Rudman issue--if there were a declaration of war, that wouldsuspend the Gramm-Rudman [provisions].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And the probability of that is not zero.MR. PRELL. That's why I raised the point. It's notinconceivable.MS. SEGER. Well, thank you for playing my game with me.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no further questions, whowould like to start the Committee discussion?MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask a question ofthe staff with respect to the forecast that has been laid out. Togive us the export numbers that are contained in the staff's forecast,it seems to me that the forecast assumes that growth in otherindustrialized countries will continue fairly strong. I know therehas been discussion of it already, but given the uncertainty about theoil situation and the reactions of Germany and Japan for example withrespect to their interest rates, how comfortable are you that we willmaintain exports at the level that you are projecting?MR. TRUMAN. Well, that's one of the conditional dimensionsof the forecast. We're reasonably comfortable, given the particularoil price scenario that is built in here. In the baseline scenario wethink there would be a spurt in inflation, some reduction in growth,and some reduction in exports in the short run--over the next severalquarters. But then these economies--at least the continental Europeaneconomies and Japan--in general would be relatively robust. There isstill the phenomenon of rebuilding in eastern Europe and East Germanythat is driving those economies and it should help sustain exports,-14-8/21/90In Japan in particular, as I mentioned in my presentation, there hasbeen quite a lot of rise in short-term nominal interest rates, so theycall it monetary restraint and as always there's a question ofcalibrating the extent that that is going to bring about adjustments.And the big drop in the stock market in Japan [unintelligible] aswell. So I suppose we could see--it's not outside the realm ofpossibilities--half the growth that we now expect in Japan. Thatwould have some implications for the forecast. But I think it's nomore uncertain than anything else that we put before you in thisexport [unintelligible] policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Who would like to start off? Si.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, reporting first on the conditionsin the District prior to the Middle East events, I must say Icertainly was surprised, positively, by the resilience of the Midwestand the ability of the District economy to rise above the nationaltrend, at least so far. Certainly, the GNP revisions reduced ourbaseline forecast at least somewhat, but pre-Middle East events wecontinued to have a positive expectation for the economy. We forecastcontinued improvement this year and into next year.I have a couple of specific comments. The steel businesscontinues to be good. A company I talked with is currently operatingat a level of 85 percent of capacity; their order books are full forthe third quarter; the fourth-quarter orders are coming in well; andthey have not experienced the normal summer slowdown that theygenerally do each year. They continue to look for shipments this yearof 83 to 84 million tons, which is about equal with last year. Andeven prior to the Middle East events, there was something of a boomletgoing on in steel used in energy-related activities. Demand for sheetand bar continues to be good. The only significant change in theirorder book is that they do see a downturn in the demand for heavystructural items that would go into commercial construction. Recentprice increases in the steel industry have been sticking, but onaverage they are still at this time some 6 percent under last year.In the construction area, on a year-to-date basis both nonresidentialand residential construction in the District have been comparativelystrong. We've had plus numbers in both categories versus negativenumbers on a national basis. And just one item, the backlog forcement shipments, currently is running some 40 percent higher thisyear than last year, at least for one shipper. But having said that,I do sense in a more current perspective that there are not onlypostponements of some major commercial projects but some outrightcancellations. I think within the last couple of weeks even in theMidwest there has been a change of attitudes there. One supplier tothe commercial construction business tells me that their attitudes arerather worse now than they have experienced since 1981 or 1982.The auto business continues to be a sector of enormousuncertainty. But I did talk to one company as late as last Friday andthey continue to hold to a sales forecast for cars and light truckstogether of 14.4 million for this year. And they're looking at 14.3million for next year. While those numbers, at least in my eyesight,look pretty good, their baseline number is 15.4 million. So, whenthey're under that baseline number by that amount, they thinkconditions are pretty negative. Third-quarter production schedulesthis year are up 17 percent over last year; fourth-quarter schedules-15-8/21/90are up 10 percent over last year. But, clearly, the production risksat this point are on the down side. And even this late into the thirdquarter the projected pickup of 17 percent is likely to be erroneous.Meanwhile, auto dealer attitudes are very negative. One would expectsome pickup in orders because of the possibility of a strike; despitethat, dealers just aren't ordering cars. But again, for the companythat I talked to, 27 percent of their dealers are operating at a loss,which accounts for the negativism. The heavy truck business is bad.One manufacturer we talked to is looking for shipments of class Etrucks, the heavy trucks, this year of 125,000 units; that's lowerthan others that are at 133,000 to 135,000. Again, that's against thebaseline number of about 160,000. So, clearly, they're having a verybad year.In the agricultural sector, growing conditions continue to bevery good, but because of late plantings and the reasonably coolsummer that we've had so far, crops are a bit slower [coming in] thannormal. The yield is going to be determined largely by the timing ofthe first frost. If we have a reasonable break on that first frost,production could be excellent and, indeed, farm income will be high.There's a shot at least at having a record farm income.With regard to credit and lending conditions, I continue tothink that this is really a phenomenon caused by the banks themselvesgoing through a self-correcting process. I think they've raised theirlending standards. But even with the increases in C&I lending by theDistrict weekly reporting banks lower this year than last, the numbersare nonetheless positive. And C&I lending by small banks in theDistrict is higher this year than was the case last year. So, maybewe're seeing a bottoming in this trend--at least in genuine C&Ilending, taking out merger-related activity and the like. I amreassured by the bankers that for good credits--they do emphasize theword "good"--there is plenty of money available. But they do all saythat they have raised their credit standards.Shifting to a post-Middle-East-events comment and a look atthe national economy, I think it's just too early to assess the damagethat we're likely to experience. Having said that, I haven't talkedto anybody so far who specifically has changed their business patternor what they are doing in the way of operations. Some companies aregoing through their capital budgets, but there are some contradictory[comments] on that. Some companies are planning to pull back on theircapital spending programs, but I did talk to one company that's doingquite the opposite. They are now in the process of accelerating theircapital spending because they sense that the level of inflation willbe higher and, therefore, they want to get their expenditures inbefore that occurs.Now, I continue to have a feeling, at least in an intuitivesense, that the economy is operating at a very moderate level and thatthe Middle East events certainly are a negative in all this. But it'sawfully hard to judge the outlook at this particular point. And,therefore, certainly in the monetary policy sense, it's a very awkwardperiod.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.-16-8/21/90MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, in the Twelfth District, employmentgrowth continues to exceed that of the nation, although the rate ofgrowth has slowed more in recent months than has been the case in thenation. For example, if you go back a year ago, our growth ofemployment was about 1-1/2 percent more than the rest of the nation;now it's running a little under 1 percent more. Following thenational pattern, employment in manufacturing and construction hasfallen in recent months, but it has fallen at a rate that is less thanhalf that for the rest of the nation. Growth of trade and servicesindustry employment is below that of a year earlier, but the growthrates continue to be in the area of 3 to 4 percent, which are not badincreases. Agriculture is performing well in the District as a resultof high crop prices and yields and also high livestock prices.If I can turn to California, since California got someattention in the Greenbook as well, economic growth has slowed fromlast year's pace; there's no question about that. But the state'semployment is growing at a steady rate of just under 2-1/2 percent ona year-over-year basis. Defense and aerospace layoffs are [slowing]and will slow economic growth. But even in LA and San Francisco,where the bulk of the layoffs will take place, the loss of jobs inthese sectors will be small relative to what are expected to behealthy gains in other nonmanufacturing sectors. Real estate activityis slow. There's no question that sales and permits are offsignificantly. Median home prices indicate the drop in home pricesbut, as was indicated in the Greenbook, most of the decline reflects ashift in the composition of sales to lower priced areas, particularlySacramento, Riverside, and places like that, and also to smallerhomes.Turning to the national economy, although the risk ofrecession certainly is real, the upward revisions in retail sales forMay and June, the June drop in the inventory/sales ratio, and thefavorable report on June net exports are certainly encouraging. Itappears as though, with a better balance between inventories andsales, positive real growth in the second half is quite likely.Although the Greenbook's oil price assumptions are reasonable, Ibelieve that the effect on inflation in the second half of the yearwill be larger than that indicated in the Greenbook. In addition, theimpact of higher oil prices in stimulating business investment couldturn out to be a bit greater than implied in the Greenbook forecast.Finally, although a future drop in oil prices is assumed and certainlywould help to moderate inflation, I don't think we should forget theeffects of the dollar depreciation, which has been quite substantial.The latter, plus continued upward pressure on wages, should prevent asignificant decline in inflation next year. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. In the Atlanta District, Mr. Chairman, withthe exception of exports, the tone of the reports that we're gettingis very, very negative. The list of the weak or the weakening sectorsthat I talked about at the last FOMC meeting is unchanged. And Isuspect from reading the Beigebook that these weak areas are very muchthe same as those around the country. Construction activity isparticularly sluggish at the present time and, unfortunately, there isa large unoccupied stock that will have to be worked off before anynew activity is justified. I don't hear very much about the [credit]-17-8/21/90crunch anymore. Clearly, the banks have tightened their underwritingstandards. What we are seeing, though, is a decline in consumer loansrather than construction loans. And I suspect that that's more afunction of demand than supply. Before the Middle East problem arose,the oil and gas business in the District was beginning to expand, butthe industry has been constrained by labor shortages. The workershave left the area, particularly Louisiana and the Mobile area, andare not returning. At the moment it's still too early to tell howmuch stimulus the oil component sector will get from the recent priceincreases. The important regional industries that are maintainingtheir level of output are doing so only because their exports arereplacing domestic sales. And in this category I certainly wouldinclude wood and pulp and paper producers. Agriculture is strong inthe District, and sales of farm equipment are rising pretty rapidlyboth because of a good year domestically and also because of risingexport sales. In an overall sense, the slowdown may be a little morepronounced than it was in July, but I don't see any new areas ofweakness emerging.One other comment that I picked up from a number of contacts,particularly people in small businesses, is that they are seeing agrowing problem with receivables, which have been much harder tocollect. As a result, these firms are in effect financing these slow-paying customers. Sentiment is very negative, I would say. And,Governor Mullins, consumer confidence is very low in our District--andit's getting lower as a result of the Kuwait and Iraq situation.With respect to the national economy, I find myself inagreement with the Greenbook generally. In the interest of fulldisclosure, I would say my staff is a little more bullish on consumerspending than I am. I must say that I am increasingly pessimistic,and I was pessimistic before Kuwait, about the budget accord. I wouldlike to think that something will happen, but I'm not at all surethat's going to be the case. Overall, I think that we may avoid arecession; but I am more concerned about our falling off the edge thanI was at the time of the last FOMC meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, as seems to be the case for thenation as a whole, economic conditions in our region are showing signsof slowing. There are special factors here and there that keep theoverall growth numbers positive. After fairly strong employment gainsin the first quarter of the year, our three-state District would haveexperienced employment losses in the second quarter had it not beenfor a strong growth in government jobs. Our manufacturing employmenthad been growing slightly while conditions nationally deteriorated.In the last few months, however, manufacturing employment has declinedin each of our three states. Weakness has been concentrated intransportation equipment--mainly defense-related--apparel, andelectrical equipment. While employment gains were experienced inchemicals and petroleum refining, we expect some slowing in theseindustries with the higher price of energy-related input. Employmentin the services sector has been extremely weak outside of governmentemployment. The government employment gains were for all governmententities and were not just related to federal census workers.-18-8/21/90In private services, the main areas of strength were intransportation and public utilities, both of which will be adverselyimpacted by higher energy prices. The one area where higher energyprices should help the District economy is in drilling activity, butany positive response that does occur will be with a long lag time.First, inflation-adjusted oil prices are only about half the peaklevel reached in 1981, and the rig count is highly correlated withreal oil prices. Second, almost half the drilling activity in theDallas District is for natural gas which has a long way to go beforegas prices catch up with oil prices. Third, drillers have to beconvinced that higher energy prices will persist for several years.And lastly, even if everything on the price side fell in place--and asBob Forrestal found out--we simply do not have the capacity toincrease drilling activity since about half of that capacity exitedthe industry over the last four years. I did see on local TV thatthey reinstituted a rough-neck school out in west Texas to teachpeople how to drill oil wells. So, somebody has a little optimism.In the short run, the negative effects of higher energy prices in theDistrict will predominate over the positive effects. I might add,however, that the weak picture for retail sales that has existedlately should be helped somewhat by the sharp boost in royalty andpartnership income which is proportional to oil prices.Following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, we did do anotherround of Beigebook contacts. As a result, the anecdotal evidence hasshifted from [an outlook for] slow but steady growth to one of greatuncertainty. Even the focus of agriculture down our way has shiftedfrom too little or too much moisture into marketing uncertainties inthe new environment. With respect to the national picture, I reallydon't have views that would be considered different from the Greenbookforecast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, since we met in July there has been somefurther softening in an already soft Philadelphia District economy.The sluggishness is widespread, including manufacturing, retailing,construction, and capital goods. Some areas of the District that haveexperienced labor shortages for the last several years now report thenumber of job applications rising. And in banking, I sense that ourloan problems, which heretofore have been concentrated largely in NewJersey, are now floating across the Delaware, much as GeorgeWashington did some years ago. And I think we're going to see some ofthose loan problems in Pennsylvania as well. The chemical and plasticfirms are the two that I have talked to most, and both of thoseindustries already report substantial cost increases from the MiddleEast problems. I also noted that attitudes have turned very, verycautious. For the first time in a number of years I'm hearing moretalk about recession in the outlook and, although I think that isstill a minority view, it's a growing minority view.On the national outlook, my sense is that we probably willsee some negative real GNP by the fourth quarter. Before the MiddleEast shock, we had increasing downside risks stemming from weakeningdemand in most sectors and tighter credit conditions. And with theMiddle East problems, I think we'll have still worse downside risks.My hunch is that the Greenbook is underestimating the negative impacton consumption. I think that consumer confidence has been on thin ice-19-8/21/90for a while and with the cumulative impact of economic concerns thatwere building, and as this Middle East situation drags on, I think wewill see more of a negative impact there. And that's going to affectbusiness confidence as well. I think the key issues for us are: Howmuch slack is enough and how much downside risk are we willing totolerate to provide a reasonable prospect of keeping the impendingbulge in oil-related prices from working its way into the core rate ofinflation? And that's the next part of the meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, the gloomy news continues to trackthe people from the Northeast. The New England economy, I think, hascontinued softening at a somewhat faster rate than it had before--evenin the pre-Saddam period. That will be exacerbated to some extent bythe Middle East problem--at least in terms of peoples' expectations--in that as a share of energy provided we rely about 50 percent more onpetroleum than the nation as a whole. But the number of BTUs perdollar of output is only about 80 percent of the national output. So,it tends to offset itself somewhat but not completely.In the District, the most pressing immediate issue continuesto be a further softening--and almost a free fall in some parts--ofthe real estate market. I don't know whether you've sold your houseor not, David. While we haven't heard anything about it yet, the oilsituation could have an impact on vacation homes similar to that in1973 and 1979, when people did not want to buy them because of concernabout the greater cost of getting to them, and that's why we had a lotof softness in condos. At that time--though it isn't true this time--there was a concern about the supply of fuel to get to vacation homes.Even before this came up, though, we really had a quite poor touristseason.Construction employment, of course, has fallen very strongly,but it still has a way to go. Even though the level of constructionemployment has fallen very significantly, it is still above the 1981level; so we think that will continue to be a drag. Beyond that,we've seen weakness now spread to the services and trade sectors. Inthe trade sector particularly, we've seen fairly significant declinesin employment. As for consumer confidence in the region, theConference Board data show that even before this oil situationconfidence had fallen 55 percent July-over-July. I don't know howgood these regional measures are, but several months ago New Englandwas the only declining region. Now it's striking that only three ofthe nine census regions--relatively small regions at that--show anincrease in confidence.In terms of the less dim, if not bright, areas of theregion's economy, I'd have to say that's in manufacturing exports. Ifind a quite distinct pattern for manufacturers between their domesticbusiness and their export business. For the domestic business, oursurvey shows them about flat to down 10 percent; but their export sideis up about 5 to 20 percent. Interestingly, and I think this reflectssomething that Bob Parry said, we've started to see some turndown--andwe have secondary suppliers--in the aerospace industry and we'vestarted to be greatly concerned about how soft things are. But we'rebeginning to see some hope that defense cutbacks won't be as great [asanticipated]. In fact, at Raytheon, one or two contracts have been-20-8/21/90continued that were expected to be dropped. Credit availabilitycontinues to be much talked about and I think is a somewhat broaderproblem. A relatively small thrift operator came in and said he hastold his loan officers: "If it isn't gold, don't bring it in to me."I don't say that that's a particularly widespread view, but I think itreflects something about the people in general working out problems.As far as the national economy goes, it's far too early intothis whole situation to know what the impact is going to be in termsof disruption. We need to look at things in terms of before Saddamand after Saddam. My own reaction is that I am quite struck by anyoverreaction to it. I'll admit that I was struck by the revisions onthe GNP numbers--that what we saw when they came out [differed somuch] from what [we thought] had happened before. And on the basis ofthat, I myself have some concerns about confidence and a littleconcern that the Greenbook forecast might be a bit on the strong side,actually. However, I also have--maybe it's a reflection of being a[unintelligible] from the Northeast--an increasing concern about thisissue of financial fragility in almost all of our large institutions.Thus, on balance, I would have thought the economy seemed somewhatsofter before the Iraqi business, though perhaps not to the point ofdictating a policy change. I don't know if we know enough yet todetermine what's going to happen. With the degree of [military]buildup that we're going through, it seems to me entirely possiblethat--even short of an absolute shooting war--before too long we couldget to a point where we will get some stimulative effect on theeconomy, particularly if the reserves are called up. We have had, aseveryone has, some reserves called up already in our District. I alsoam somewhat concerned about the patterns in consumption and thesteepening of the yield curve in the context of the internationalsituation. So, I think the discussion in the policy section is goingto be very lively indeed.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, as far as the District goes, it's more ofthe same. Growth is unspectacular but it's steady. We continue to doa bit better than the nation; of course, that's not a very remarkablestatement these days. But most of what has been happening in theDistrict reflects a continuity of what has happened over the lastseveral months. Agriculture remains good; tourism has been good; mostof the natural resource related industries are doing well; and thediversified metropolitan areas continue to do well, all thingsconsidered. I would say that we're not likely in my District tocontinue to outperform the national economy much longer, but at themoment anyway things are still going a bit better than at the nationallevel. The run-up in oil prices as a result of Iraq and Kuwaitoccurred too late to stop the bikers from descending on Sturgis[unintelligible]. So that turned out to be a successful event andinjected a lot of income into the South Dakota economy.With regard to the national outlook, somebody used the word"dilemma" earlier and I think that captures it. Even before theinvasion of Kuwait, we were looking at slow growth and we were lookingat that simultaneously with a lack of progress in bringing downinflation. And it seems to me if that was the dilemma, it has onlybeen sharpened by what has happened in the Middle East. Obviously, Ican't assess magnitudes, but I think it's fair to say the dilemma has-21-8/21/90been sharpened. My own judgment is that on top of all that--and onecould probably point to some other things that have gone wrong--thelikelihood of any progress on the budget has diminished as aconsequence of this. I would guess, although this is a double-edgedsword, that we will see some kick to military spending before this isall said and done. Now, that may help the real economy a bit, but Ijust have a sense that there's an awful lot of turmoil out there andthat the dilemma, as I say, has worsened.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, first of all, in terms of thenational outlook, I think the staff has done as well as anybody couldpossibly do in terms of trying to capture what might happen and whatthe contingencies are. For what it's worth, both our baselineforecast and our alternative forecast are really quite similar to thekinds of things the staff is talking about. About the only materialdifference is that in the next two quarters we probably have the realeconomy a bit softer and the inflation rate a bit higher. But overthe forecast period as a whole, the numbers both internally andexternally (on trade) are really quite similar to the staff's baselineforecast. There are multiple risks. In the very short run thegreatest risk or uncertainty, of course, is that the Iraqi situationwill turn into a shooting war. I've talked to some people who knowsomething about the oil infrastructure in that part of the world andthe impression I get is that even if it were a very short armedconflict, a guy like Hussein could do one heck of a lot of damage in avery short period of time to the oil infrastructure in terms ofpipelines and that type of thing. So, again, even if a shooting warwere very short and very decisive for the good guys, the damage thatcould be done to the oil infrastructure in a matter of days is quitesubstantial, I gather.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's all concentrated in a relativelysmall area south of Kuwait.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. All the pipelines I gather are aboveground even when they're far removed from Iraq or Kuwait itself. So,they are just sitting there. And the potential for substantial damagewhen you have a crazy guy like this guy is quite real.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. When you say crazy [unintelligible] getit back to work and functioning within a year.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. All of that would, consistent withwhat Gary says, involve some substantial stimulus from a lot ofsources. Anyway, I think the staff's effort to try and capture boththe baseline and some of the contingencies is as good as one can do itin these circumstances. Leaving that aside, an interesting way tothink about this is to ask what was going on pre-Iraq and whatsuperimposing Iraq means. I have to say that my impression is thateven prior to the Iraqi invasion the attitudes in the businesscommunity--both big business and small business--were souring. Mysense is that the economy, if anything, was softer rather thanstronger and that even before the very latest CPI number the inflationrate was higher rather than lower--not in any decisive way, butcertainly the hopes that the inflation rate was going to bend down, Ithink, were fading. I agree with some of the others who said-22-8/21/90that--again, even before the Iraqi invasion--expectations had souredquite significantly in terms of the prospects for any kind of ameaningful budget compromise. Obviously, the Middle East situationhas made all of those things worse, at least in the short run. What Ihear now is not only more overt talk about the risks of recession buta crescendo of opinion about a vicious form of stagflation in whichthe inflation rate, at least for the foreseeable future, could besignificantly higher in a context in which the economy is just sittingthere. Now, the good news in all of this that I detect rather overtlyin many instances is that there is a recognition in the businesscommunity and maybe even on Main Street that, at least in the shortrun, it's not something that is subject to any quick fix by monetarypolicy. I think there is a recognition that all of this does putquite a constraint on monetary policy. Indeed, I'm even surprisedabout the number of people who talk overtly about not making the samemistakes that were made in the 1970s when, in the eyes of many people,oil prices and energy shocks were allowed to feed into the generalpattern of wage and price setting. So, there may be at least thatelement of realism there. Nevertheless, I have the impression at thispoint that things are very much on the gloomy side.One quick footnote on the real estate situation: You can getmany different stories there; it depends upon whom you talked to last.But what I'm impressed with is that my examiners--who I think arepretty darn good, especially in real estate--are very much of the mindthat the situation had to get worse before it was going to get better.And again, that was before any further problems were superimposed onthat situation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. For the District, the most recent numbers, whichare second-quarter numbers, show a decided shift. Generally in recentmonths I have been reporting that we have been out-performing thenational economy; in the latest period both absolutely and relativelythere is weakness in employment and weakness in non-residential andresidential construction. In talking to our directors and othersaround the District, I have not picked up any sense that they havenoticed anything dramatically different. What's interesting is that,despite reporting that things are pretty much as I have described themin recent months, there is a lot more anxiety. Last week I had ourstaff do a survey of business contacts throughout the District, whichwas rather interesting. In general, it supported an outlook forcontinued, albeit somewhat slower, expansion for the balance of 1990.One surprising part of it to me was a good deal of optimism in termsof retail sales, which either met or exceeded expectations. And thosesales were obtained without unusual price cutting; their inventorieswere in good shape. Basically, 7 out of 9 retailers contactedreported that their outlook was good or optimistic for the balance ofthe year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This [survey] was taken when?MR. MELZER. Just last week. Now, we have relativelysluggish job growth and some layoffs coming in the aerospace industry--in St. Louis in particular--and in the defense industry. So,whether or not that optimism by retailers holds up in the face ofslowing or maybe even declining employment growth and lower incomes-23-8/21/90remains to be seen. Based on this survey and the views of our people,in general we would expect weakness in autos and construction and somestrength in services, agri-business, and mining. That pretty muchsums up the results of that survey.On a national basis, I would be in general agreement withwhat the staff has forecasted. What's very tricky, if we come togrips with monetary policy, is that there's an assumption in thatforecast of an essentially unchanged monetary policy in terms of thefunds rate. And, of course, given our operating procedure, anunchanged funds rate in a slowing economy could in fact create atightening--from the perspective of monetary stimulus. And I thinkthat's something we have to watch pretty carefully. Now, I'vepersonally been encouraged by the pickup in money growth recently andwhat's projected for August and so forth, but we have to watch thatcarefully. The other general comment I would make is that I think theJuly experience sort of showed us that we're not in an environment,given the concerns about inflation, in which we can try to lead themarket lower. I think we're in a position where we have to followbehind market expectations in terms of policy actions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, [economicactivity] in the Tenth District is not a great deal different thanreported in prior meetings. We continue to have moderate growth withmixed performance in individual industries within the District.However, the higher oil prices will likely slow job growth in theDistrict, particularly in states such as Missouri, Nebraska, andColorado. And that will not be offset in our opinion by theDistrict's increase in energy production in states such as Oklahoma,Wyoming, New Mexico, and Kansas. In the energy area, the District rigcount did increase before the Middle East situation; the rig countwent up from 266 in May to about 290 in June, largely in the naturalgas area, however. That level of 290 in June is only about [20]percent of the level in the peak years of 1982 and 1983 when thenumber of rigs operating in the District was something over 1500.Automobile manufacturing has been curtailed within the District,principally in Missouri, as has been reported. For example, the GMplant has been closed for two weeks' vacation related to a lack ofparts. There is some suspicion that it's simply because the dealersjust don't want to take down additional inventory. On the other hand,Ford has closed its plant for a week because of the slow orders fromdealers.In the agricultural sector, there has been a very large wheatcrop, as I think everybody knows. Prospects for corn and soybeans andother feed crops have been very good. As reported earlier, because ofa wet spring and late planting there is a good growing season, and itappears that we will have a very good crop in all of these differentcommodities providing we don't get an early frost, which would killoff this late planted corn and soybean crop. One interesting thingthat I'd like to report on is a second-quarter survey of farm landvalues, which showed a continued increase of 3 percent overall. Butthat's a slowing in the rate of increase of agricultural land prices.For example, in the same period in 1988 the year-over-year increasewas 5-1/2 percent; for the same period in 1989 it was up 4 percent;and this year the increase slowed to about 3 percent.-24-8/21/90Given all of that, we don't see any great deterioration ofeconomic activity, which is very much as it has been in the past.What will happen with respect to the energy sector as a result of oilprices is still uncertain, obviously. But as also reported earlier,we will not be able to get back into a boom condition of drilling oilwells simply because the level of skilled labor has vanished sincethat earlier period and there is not the equipment to put in the fieldto bring forward new wells.With regard to the national outlook, as Bob Forrestal said,in the interest of full disclosure I should report that our staffbelieves the outlook is a little weaker than shown in the Greenbook,marginally so. However, I'm more supportive of the Greenbookforecast. And it does show, of course, the kind of outcome that wewould hope for. That's all given against the background of the greatuncertainty of the Middle East situation. Talking about a recession,given what's going on in the Middle East and the prospects for ashooting war, I don't know that we have any history of going into arecession during a shooting war. As a result, this adds a bit moreuncertainty, but I come out [with the view] that the Greenbookforecast is very believable.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. First Vice President Monhollon.MR. MONHOLLON. We think the baseline projections in theGreenbook make up about as reasonable a scenario as anybody might comeup with, given the additional uncertainties created by the Middle Eastcrisis. The key assumption underlying these projections is that theoil shock will be relatively brief and relatively mild. That may ormay not turn out to be correct, but it's certainly a reasonableassumption given what we know now. But even the stronger and morepersistent shock assumed in the staff's alternative scenario producedonly a moderately different outcome. As has been discussed here, weagree that the [range of] confidence around these projections isobviously wider now than it was a month ago. And the probability of anear-term recession is correspondingly higher.As a matter of fact, slowing economic activity in our ownDistrict and rather pessimistic recent comments by some of ourdirectors and other contacts led us to think that the probability of adownturn had risen a bit even before the Iraqi invasion. But we thinkit's important not to exaggerate the downside risk to the economy.Several points, some of which have been mentioned, come to mind inthis respect. First, the upward revision in the second-quarter retailsales figures suggests that final demand in the second quarter wasstronger than we had thought, and the healthy increase in hours workedby production workers in July indicates that the payroll employmentdata may have overstated the weakness in the early part of the thirdquarter. Secondly, both the United States and the rest of theindustrial world are better positioned, for a variety of reasons, toabsorb an oil shock now than in the 1970s. Third, the prospects forcontinuing pretty strong growth in Japan and the European communityshould hold up export growth to provide a partial offset for softeningdomestic demand. Fourth, the absence of any widespread inventoryimbalances implies that if we do get a recession, it should be fairlymild. And finally, the projected acceleration in M2 growth in Augustholds out some hope that the extraordinary weakness in the growth ofthe money supply in recent months may be ending. These observations-25-8/21/90are certainly not intended to deny that the downside risks withrespect to economic activity have increased. But the purpose is tohelp keep these things in perspective.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Business conditions in the District really havenot changed much from the reports I've given you before, and wecontinue to operate at high levels of economic activity. What haschanged, obviously, is what everyone has mentioned here already andthat is the uncertainty that people have going forward. In responseto that [uncertainty, the comment I heard] when I dug around a littlewas that firms were not planning to reduce production now or tocurtail capital spending plans. Their plans had more to do in somesense with anticipating slower growth out there and preparingthemselves for reductions in their labor force in the future. Theresponses that some people seem to be making to the uncertainty aboutthe fourth quarter included: using overtime as opposed to adding newpeople; letting attrition run down the work force a little; and usingcontracted help. One response from a steel company executive was toprotect the company in the fourth quarter by exploiting opportunitiesin Europe where steel demand is very strong and mills are booked outthrough December. He has the opportunities for business in that area.The only cancellation, or at least deferred sale that I know of, is ata steel company that had a transformer on a ship to Iraq. I don'tthink they're going to complete that sale for a while!MS. SEGER. Iraq really needs it, doesn't it?MR. HOSKINS. They'll need it more later. In terms of thenational outlook, it's obvious what we face. The oil shock has givenus two outcomes for the economy: higher inflation in the near term andreduced output. It seems to me also that one could argue that realinterest rates need to be--and probably are--somewhat higher to rationor reduce the supply of output over time. With respect to monetarypolicy, I think there's little that we can do constructively to getmore oil. And there's not much we can do constructively to lower realinterest rates. There is one thing we can do and that is to keep thelong-term inflation expectations from being built into this economy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. It does seem that looking at the real economyprovides some benchmark that we can use to make our estimates aboutthe future. But, certainly, the latest revisions make it very clearthat, when some quarters in 1989 that were originally around 3 percentare revised to 1.7 percent, we have to be very careful about thinkingabout that kind of precision. I am somewhat optimistic about the realeconomy in regard to the performance of net exports. I think thestrong current dollar net exports in the second quarter will certainlyswitch to very strong real net exports in the third and fourthquarters, as the price patterns in the second quarter reverse.The monetary aggregates now have fallen into the category ofbeing interesting. I used to think they were much more thaninteresting, having had four years in which the growth of theaggregates has been down, with M2 below 5 percent. Whether you'remeasuring M2 over four years, three years, two years, or one year, its-26-8/21/90growth is very close to 4-1/2 percent. But the fact of the matter is,according to the staff forecast, we're probably going to end up withthe highest year-over-year CPI inflation since 1981. That means theresults in nine years have been better than the results this year.Certainly, for an old fashioned monetarist that gives one pause. Now,that doesn't mean that the monetary aggregates are not important; itprobably just means that we have to look to somewhat lower M2 growthrates to achieve our objective than we first thought necessary. Wecan also look at real interest rates, which I think are a very crudecheck in regard to distinguishing between periods in which monetarypolicy is apparently very easy, as it was in the 1970s, versus thereal interest rates that prevailed in the 1980s, which in general werein the 4 to 4-1/2 percent range. Certainly, it seems likely, giventhe tax changes with regard to the deductibility of interest, thatthose real interest rates are consistent with inducing a change inhousehold savings patterns. And in a sense, I think all of us oughtto be much more enthused than we are regarding the level of consumerspending. It seems to me that the saving rate in the United States isnot too high and that, consequently, some rise in the saving rate--which means a diminution in the rate of growth of consumer spending--is exactly what the doctor would order.Now, it seems to me that a look at forward-looking indicatorsreally can [help one] begin to pinpoint a bit better when monetarypolicy has been easy and when it has been restrained. And thoseforward-looking indicators clearly show that monetary policy in 1988and after maybe the first three quarters of 1989 were indicative ofrather significant restraint. Whether you're looking at commodityprices, the yield curve, or the foreign exchange value of the dollar,you get a confirmation of the fact that the money growth prevailing atthat time did not enable enough liquidity to be out there to supportupward movements of commodity prices and it supported the exchangevalue of the dollar. But, frankly, it seems to me that over the lastnine months we have moved--though not from a monetaristic determinedway of looking at monetary policy--from monetary restraint to monetaryease. I don't think it has been an abrupt move; I think it has been avery gradual move. And we probably have not altered the real interestrates significantly, or so dramatically as to [foster] too muchexpansion in the period ahead. But I think it is quite apparent thatthe yield curve is indicating that participants in the real market aresuggesting that the appropriate rates of interest are higher than wemay be providing. Certainly, [that can be seen in] commodity prices.The staff did me the favor in Chart 7 of indexing these commodityprices to the first quarter of 1986, which is in some way a littleembarrassing for me because I talked about keeping those commodityprices within a range of 10 percent up or 10 percent down from wherethey were in the first quarter. And when I look at all commodities,the index at almost 140 means that we had an 8 percent annual growthrate over a 4-1/2 year period. All commodities except crude oil showa 5 percent annual rate of gain; and that's not stability in thoseprices. So monetary restraint does not seem to be characteristic ofthis era. When you look at the bottom chart, all commodities exceptfood and crude oil--which takes out some of the variabilities ofagricultural policy--it looks like we have had a very significanttrend line of rising prices over the last 11 months. So, there'snothing there that gives me any indication that monetary policy atthis moment is too restrained. Indeed, if the foreign exchange valueof the dollar continues to fall at the rate it has been falling--since-27-8/21/90really over the last 10 months--it's a rather significant event, whichwith the recent movements in gold prices I think could be an outrightdevaluation. And that only occurs during periods of monetary ease,not monetary restraint. So, I'm somewhat of the view that we havealready eased. And I'm of the view that that ease, if it takes holdprior to the time that we get a breakout of the rate of inflation fromthe rut we have been in on the down side, is going to give us one heckof a problem in the years ahead.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I'll be brief because myobservations are very much in the mainstream of much of what has beensaid this morning. In the area of inflation, pre-Iraq I think thenews was already disappointing in that we really had made very littleprogress. And now post-Iraq, we have an oil shock that is a virtualcinch to pick inflation up substantially. So, I believe we do have ahigher inflation outlook. There is some concern that it might besubstantially higher; that's a very clear and unequivocal threat. Inthe area of real economic activity, I think pre-Iraq we have beengetting pretty much what we had asked for--maybe a little on the softside of that, but no real nose dive that was in any way perceptible.And today, we have even more softness in prospect as a result of theoil shock. So, the recent events are certainly not a plus and theycertainly add to the risk and to the uncertainty. But at least thereis not yet much evidence that the economy is headed for the tank. So,we do have an exacerbated inflationary situation and I think there isa clear need that that be minimized in a way that is most sensible tothe rest of the economy and its progress. Economic activity per theGreenbook may still be okay; I hope we get the Greenbook outlook and Ithink that probably would be okay.One question that I ask myself is: If we did try to help theeconomy through easing, would it work? Would the medicine turn out tobe as bad as the disease is in the first place? I'm not sure; perhapssome percentage thereof. I'm not sure what would happen to long ratesin that event. I'm not sure what would happen to the dollar or theinflation rate. And I'm not even very sure whether we would get theresponse we would be looking for from the consumer and on theinvestment side if we did that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. In general, I would like to identify myself withPresident Boehne's remarks. In spite of the fact that the consumerconfidence figures are terribly volatile and not necessarily reliablein the long term, they are cause for a reasonable amount of alarm onmy part because we have such a consumer-driven economy. I think we'revery close to the edge of that cliff; if it's not a cliff, it's asteep decline. I'm concerned that if we do lapse into recession,certain weak elements in the economy could accelerate. The realestate mess could be a real collapse on a much broader front than itcurrently is. The further losses that a recession would imply for thebanking system would further undermine the banks at a time when manyof them are on skinny ground as it is. Corporate profits remain verydisappointing. The debt burden of the private sector is heavy and,obviously, the burden of servicing that debt in a declining economy isgoing to be much greater. I have no confidence that the oil price-28-8/21/90rise will be contained or that it will begin to decline due to offsetsfrom Saudi Arabia, Venezuela, the United Arab Emirates, etc. I'm notsure that they really are going to come on stream as advertised andthat they will be sustained. Part of it depends on the duration ofthe Iraq crisis and I think that's an imponderable. Short isobviously good even if it's a shooter; long is very serious whether ornot it's a shooter because of the effect on the economy and thepossibility of permanent or at least longer-term impairment of theflow of oil. The dilemma is that the external circumstances havethreatened growth and at the same time stimulated inflation. And thechallenge for us is that movement against one exacerbates the other,whichever way we go. And the whole situation is seriously complicatedby the vulnerability of the dollar and the possible consequences of afree fall in the dollar to the financing of the deficit--and thedeficit may be growing at the same time. So, those are comments thatdon't lead us anywhere, but they describe what I am thinking about atany rate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. My views on the nature of the economy, pre-oilshock, are pretty consistent with what everyone else has described. Iwould consider it marginally gloomier than last time, but with noreally clear evidence of a recession, and brighter than the gloom thatpervaded after some of the statistics that were released a few monthsago. I guess we're still pinning our hopes on exports. Looking backover six quarters, if you ignore the first quarter of 1989 droughtdistortions, we have had roughly six quarters of maybe 1.4 percent GNPgrowth. That should be the equivalent of a couple of quarters ofnegative 1 percent recession with the rest of them in the mid 2percent range and you would think that it should have produced slack.We don't see a lot of evidence of slack in the economy but we do seesome. Capacity utilization has edged down some and it's only high ina couple or three industries, such as mining and primary metals.Unemployment has increased and employment has fallen. The realmystery is what happened to the 600 thousand to 1 million people wholeft the work force. Clearly, if they were in the work force and ifthe latter had grown at the rates we saw in the 1980s, unemploymentwould be above 6 percent. I think they are legitimately out of thework force because we don't see the pressure on wages. And we seeother evidence in the labor statistics, such as aggregate hoursworked, that suggests there is not a lot of slack.So, overall, I think we've seen very little progress oninflation. It is true that the June CPI number, which upset so manypeople, had the owner's equivalent rent in it suggesting that homecosts were going up pretty rapidly at a time when other thingssuggested they were going down. That was true in July as well, but itwas not the only factor in July; there were other concerns in July.You can't help but believe that nearer term the recent months of slowgrowth in money and credit should start to have an impact. But Iwould say at this stage that I see no hard evidence of progress. Fromthese levels of GNP growth I'm also not that confident that if we sawa downturn we could do much to catch it in time, which is why I thinkwe need to look ahead and think carefully about the future. Myinitial view of the oil shock was that it was not such a massiveevent. In terms of the increase in the price of oil it is perhaps 50percent. In the early 1970s, oil prices increased by four times and-29-8/21/90 -30-in the late 1970s by two or three times. This seemed a lot smaller,although the news media tends to equate it with those two [earlier]events. And I think the 1970s conditions were far different.Certainly, we're going to see higher CPI numbers. As Governor Angellmentioned, these will be the highest we've seen essentially in the[last decade] and in fact the highest we've seen since the last timean oil shock happened. One of the reasons we didn't see highernumbers in the 1980s was because we didn't have oil shocks in the1980s. It's still not a very pleasant prospect; and it comes on topof not very much progress before this in the CPI. The staff estimatesa moderate impact on inflation, perhaps 1-1/2 percentage point higherCPI numbers, and a transitory impact. I guess that's consistent withthe notion that there is some slack in the economy. The economy ispretty weak and money and credit growth have been slow. It's not toolikely that this would feed into some generalized inflation.Yet the bond markets reacted quite negatively to this--andaround the world, I might add. The reaction was pretty similar inbond and stock markets in the major industrialized countries. U.S.long bond yields went up 50 to 60 basis points, and it's hard toreconcile a transitory impact on the CPI with 30-year investors insome crude sense saying 30-year inflation is one half point higher.They are responding not so much perhaps to the projected medianinflation rate as to the small probability that the high consequenceoutcome is letting inflation get out of hand. I also believe someimportant part of the higher yields is a real risk premium associatedwith the uncertainty and the disruption in real economies. Investingin 30-year bonds is simply riskier in a world when small countries candisrupt large economies at will. That disruption risk had been therein the 1970s. We went through the entire 1980s without one of theseevents; indeed, we went through the entire Iran-Iraq war without oneof these events. The cold war ended and now all of a sudden we havereal instability, which I think people will offset with a real riskpremium. There are some arcane measures which document thevolatility. The implied volatility on bond options has gone throughthe roof. There are technical factors in the bond market. When youhave this sort of uncertainty the hedges come undone; it's moreexpensive to be a 30-year investor. Peter mentioned the problems withthe auction. And it's not clear to me that some of the other marketsthat didn't have the auction problems went up quite as much. One wayI try to conceptualize the oil shock impact is to assume that ithadn't happened but that instead we had a budget deal which involved a$10 a barrel tax on oil with half of the proceeds given as foreign aidto oil-producing countries. It seems to me that the inflationaryimpact of that sort of budget deal in some crude sense should beroughly the same as what we've seen. But I suspect the markets wouldhave responded far differently. And it seems to me that difference inresponse has a lot to do with the uncertainty and the potential forfuture disruptions of this type. So, I wouldn't read--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But the difference is who imposes thetax.MR. MULLINS. I think the yield curve is going to be moresteeply sloped for some time to come because of an uncertainty premiumin it. What bothers me most is the impact on the real economy. Thisis a contractionary event. People are poorer; they have less money tospend; their wealth is reduced. Because the magnitude of the impact8/21/90is not that great in terms of the percentage increase in prices, theimpact in the Greenbook is relatively small--less than 1 percentreduction in GNP. And we don't have a lot of GNP to give up now; wecome out projecting .5 for the fourth quarter, which is a pretty smallmargin of error. I've already alluded to my major concern in thisarea, which is the fragility of consumer confidence. I'm a littleconcerned that we may see the increase in the saving rate thatGovernor Angell talked about if we start a shooting war over there.I'm also concerned that we haven't thought a lot about how this islikely to end. We discussed it a little here. The outcomes aren'tthat encouraging from the point of view of consumer confidence. Wecould be lucky enough to have an efficient coup. But when you thinkabout the scenarios, it leads to a pretty sour mood. This on top ofan already fairly weak economy suggests to me that there's certainly apossibility that the contractionary consequences could be greater thanprojected in the Greenbook.I'm still a little concerned about the slow growth in moneyand credit. We have had very low growth in the past four or fivemonths, including last month, despite the absence of RTC activity. Iguess growth is picking up in the first couple of weeks of August, aswe apparently have scared people back into money. Money market mutualfunds have gone up and we're apparently exporting currency again at arapid pace. Obviously, some of it could be demand; but there also issome fragmentary evidence on the supply side. The lending officerssurvey continues to show tightness; and finance company lending wentup pretty dramatically recently, which is consistent with the notionof some borrowers having to search for alternatives to bank credit.I'd be particularly concerned about where the low investment gradeborrowers are going. The junk bond market is gone; the banks are notforthcoming. You don't see the substitution effect in the commercialpaper market; high-grade credit has gone down as well. The otherconcern I would have is the fragility of the banking system. If wehave a sharp downturn, we could have some real problems there and theFDIC could have some real problems as well. So, I see a fairly weakpicture to begin with--with this shock making it weaker--and with thecertain prospect of higher numbers on the CPI as inflation worksitself through, the specter of a real possibility that the consumercould pull in his or her horns. This presents us with a difficultdilemma for setting policy; people have extended their pity on ourtough dilemma. What concerns me is that I think it's likely to getmore difficult before it gets easier. As the numbers actually startto go into the CPI and as the impact on the consumer becomes clearer,the policy options down the road may be at least as difficult as theones we face now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Every time I come to one of these meetings I amreminded of how difficult it is either to analyze the economycurrently or to forecast it. This time we've just come through aperiod of having received these major revisions in the GNP numberswhich, at least as I read them, show that we had weaker growth lastyear than most of us thought we had had. Also, the numbers for thefirst two quarters of this year look rather weak. In doing ourforecast, I think the uncertainties are really tremendous. Imentioned a couple of them in my questions for the gentlemen at theend of the table: primarily, the impact of the Middle East situation,-31-8/21/90the budget summit or what might come out of the summit, or how Gramm-Rudman will work and whether or not we'll have a sequester. All ofthose are key unknowns in our forecast. I certainly don't pretend tohave any answers that are any better than anyone else's. It isinteresting for someone who has been rather concerned about the signsof weakness in the economy, as I have, to be able to add some moreindicators to my list this summer. A number of them have beenmentioned, so I won't repeat them. Also, I think it's interestingthat the U.S. Chamber of Commerce has now come up with, and madepublic, a recession forecast for this year. Solomon Brotherseconomists also are now forecasting a recession.As I compare my own views with the Greenbook presentation,there are a couple of things I would mention. One is the area ofconsumer spending. I'm somewhat more negative about that than ourofficial forecast, primarily because of the debt situation. Consumersare really loaded up to their eyeballs, I would argue. And I thinkthis Middle East mess and what that's doing to consumer confidence isgoing to result in a chance that their debt problems may even worsenwith defaults and delinquencies and those sorts of things. Also, Inever hear anyone mention the impact of these declining real estate[values] on consumer spending. John LaWare and I have talked about itin the past as an influence on the health of the banking system andS&Ls, etc. But for the average person, at least the average person Iknow, the equity in their home is the biggest single item on theirpersonal balance sheet. And when the bombs dropped on the values ofthose homes--they actually are facing declines in real estate valuesin many parts of the country, except maybe where Bob Parry lives--itmade them feel more poor. I think that is a bigger impact on theconsumer sector than the October 1987 stock market decline. Thelatter impacted people who owned equities, but a lot of other peopledidn't even know there was anything going on on Wall Street. I thinkthe decline in real estate values is far more serious to the consumerand will be a future influence on consumers' willingness and abilityto spend.Also, I'm somewhat more concerned about housing and otherkinds of construction because I don't think the financing problemsthat are out there in the real world have been fully reflected in ourstatistics, particularly the needs of contractors to locate funds todo their construction work. I know we've discussed the credit crunchprimarily in the context of banks, but it also relates to S&Ls and tothe closing of S&Ls and to the limits on loans to a single borrower.That is coming in through the back door and impacting on theconstruction of single-family homes, multifamilies, etc. I'm alsomore concerned about what's going on in state and local governmentsand their budgetary problems. I think we're likely to see either cutsin their expenditures or still more hikes in their taxes. We'vealready seen numerous instances of that but it wouldn't surprise me tosee still more. And that, of course, impacts those folks who have topay the tax bills.In terms of why I would just as soon not let us go into arecession, the fragility of the financial system is certainly the bigpart of that. I'm sure that the problems that already exist would bemade much, much, much more difficult. And a recession would make theU.S. budget far more difficult to deal with and would make the budgetdeficit much, much bigger. As for inflation, if you could guarantee-32-8/21/90 -33-me that a trip through the wringer would cut our inflation rate inhalf, I might sign on for the ride. But I haven't heard anyone try tomake that argument. Consequently, I am unwilling to take the risk ofa recession to get what may be a very modest cut in the inflationrate. So many of the sources of inflation that I see are just out ofour reach, period--whether it's an action by government or whetherit's something that has to do with OPEC or Mother Nature, etc. Ithink we have some impact but we certainly don't have completecontrol. So, I hope that we can come up with a good decisiontoday--one that will help to keep us out of a recession if we're notalready in one, though be responsible on the inflation-fighting side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we all need some coffee.MR. BOEHNE. Good idea.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Kohn.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Kohn?MR. PARRY. I'd like to ask a question about what youreferred to as the "felicitous" outcome involving an unchanged[nominal] income path after the shock which, of course, leads to an[un]changed interest rate path and M2 path. To me that has criticalimplications for the policy decision we make here. What bothers me alittle is that it seems to me a bit counter-intuitive; also, I know acouple of models at least where there are different results. It wouldseem more likely, with an oil shock of the magnitude we're talkingabout, that in the first year we probably are going to see more of theimpact on higher prices than on the real side. That would suggestthat in order to get the same path for nominal income growth we wouldneed higher interest rates and somewhat slower growth of M2. And ifindeed the same nominal income path is what we want now, this is avery critical difference. I don't know how much effort was spent intrying to verify this or to look at it in different ways, but assumingan unchanged nominal path is what we want, it's critical whichinterest rate path is consistent.MR. KOHN. Well, let me make one or two comments and thenDave or Ted may want to comment as well. One is--and this follows theconversation we had before--that I think it's important to distinguishbetween GNP prices and the CPI.MR. PARRY. Yes.MR. KOHN. You get a lot more [effect] on the CPI, given thatit has imports in it and given that it has a higher weight on energy,than you would on GNP prices. Secondly, it's sort of a function ofthe model; it falls out of the model's parameters, which are based onpast experience. I think you could argue that past experience wasdistorted; we had controls in certain cases and things like that. So,I think it is particularly difficult to get a reading on what's goingto happen now.8/21/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's also an interesting change inthe translation from crude oil to product prices this time relative tothe last time. We used to have a long lag; now it's instantaneous.MR. PARRY. Well, we had price controls.MR. KOHN. Yes, everything was distorted by the controls,certainly in the first period. So, my thought is that past experiencemay not be that good a guide. And that simply reinforced my ownfeeling that one can start with the staff forecast as a firstapproximation, but this is probably a period in which the odds on thatcoming through are less than I would usually say is true for the staffforecast and, therefore, that one needs to be somewhat more adroit andalert in changing policy if in fact the incoming information is not sosuggestive--MR. STOCKTON. It isn't the case that our forecast isconstrained by this particular feature of the model--that somehow theenergy price run-up would naturally lead to offsetting price andoutput effects with unchanged nominal income. As Don pointed out inhis briefing, it is a function of the parameters of this specificmodel and not a theoretical feature of the economy or something thatis anything other than a summary of past historical experience.MR. PARRY. It seems to me that we made one major judgmentthat interest rates should be the same or lower, but I have a feelingthat we shouldn't take too much confidence in that result. It seemsto me quite likely that if we make that judgment then we're probably,in effect, going to see higher nominal income and it's probably goingto be primarily as a result of greater inflation. I think the risk isthere and it's a significant risk.MR. PRELL. I think the sense in which this nominal GNPconcept is attractive is as sort of an automatic stabilizer.MR. PARRY. Right.MR. PRELL. But you don't necessarily have to constrainyourself to that automatic response. So, there's nothing magicalabout this. If you were concerned about any acceleration in inflationin the short run, you might want to have a lower nominal GNP path oreven--MR. PARRY. Oh, that's true.MR. PRELL. So it doesn't do the work for you here in termsof the policy decision.MR. PARRY. But it may cast it in a somewhat more[unintelligible] way if indeed the underlying relationships aredifferent than as portrayed by that model. But you're right: Itdepends on what you want to set as your objective.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Don, what do you project for M2 growth in thefourth quarter given something like the baseline assumption?-34-8/21/90MR. KOHN. We have 4 percent quarterly average growth in thefourth quarter. But I believe the monthly numbers, which I don't haveright in front of me, are lower than that. We come out of the thirdquarter higher, so I think we're looking at rates more like 3-1/2percent on a monthly basis in the fourth quarter. And partly becausewe have the RTC activity picking up at the end of September, onceagain that starts depressing M2 growth early in the fourth quarter.And then we have opportunity costs perhaps even widening a little asbanks and thrifts reduce their offering rates in lagged response toother rates. So, we don't have any big push in M2 for the fourthquarter. We did raise the projection for the year to 4 percent basedlargely on incoming data, revisions to past data, and how we saw thethird quarter. We didn't really strengthen our outlook beyond thethird quarter very much.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody else? If not, why don't I getstarted and try to cut through some of this. I must say that this isabout as difficult a policy discussion as I have ever been confrontedwith, and I've been around these policy woods so to speak for 40years. Let's start with where we are. I think there are severalthings we can stipulate with some degree of certainty: namely, thatthose who argue that we are already in a recession I think arereasonably certain to be wrong in the sense that we do have weeklydata that suggest, as others have mentioned, that up until perhaps aweek or so ago there was no evidence of deterioration in what was avery sluggish pattern. The insured unemployment data are as broad asany set of numbers that we have for the economy as a whole. Theydon't get revised. Sometimes they are a little unstable, but ingeneral they do give an unfailing measure of where we have been. AndI think where we have been in the first half of the third quarter isclearly some small plus. The whole thing may fall on its face nextweek, but I think at the moment it hasn't.On the inflation side, those who argue that the goodsinflation is suppressing the problem on the services side are clearlylooking at the numbers [but] I find the numbers a little difficult toread. I think the crucial issue here is not the services inflationnumbers but the wage rates which--however one looks at this inflationtrade-off--clearly have not been coming down and show a slight upwardtilt. Although there is still the possibility that that could turnaround in the third quarter, I wouldn't want to count on it given thetype of environment we're in. The services inflation problem has alot of tricky things to it, which is what I think David Mullins wasraising--especially when you try to substitute existing house pricesfor the cost of house operations for the owner or renter. So, it's amixed bag.What I am saying, essentially, is that there's a degree ofapparent certainty out there in forecasts and judgments, which I thinkis suspect. The crucial issue confronting us right at the moment isthat the odds of an actual war in the Middle East are 50/50. If youlook at the form of the buildup that we're engaged in there, it'sfairly apparent that this is not a military establishment that isgoing to sit there for a very long period of time. We are bringing infairly significant tactical offensive weapons. The chances of thisall positioning itself and doing nothing and Saddam backing downeasily has to be on the low side of the probability [spectrum]. Andthe crucial issue here is that if a war does come, we have a very-35-8/21/90serious question--as I think Jerry mentioned--with respect to thestate of the Saudis' oil facilities, a very substantial part of whichare concentrated directly under Kuwait off Ras Tanura and to the northof Bahrain. And that is not all that far away from a couple ofkamikaze raids, which some Iraqi pilots have already volunteered for.Frankly, I don't think it's an issue in the next week or so. We arestill building our military forces and it's extremely unlikely thatanything will be triggered until we are positioned. We are nowherenear there because of the lead times it takes to move our equipmentand troops. And while we have a formidable force--enough forinhibiting any adventuresome activities--I don't think we're yetanywhere near the level that the reported flow of materials suggestswe are.As a result of that, in an odd way where the economy has beenis a very interesting statistic, but I'm not altogether certain it'sas crucial as we probably would like it to be. We obviously have amajor budget problem, not so much in the additional costs but I thinkin the reduced probabilities of getting an agreement, which I thinkclearly have declined significantly. In Gary Stern's terms, we are ina sense in economic/political policy turmoil.In that type of an environment, it is crucial that there besome stable anchor in the economic system. It's clearly not going tobe on the budget side; it has to be the central bank. It's got to bewe! I think we very clearly have to preserve--which is ourfundamental role, mainly--the value of the currency both internallyand externally and, in a sense I suspect, be more involved in damagecontrol than in trying to implement a policy that is apt to dosomething of very significant dimensions. I personally would feelvery uncomfortable if we exhibited any evidence that we were going toaccommodate the increase in nominal GNP that we would like to come out[unintelligible] with the price rise. As Lee Hoskins mentioned, theexperience of the 1970s is something that very clearly has to beavoided. When we get uncertainties at the level that we currentlyhave, I think we have no choice but to go to where our fundamentalpolicy issues lie, mainly in trying to maintain as closely as we can astable credit and monetary environment.I must say, I disagree with Wayne Angell's pessimism on M2.I would be more inclined to explain the fact that we have had a verylow rate of M2 growth in the last three or so odd years--in thecontext that inflation was not coming down more--in terms of the P*model that we set up. That would show in 1986 that adjusting themoney supply relative to the price level indicated that the pricelevel was down here and the long-term parallel real money supply wasup here. What we have been seeing essentially is a gradual narrowing,with the price level coming up and essentially burning off the excessmoney supply. And it's only very recently that the lines havecrossed. I certainly would say that if the inflation rates were tocontinue [moving] up as money supply stayed stable, then the pessimismthat you're exuding has some reason to be focused on. But at themoment I think it's premature; I think we have evidence that thissystem fundamentally still works. And I think that we have to befocused on essentially where the credit aggregates and the moneysupply growth are. While at our last meeting we were getting clearindications that the markets were tightening more than we hadanticipated, I had hoped that the money supply numbers we were looking-36-8/21/90at in recent weeks were suggesting that that basically is simmeringdown. As I recall, Bob Forrestal mentioned that he was hearing lessabout a credit crunch and that may in fact be what is happening; itmay well be that what these money supply numbers of recent weeks areshowing us is that the cumulative pressure coming in the creditmarkets in an endeavor essentially to preserve capital has reached thepoint where that continuing tightening has at least flattened out.In today's environment we have to recognize that there is arather limited chance of affecting the economy in a significant way.I would suspect at this point that the Pentagon has more policymakingclout than we do, because it's fairly obvious looking around the worldthat if oil [prices] go up and oil [production] comes down, that willhave profound effects on the system. And if Saddam is perceived to beincreasing his power and his clout and his control over the West, heis going to be able to name OPEC's level of output--including his own,which will be up there and everybody else's, which will be down. Andhis control would be more than just strictly the Gulf states becausehe has terrorist groups out there and he can control Indonesia andevery far flung oil producer in the world. Consequently, our abilityto divert this guy probably has far more implications with respect tocrude oil output, prices, interest rates, the world economy, andspecifically the United States economy, than anything we can dositting around this table for weeks. So, I would suggest at thisparticular stage that we ought to have a more modest view of what itis we're going to be able to accomplish. I don't think it is in ourpower to either create a boom or prevent a recession or vice-versa.At this particular moment and for the period immediately ahead ourtools are limited. Therefore, I would suggest that perhaps thegreatest positive force that we could add to this particular state ofturmoil is not to be acting but to be perceived as providing a degreeof stability. And I would hope that to the extent our foreign centralbank associates will feel the same way, we might be able temporarilyto put some degree of stability at least somewhere in the system.Having said that, if one looks through to our next scheduledmeeting on October 2, I think it's more likely that events willmaterialize in a manner whereby we eventually will feel morecomfortable easing than we will tightening. So, I would still like tostay where we have been which is "B," asymmetric toward ease. Butthis is such an uncertain period that I think we're going to have tobe auditing it quite considerably. And under any conditions, I wouldrecommend that we not go more than two weeks before we meet again onthe telephone because I do think that within the next two-week periodsomething is very likely to emerge that will require a general review.I don't know anything specific about whether or not [our military] hasbuilt up to an offensive technical capability or not. Frankly, if Ihad to guess, I would believe that the President has not made thatjudgment yet. To know that we have the capability, one only needs towatch the television tube for any protracted period of time and knowsomething about what types of armaments are used for what types ofpurposes. Now, if this is strictly a limited police action, there arejust too many policemen. So, let me stop there with that proposal andsee where everyone would like to go.MR. HOSKINS. Just a point of clarification.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure.-37-8/21/90MR. HOSKINS. In the context of what you said on asymmetriclanguage and the conference call, are you suggesting that you aresuspending what I guess has developed into a tradition recently ofasymmetric meaning you have two calls of your own of 25 basis points,or would you confer?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, this particular period I would viewsomewhat as a special case. I don't know how I'm going to answer thatfrankly at this stage. I haven't given it thought. The authority ofthe Chairman under this proposed directive I think has to be evaluatedvery carefully. Certainly, this is not the same view that I held lastJuly when I put it the other way around. I think we need somethingvery significant to move from where we are. President Syron.MR. SYRON. I guess the first law of medicine is do no harm.It seems to me that you're suggesting that that might be the first lawof central bankers in these circumstances. I have a lot of sympathywith that. I think of the whole situation in a sort of "BS," beforeSaddam, and "AS," after Saddam way. I must confess that before SaddamI was somewhat inclined to think on the basis of the data we hadcoming in--the GNP revisions, other developments, and the financialsituation--that some moderate easing along the lines of 25 basispoints might be appropriate. But in the wake of what has happened inthe Middle East, with the further steepening of the yield curve andthe intermingling of the concern of inflation expectations for avariety of reasons and also what has happened in the foreign exchangemarket, it's a somewhat hazardous course to make any change at thispoint in time until we have somewhat more certain information aboutwhat's going to happen with the dominant event. As you point out, thedominant event will be something not determined in this room. I mustconfess to being somewhat dismayed by your odds. I'm not disagreeingwith them because I'm sure you know more than we do, but still it'sfairly discouraging. I agree with the "B" asymmetric; and because itis a long time in this environment until October 2nd, I think we mayneed some consultation before then.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, in light of the uncertainties andconcerns that you mentioned, I certainly would be supportive ofBluebook alternative B. In terms of my own viewpoint, though, myconcerns about higher inflation are equal to my concerns aboutrecession. Consequently, if I had my druthers, I'd prefer symmetriclanguage as well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I'm encouraged by your confidence in M2 and, Mr.Chairman, I want to believe you're right. I think [your proposal] isin a somewhat acceptable range and I certainly do agree that we needto have more information to move. Although somewhat satisfied withthe range that you stated, my preference would actually be "B" with atilt toward restraint. But I don't know that that restraint wouldneed to take place by an increase in interest rates. I just believethat there's some confusion in the marketplace in regard to what it isthat we are about. And if there were some way of communicating yourcall for stability, and that includes price level stability, then Ibelieve that we would have a much better chance to get long-term-38-8/21/90interest rates down. My guess is that if we were to move the fedfunds rate up 25 basis points that that would be quite a surprise andthat it would be taken as an indication of our not accommodating thisoil price phenomenon. And frankly, I would expect long bond rates tocome down as much as short-term rates go up. Now, I realize it's alot easier to suggest that when you're not Chairman than it is whenyou are, but that's my guess. In periods of low growth in which thehousing industry is under such a serious restraint that it does makeother consumer goods areas vulnerable to the downturn, it is importantto have lower long-term rates; and those lower long-term rates comewith reduced inflation expectations. I believe if the world knows theFederal Reserve stands as the guardian of the value of the U.S. dollarin purchasing goods and services in our market, which also includes astable value of the dollar abroad, then we would do wonders forinterest rates and actually increase the chances for the higher realgrowth that I think some of you would like to see.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I absolutely agree with thesolution that you describe in what is at best a very difficultsituation. Therefore, I would support alternative "B" with asymmetriclanguage toward ease. I have one minor operative difference, and itrelates to the question that Lee Hoskins raised. Looking ahead, I dothink the chances are that we will be easing policy sooner than wewill be tightening it. And it seems to me that these kinds ofsituations happen very, very quickly and that there are brief windowsin which we would have an opportunity to make a change. Therefore, Iwould not be uncomfortable--if you were to become aware of somethingand you felt we did not necessarily have time to bring the Committeetogether--if you were to go ahead and make a change without a phonecall.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Lee was raising a question of two[changes], is that correct?MR. HOSKINS. Yes, that was what I understood it [meant]around the table when the language was asymmetric. But my questionalso relates to--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I recall we always really interpreted itas one.MR. ANGELL. One.MR. KEEHN. Yes, that's how I interpreted it.MR. HOSKINS. Well, I always interpreted it as that you had[as Chairman the authority to make] a 25 basis point move either wayif the directive was symmetric. That was my understanding. If it wasasymmetric--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't think that has ever actuallybeen formulated by this Committee, at least--SPEAKERS(?). [Secretary's note: Unintelligible becauseseveral people were talking at once.]-39-8/21/90MR. BOEHNE. I think we shouldn't do it today.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't think it's the appropriate day.MR. BOEHNE. I think we have to have some confidence in ourChairman to use his discretion, particularly in periods like we're innow.MR. KEEHN. That's my point.SPEAKER(?). That's the point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I appreciate that. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, in the pre-Iraq invasionenvironment I was beginning to feel that we were at the point where weshould consider some easing of policy, and I must say that the eventsin the Middle East have tended to confirm my feeling that that isprobably the appropriate stance for policy. I'm not at all convincedthat the price of oil is going to be maintained at the $25 level that'the staff is forecasting, in the context of your remarks--which I tendto agree with--that there's a 50/50 chance that we're going to getinto a real shoot-out here. All of that I think is going to reduceaggregate demand in the economy and it's going to have a greatereffect on the real economy and on output than on prices. My view isthat we should do what we can to avoid a recession for reasons thatwe're all familiar with and that Governor LaWare articulated very wella few minutes ago. I think one can argue that we can attain greaterstability by moving at this point and giving greater confidence to thepeople at large that we are not going to be moving into a recession.And I say that with full recognition of the effects on inflation andthe exchange rate. But having said all of that, your argument isquite persuasive. As you said, it's a very, very difficult call--probably one of the most difficult we have faced in a long time. So,I can support your prescription with some reservation. My preferencewould be to move slightly to give a psychological boost, if not a realboost, to the economy. But if I were a voting member I would notdissent from your prescription.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I'm fully supportive of yourposition.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I support your position as well. I think it'sthe right prescription for these circumstances. There might besomething to be said for a symmetric directive, in part because that'smy usual preference and in part because of all the uncertainties andrisks. But I don't feel very strongly about that at the moment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I also would support yourproposal. I think the most important thing that you may haveindicated is the need for stability. If we were to move, it seems tome that the markets would read it as sort of a double whammy. On the-40-8/21/90one hand, I would assume a move toward ease would indicate to somethat we are more concerned about a recession and, therefore, peoplewill accumulate the thoughts [and tend to react in ways] that willmake it come true. On the other hand, another part of the marketwould read the easing as being inflationary over time and that willbuild inflationary expectations. I think nothing good could come outof a move right now. And as a result, stability is where we should beand where we should stay unless some very dramatic changes take placein the near future.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, doing nothing so as to do no harm is oneside of the coin. The other side of that coin is paralysis. I thinkit might freeze us into avoiding opportunities to make some positivecontribution. And I think we need to be aware of that paralysis riskas we go through the next several months. I agree that at this pointwe cannot change policy, if for no other reason than what's going onin the financial markets, both the bond and foreign exchange markets.But I feel that the real economy is going to need some help; it'sgoing to need some help from us in the coming weeks and months and Ithink we ought not to shy away from providing that help. So, I preferan asymmetrical directive in the direction of ease but I think I wouldbe more active with that asymmetrical directive than I sense you wouldbe. I would look for opportunities to ease in the intermeeting periodwhen financial markets would be more favorably disposed to accept suchan action. I view this as a tactical maneuver rather than anabandonment of our basic strategy of restraint to bring downinflation. My expectation is that whatever easing moves we make inthe coming months will likely have to be reversed once the economybegins to strengthen.We hark back to the lessons that we learned in the 1970s, butI think we learned lessons on both sides. In the first episode in1974 we underestimated the amount of weakness in the economy that wasin the background when we had that first oil shock, and we ended upwith a very, very deep recession. On the other hand, in the later onein 1979, we wanted to avoid the first mistake so we tended to err onthe side of ease and we ended up with one big inflation that led torecession. So, there are lessons on both sides. And while I agreewith you that this is not the time to move, let's not get aninferiority complex in this big world and get paralyzed into doingnothing when opportunity knocks at the door.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I would agree with what you recommended here.I'd make three points. First, in this kind of environment, while Idon't think we can rely exclusively on it, I really do think as DonKohn suggested that we need to watch what money is doing because Idon't think we can assume that an unchanged funds rate is an unchangedpolicy. Secondly--I've said this before as well and I think Donsuggested this too in his remarks--I don't think that we can pretendto lead markets in this kind of environment; we really have to follow.Now, we don't always have to buy what markets are doing in a volatileperiod, but I'm suggesting that unless there were expectations of easeevidenced in financial markets, it would be very difficult for us toease and get away with it given the concern about inflation that's out-41-8/21/90there. And the final point I would make is that if a recession isimminent--if we're going to go into recession in the fourth quarter--Idon't think we can do much about it right now. Even in the face ofweak incoming data, if we feel that we're on a monetary policy coursethat is consistent in the long run with sustainable growth andprogress toward price stability, that's about all we should do. Iworry about overreacting--not on your part but just in general--toincoming weak data on the thought that somehow we could pull thiseconomy out of recession in the short run. I don't think we can.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Well, instinct and intuition both tilt me towardease and sooner rather than later. But the cautionary comments thatyou made persuade me that, as long as we monitor the situationcarefully and closely and are prepared to move quickly, yourrecommendation is appropriate. So I join in supporting it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I fully support yourrecommendation for "B" asymmetric toward ease, but I'm not as sure inmy own mind that we really are locked into an eventual ease. I thinkwe may be surprised with the strength of the economy. I also thinkthat if we do contemplate ease, we're going to have to assess thatvery carefully to make sure that it is efficacious if we do ease.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I also would support yourformulation. It's probably fair to say in my case that prior to theIraqi developments, I would have leaned to easing in any event. Asthings stand right now, I probably would come fairly close toassociating myself with Mr. Boehne's definition of the situation. ButI also think it's so uncertain that it could easily go the other way.I could easily envision unpleasant circumstances where we might haveto tighten monetary policy. I say that not because I favor that, butonly because it captures the range of emotions that I think is reallyon the table. As I say, your formulation is fine with me as thingssit right now. I would lean toward Mr. Boehne's prescription, butdepending upon what happens I might be a lot more cautious aboutseeking out an opportunity to ease.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Monhollon.MR. MONHOLLON. I think there's a serious risk that if wewere to ease now, we might be misread by the public and by themarkets. It might decrease our credibility and might produce sharpnegative reactions in both domestic bond markets and foreign exchangemarkets. It might make our longer-run objectives more difficult andmore costly to achieve. So, I have a strong preference for "B," Mr.Chairman for those reasons in addition to the ones you've outlined. Idon't have a strong feeling about the symmetry question, but I have aslight preference for symmetry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.-42-8/21/90MR. HOSKINS. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your analysis thistime almost wholeheartedly with respect to what monetary policy canand can't do. As I said before, we face the fact that there is an oilprice shock, that output is going to be less than it otherwise wouldhave been, and that inflation is going to be higher than it otherwisewould have been. There's not a lot we can do about that. The onething we can affect, however, is how people in the marketplace viewthe future for inflation--that is, inflation expectations. My viewwould be that we should look at that more carefully or at least giveit more weight than perhaps we have in the past. This is a policymess, but there is a silver lining in it. It does offer us a chanceto regain some of our credibility or to increase it. That would arguefor a position very close to Wayne Angell's. One could make a case onthose grounds, I think, for a token tightening. But since the marketalready expected an easing by us, that would argue in my mind forstaying where we are for stability reasons. But I do think we are atrisk with respect to our credibility in terms of pursuing pricestability. My preference would be that we have symmetric language in"B" and that hopefully we would have a Committee discussion before amove is made.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I would support the proposal, although I'mleaning more in the camp with Vice Chairman Corrigan and PresidentBoehne. Without this [Middle East situation] I think a case could bemade for some easing, especially if money and credit growth had notpicked up a little in August. It still bothers me when we go througha period of months with low growth in money and credit because historysuggests difficulty a bit down the road. I would agree that in thecurrent setting stability is important. I do think, though, thatthere are some risks in waiting and that it's not likely to be a loteasier down the road. What concerns me most is that we might findourselves in a position where we're trying to play catch-up, requiringlarger moves, which would make me uncomfortable because of the risk tostability. I believe there's great merit in gradualism. Also,looking down the road, I would suggest that at some stage it wouldn'tbe too bad an idea to get the market used to somewhat more movement inthe fed funds rate instead of the assumption that it's chiseled inmarble. That's something we should think about as well. But in thecurrent climate I would support "B" asymmetric toward ease.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I know these are very tough times and it'sdifficult to come up with accurate forecasts and it's difficult tomake good policy. And I appreciate your point about the need forstability and the need for some sort of anchor in Washington orsomething that is viewed as an anchor. But having lived on a riverfor 13 years, I remember that even boats that are anchored move alittle; otherwise the line snaps. So I think we could move a bit andnot be viewed as either irresponsible or reckless and also that itwouldn't turn the financial markets on their ear. In fact, it seemsto me that a modest move--to me 25 basis points is modest--wouldoffset some of the availability problems that I see in the creditmarkets. And at the same time it would make it easier to do furthermodest moves in the future as we see the need. So my preference wouldbe for some sort of a move that would resemble "A."-43-8/21/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't think I have asked specificallyfor support in a large number of meetings, going back a number ofyears. I'm not saying that people should violate what they think aretheir principles. I merely indicate that at this particular meetingit's important for us to have as large a consensus as we can get.Obviously, I'm not asking anyone to go against his or her particularview of where you would like policy to be, but if you can find yourway clear, this is the type of meeting in which it would be helpful ifwe had a very substantial consensus. Having said that, I'd like torequest the Secretary to put to a vote "B" with the languageasymmetric toward ease.MR. BERNARD. I have a question. On the asymmetry towardease, we [now] have "slightly greater reserve restraint might orsomewhat lesser reserve restraint would...." Stay with the "would"?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I'd stay with exactly what we had.MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. Taking account of progress towardprice stability, the strength of the business expansion, the behaviorof the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange anddomestic financial markets, slightly greater reserve restraint mightor somewhat lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in theintermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expectedto be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from Junethrough September at annual rates of about 4 and 2-1/2 percentrespectively. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if itappears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditionsduring the period before the next meeting are likely to be associatedwith a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 6 to 10percent."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Hoskins YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Seger Yes, with careful writing ofthe minutes.President Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Our next meeting is October2nd. Let's break for lunch.END OF MEETING-44-