Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 15, 1990A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 15, 1990, at 2:00 p.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneBoykinHoskinsJohnsonKelleyLaWareSegerSternMessrs. Black, Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis,and Boston, respectivelyKohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPrell, EconomistMessrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey,Promisel, Rolnick, Siegman, Simpson,and Stockton, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, T. Davis, Ms. Munnell,Mr. Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, San Francisco,Richmond, Kansas City, Boston, Chicago, and Atlanta,respectivelyMr. Cox, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of DallasMr. Guentner, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMay 15, 1990CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Will someone move approval of theminutes of the March 27th meeting?MS. SEGER. I'll move them.MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Cross, would youbring us up to date on Desk operations?MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Cross? If there areno questions, would somebody like to move the ratification of histransactions since the last meeting?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any questions for Mr.Sternlight?MR. HOSKINS. Peter, in March I asked about collateral toback the Federal Reserve notes. You thought there might be a problemin May, but I guess the Treasury balance situation solved that. Or doyou see a problem coming up soon?MR. STERNLIGHT. We had thought that there could be a problemin May. Our subsequent reviews suggest that it doesn't look as tightfor the balance of this year as we had thought a month ago. That'snot to say that the problem may not still be there; but it's not goingto be as severe for the rest of this year as I might have thought some6 or 8 weeks ago.MR. BOEHNE. The change in sentiment in the market was anextraordinary swing in mood. Yet I found that in the previous coupleof months or so the national statistics that we were getting didn'tseem to coincide with what I was hearing from the business community.The current numbers seem to me to be more consistent with what I hearfrom the business community. My question is: Is the marketplace sodependent on these published statistics or is it also relying some onthe kinds of ad hoc information that it gets from the businesscommunity generally? What a difference one number made! It juststruck me as extraordinary.MR. STERNLIGHT. There was an enormous change in sentimentjust about the time of that one set of employment numbers in earlyMay. I think more went into it than just that number. It wasn't justany single number; it was the unemployment rate as well as the flat5/15/90report on nonfarm payrolls and information that looked more comfortingon employment cost measures all wrapped up together in that.MR. KOHN. Part of the issue is what they think the Committeeis looking at, President Boehne. They are trying to guess what theFed is going to do and they think that the Committee pays a lot ofattention to those numbers.MR. PRELL. To add another two cents worth: My own impressionfrom talking to people who are with dealer firms and looking for someinsight into what the business community is saying is that the tradersand even the economists in many of these firms don't have all thatmuch exposure to anecdotal evidence directly from the businesscommunity. I have been disappointed regarding the paucity of suchinformation, at least among economists in banks and industrial firms.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions? If not, wouldsomebody like to move approval of the actions of the Desk?MR. LAWARE. I'll move it.MR. JOHNSON. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Prell.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Pause.] There must be questions!MR. BOEHNE. I have a couple of questions. On page 4 in theGreenbook, you have laid out the monetary policy assumptions aboutbringing inflation down over the next couple of years. We have anenvironment in which there is not very much support--certainly nonational support--for this kind of firming in monetary policy, as bestI can tell. But even besides that, going all the way out to the endof 1991 we have a 6-1/4 percent unemployment rate and then that slackcontinues into 1992. You don't indicate what the unemployment rate isin 1992. I presume it goes up another half point or three-quarters ofa point?MR. PRELL. No, we're thinking it's within a small fractionof 6-1/4 percent.MR. BOEHNE. But even after we have done all of that[firming], we have not done much more than keep inflation fromaccelerating, at least in terms of the numbers that you have. Thereis some deceleration, but inflation is still largely in the 4 to 5percent area that we have been talking about. Now, presumably, if youcarry this [forecast] out to '93, '94, and '95, you begin to get someresults. But to me that calls into question the whole logic behindthis approach that we can gradually squeeze inflation out, asdesirable as that goal is. Somehow this paragraph brought home (1)the difficulty of it, and (2) how unreasonable it may be even to thinkthat we can pursue something like this in the kind of world that welive in. I don't know if that's a question or a comment, but I guessI'd like you to disagree with me.5/15/90My second question has to do with this credit crunchphenomenon. We've all looked into it; we've put together theseanecdotal reports, and every report suggests that there's less of acredit crunch than is talked about popularly in the general press.I'm just wondering if you have any insights as to why we have thisdichotomy between what is said loosely and what we find when we try tozero in on the extent of it. It doesn't seem to be the same problemthat is often reported.MR. PRELL. Well, on the latter question, I'll offer a littleanecdotal information on anecdotes. I'll repeat one conversation Ihad with Bill Dunkelberg, who conducts the survey for the NationalFederation of Independent Business. That survey has shown very mild,if any, changes in the credit picture for that constituency. Herelated to me that he had been contacted by The Wall Street Journalbefore they published their lead story on the credit crunch and he hadtold them that. If you look at that story, he wasn't quoted. Thereporter obviously thought it would be better to discuss the negativenews than what Dunkelberg's survey suggested. That isn't to say theDunkelberg survey is absolutely reliable. But I think one finds thatsort of bad news orientation in the press reports. One also needs tolook carefully at the geographic detail and the sectoral detail thatis being addressed. Everything we have seen suggests that in the realestate area, particularly the construction side of the market asopposed to permanent financing of residential real estate, there hasbeen a substantial change in the tenor of credit conditions. And Idon't see any conflict with the anecdotal information in that area.As for small businesses, the senior loan officers opinion survey doessuggest that there has been some tightening. It hasn't been justrecently; it has been going on for the last year or so perhaps. Andit's affecting small and medium size businesses, particularly in[unintelligible]. It isn't showing up in rates; it isn't showing upas businesses not having any access to credit, at least not in termsof figures [unintelligible] cut back existing customers; but it'sshowing up in the standards that are being applied and the collateralthat is being used. The question is: What does that all amount to inthe end? In terms of GNP we think that the only significant effectsare going to be in the construction area. We would have had a markedweakening anyway in that sector, particularly in the commercial area,because of the overbuilding.On the inflation front, I don't want to repeat the entirepresentation that we gave a few months ago, but this is basicallyconsistent with that. In fact, I'd say this could be regarded as arelatively favorable short-run sort of Phillips curve trade-off. Weare getting a lot of disinflation for what we perceive to be the gaprelative to the natural rate. It does presume that history is tellingus that we can get there gradually, but the effects are not linear.In a sense, you have to get sharp absolute declines in activity inorder to get these effects, but we can do it gradually over a periodof time. I don't think we have historical episodes to go back to andsay "Yes, we had periods where the economy moved slowly, theunemployment rate was perhaps slightly above the full-employment rate,and we got a gradual diminution of the rate of inflation." But theevidence that exists suggests that we ought to be able to get someprogress over time. As I hinted here and said in my briefing, we'dlike people to perceive that it's headed in that direction and thatthe Fed is persisting--accepting whatever slack there is, presumably5/15/90leading to some rise in the unemployment rate to 6, 6-1/4 percent.Frankly, people thought that was looking pretty good coming from wherewe were. Maybe we will get to see some of that developing and thetradeoff will look better.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Did the recent numbers change your outlook any?I gather that you put a lot of this together before the most recentnumbers.MR. PRELL. The employment numbers led us to show a weakersecond quarter than we might have otherwise. We didn't feelcomfortable pushing the numbers much further than this. I must saythat there certainly are arguments--looking at what's going on in theautomobile sector--for a larger second-quarter number. But this issomething we feel comfortable with.MR. JOHNSON. The other question was on the budget. Youimplied that strong action on the budget would restrict the economy.Is that assuming that what goes with it is a drop in real interestrates? I just wonder: Wouldn't that be a source of stimulus to somedegree too? How are you coming to this restraint view?MR. PRELL. Well, this is a complicated question, obviously.Part of the issue would be whether this was just a one-shot effort tohit the Gramm-Rudman target for this coming fiscal year or whether itwas something that would dramatically change the outlook for the nextseries of years and greatly change expectations. When you open upthat latter door you're somewhat at sea in terms of an econometricmodel. One can come up with rather interesting results with that,such as long-term rates going down appreciably in anticipation of lesspressure on credit markets throughout the coming years. But if thatopened the door to a great deal of investment activity and it happenedvery quickly, we could even in the extreme get a net increase inaggregate demand in the short run; and short rates might even have torise some in response to that to keep things on a desirable path.Falling short of that, if the Federal Reserve is accommodative interms of trying to hold real GNP close to the path it would otherwisehave been on, I think the fiscal shock has to be one that tends tolower interest rates. The degree would depend in part on how muchforward expectation there was and how much bond yields move as well asshort-term rates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mike, if you pursued a gradual reduction in therate of inflation, it's quite likely, isn't it, that the noise may attimes obscure any trend of progress? That's more apt to happen in agradual reduction approach than if there were a significant recession.MR. PRELL. Well, in addition to that--MR. ANGELL. So, even though in some ways this may not givethe Committee a sense of a lot of achievement, you think it would bedifferent than that if we did not pursue this course?5/15/90MR. PRELL. Correct. Our suspicion is that if you hold tothe current money market conditions, economic activity will graduallypick up. You will not see the unemployment rate rise much, if at all,over the coming year or so. And since we believe that right now thepressures are such that the tendencies for inflation point up, wewould make a new course and head in that direction. So, instead ofheading south to 4 percent a couple of years from now, we feel therisk is that inflation would be heading north to 5 percent. That's asignificant difference and I'd hate to make it more precise than that.But as we've said, we felt there was noise affecting the reading ofthe trends [unintelligible] a variety of special factors: thesurprising strength of the dollar earlier in the year and so on. It'salways difficult to read these [unintelligible]. So, that's the basicthrust of our assessment at this point.MR. ANGELL. Well, I appreciate very much your laying out thepolicy options for us that you have.MR. PARRY. My point was somewhat similar to GovernorAngell's. The sentence on page I-3 [of the Greenbook] says: "Therecent data reinforced the view long embodied in the staff forecastthat restoration of a disinflationary trend is unlikely at currentlevels of resource utilization." The implication is that if we staywhere we are for a very long time, there is only a very small chanceof restoring the disinflationary trend and, in fact, it might evenproduce an increase in inflationary pressures. That's theimplication.MR. PRELL. That's what we are saying. Now, there's a secondpart to this and that is: Will the Federal Reserve obviously letfinancial conditions go, maintaining the historic growth path ofresource utilization numbers where they are? And that's the secondprojection. One is the implication of the resource utilization level;the second is about what financial conditions are compatible withresource utilization levels. I guess I'd say I'm a little less sureabout the second than I am about the first and there's a good deal ofuncertainty on the first.MR. PARRY. One get's the general feeling, though, that thepublic feels that if we were to stay where we are we would have acontinuation of growth rates of around 2 percent and a gradual[reduction of inflation]. What you're basically saying is that if westay where we are, growth rates are likely to pick up and we will notbe able to restore [unintelligible].MR. PRELL. My sense of the consensus of business economistsis that the economy probably is going to run with 2, 2-1/2 percentgrowth going out the next year to 18 months and inflation is going toremain roughly in the 4-1/2, 4-3/4, 5 percent zone.MR. PARRY. But they would not be assuming much in the way ofinterest rate pressures?MR. PRELL. No. My sense is that they probably are expectingvery little [change in] inflation, maybe some slowdown--MR. PARRY. That's my point.5/15/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I have two questions, Mike. One has to do withan earlier period--1988 and early 1989--when we raised the funds rate300 basis points, I think. I'd like you to contrast how you view thattradeoff now. We raised interest rates a lot and not a lot happened.You have built into your forecast an increase of 125 basis points orso and are expecting to get some bang for that at the end of 1991.I'd like you to compare those two periods if you can.MR. PRELL. Let me just go back to a factual matter. What wehave built in here is a rise in the funds rate of about 200 basispoints but then we have it coming off [some] in the latter half ofnext year as pressures begin to abate.MR. HOSKINS. Okay, that narrows the tradeoff down a little.The point I'm making here is that we acted fairly aggressively at onepoint in time and did not get much, as viewed by some people, in termsof [lower inflation] rates. We did not necessarily get disastrousresults either in terms of slowing growth, but also we didn't gain alot. We kept the inflation rate roughly where it was. I guess itcould have gotten a lot worse had we not done something. I don't knowif you see any difference between those two periods that wouldenlighten us now--perhaps not. The second question has to do with thedeficit issue. If you argue that we could get some benefit from alower deficit in the future, and if you've revised your 1990 deficitup, then couldn't you argue that we might need to tighten to takeaccount of that now instead of in the future?MR. PRELL. Well, a large part of that revision is RTC-related and we don't think that's a real--MR. HOSKINS. It's not real debt!MR. PRELL. Our measure of this shows a shade less restraintin the current fiscal year than it did previously and that's mainly areflection of our reading of the information on what occurs on the taxside. It does look like tax revenues are running a bit weaker than wehad anticipated. What seems to have come out of tax reform, reading alot into the 1989 experience, is that revenue falls a bit relative towhat we previously had anticipated in our forecast. So, we do have alittle less restraint but it's a marginal difference, although that's[unintelligible] factor. Looking back at the 1988-1989 experience,there are many things that are different; and one has to make verydifficult judgments about the timing of various effects. At thatpoint we were coming off a dollar depreciation that was causingconsiderable improvement in our export growth. Exports were growingmuch more strongly than they are now. That probably worked againstthat restraint. We didn't have, perhaps, quite the debacle we thinkwe have now on the construction side, though office building has beengoing down significantly for a while now and it wasn't at that point.Perhaps we are closer to demographic requirements in housingconstruction [unintelligible] some cushion here on interest rateeffects. The levels are somewhat different. I think there areparallels in the two periods, but there are differences; and I have avery hard time drawing a particular lesson. Our sense is, as yousaid, that we did contain the rate of inflation. Whether that slowingin the economy and leveling of the unemployment rate that occurred was5/15/90attributable to the rise in interest rates or to interest rates andother factors is difficult to say.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I hate to sound like Ginny Dimwit today, butwould you walk me through one more time the sectors that in the nexttwo to four quarters would be taking off, or would be much stronger,with a status quo monetary policy? In other words, exactly whichsectors are the ones that we have to restrain? I'm having a problemfinding such sectors out there.MR. PRELL. I wasn't trying to characterize the current moneymarket conditions alternative as one which led to a take off, butmerely a gravitation back to the recent trend of potential output--asort of natural tendency in the economy in any event unless there arecountervailing forces. But in the short run we think that we could doa little better due to some pickup in inventory accumulation relativeto the significant swing we have seen in a negative direction ininventories. And without that, the final demands in the economyshould show through ultimately to output growth. If we didn't get therise in interest rates, we would have in our forecast a strongerhousing sector than we have. If we didn't have the restraint, wewould expect investment to be stronger. So, if we start removing therestraint, the interest sensitive sectors would look a bit strongeracross the board and we'd probably add on top of that some leaningtoward a moderate, or higher than we have, level of inventoryaccumulation. And if the dollar were to be weaker than we have inthere--MS. SEGER. I would just as soon see us export more, butthat's a personal bias.MR. PRELL. Then, I'd begin looking for the fiscal policy--MS. SEGER. Right.MR. PRELL. That's the [unintelligible] shift.MS. SEGER. What amount of attention are you paying, then, tothe availability of credit in the housing situation? I just hear sooften that it's not the price of money or the price of credit as muchas it is strictly unavailability.MR. PRELL. Well, as I suggested, the commercial real estatemarket may be more affected by this. We have built into this[forecast] some effect, showing the availability of credit to buildersat a reduced level in the residential sector. I wouldn't say thatit's large; it's not hundreds of thousands of starts in this forecast,but there is some mild effect. We think that would abate over time asbuilders make connections with new lenders and as lenders find ways ofparticipating loans and some other arrangements. Over the next yearor so we think we probably will see some abatement of these problems.MS. SEGER. Thank you. I hope you're right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Mr. Prell?5/15/90MR. SYRON. Mike, just a technical question: The inventorysituation seems to be depending on how one looks at it. Are we goingthrough any sort of structural change over time? How much weightwould you put on structural change toward just-in-time inventories andthat sort of thing? Or are you thinking it's still a pretty accuratereflector of [unintelligible]? My own view of inventories is thatwe're likely to see a bounceback. But do you think there's anargument against that and that [businesses are moving to] permanentlylower levels of inventories?MR. PRELL. My judgment at this time is that I don't seeinventories as an impediment to the growth of production. I'm notinclined to read it as a really strong bullish factor, in part for thereason that you suggested. I think there's still some effort,particularly in manufacturing but in other sectors too, to decreaseinventories in relation to order/shipment ratios. And we view this asstill having some way to go. An industry economist at a meeting Iattended recently said: "Boy, these numbers look great; but my bossthinks these inventories are still too high." So, I think the target,in effect, is continuing to drift downward. That was one of thereasons why in the past year when we saw manufacturing inventory/salesratios essentially just level out we didn't move up [our forecast]very much. I thought that was a concern and would likely lead to someeffort to restrain inventories. And I think as [it turns out] that'sthe pattern we've seen. I think we're in much better shape now; butstill, my enthusiasm for thinking we're on the verge of a boom is[unintelligible].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Actually, they are leaner than I thinkthe numbers show because our conventional measure is inventories overdomestic sales, whatever they are. But [unintelligible] theproportion of the inventories of imported goods. While one can't saythat excess inventories of imported goods will have no effect ondomestic production but only an effect on production at foreignfacilities, there is an element of truth in [the latter]. So theestimates that we're making for wholesale and retail tradeinventories, for example, have a rise in the ratio of imports tototal, all at factory gate values, from 20 percent in 1980 to 25percent now. Assuming you also have the data for manufacturing, ifyou make the adjustments to have some form of weighing toward importsand take them out or put final sales in or total imports in, theinventory/sales ratios are much lower [now] than they were on anhistorical basis. So, they are already pretty far down. But, as Mikesays, when you speak to purchasing managers they still have a way togo because they still think that there is significant improvement yet[to be achieved] in the quality of production. So, if the reject ratecan go down, which means they can bring the safety stocks back [down],well, it's really quite an extraordinary change.MR. JOHNSON. Could this trend also be in addition to theimproved efficiency? That would be a good sign on the inflationexpectations side. It could imply that the real cost to carry ispretty high and that there's no speculative inventory built in. Thatwould be consistent with--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, if you look at the lead times, theApril lead-time numbers were the lowest in I don't know how manyyears. For production materials they're at the bottom of the chart.5/15/90MR. PRELL. That would suggest the need to stock up in orderto have supplies, so that's the argument against the big boom. Withthe firming of materials prices in [unintelligible] sector, thecarrying cost might not look quite as formidable as it did months ago,but it's still substantial.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The other issue is that there isincreasing access to foreign facilities for materials, so that leadtimes don't have to be bunched up every time there is a contraction inexcess domestic capacity. And it was the contraction in excessdomestic capacity that used to trigger the lead time stretch-outs ininventory accumulation and [thus a] crash. At the moment one ratherpositive aspect of the big share of imports to domestic demand in thiscountry is that it implies that we have access to facilities all overthe world. That really makes a difference. Any further questions forMr. Prell? If not, who would like to start our tour de table? Bob.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, it's not too often that anecdotaland statistical information seem to be pointing in the same direction,but in our case for the first time in over two years they arebeginning to match. In contrast to previous reports that I've beengiving, where District performance had been marked with some strongand some very weak sectors, there is now improvement and it's morebroadly based. District manufacturing continues to outperform thenation. We had increases in manufacturing employment in the fourthquarter of 1989 and the first quarter of 1990 while it was decliningnationally. In wholesale and retail trade, District employmentincreased at about a 4-1/2 percent rate in the first quarter.Employment in the services sector is still growing at a healthy rate,with particularly strong gains in the areas of finance, insurance, andreal estate. In the energy sector, all field activities continue toimprove; as for the long-term outlook, there is considerable optimismfor continued improvement. District construction activity has beenstrong recently, though it's likely to slow some from its current paceof nearly 10 percent. Recent rains have improved the outlook foragriculture except, of course, in those areas where we've had somevery, very severe flooding, which I'm sure you've seen on the news.Our bottom line is that we do appear to be coming out of whatwe call our great recession in the District, and the improvement andgrowth seem to be widespread. Also, I think it's becoming quiteevident that our economy is much more diversified. Having said that,I'm inclined to conclude that we may be getting away from thehistorical boom-bust type of activity that we've had. There may besome disappointment for those who are waiting for the next boom,having gone through the bust. But I'm inclined to think that for thelonger term it's going to be a much more healthy situationeconomically.With respect to the national picture, we're in substantialagreement with the forecast that you have, Mike.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we think that the more restrictivemonetary policy that the staff is projecting is going to be needed ifwe're going to generate greater projected disinflation as appropriate.What's striking and disappointing to us is that this assumed tighter5/15/90policy is expected to produce only a small improvement in theinflation outlook, at least through 1991, but a fairly substantialreduction in GNP next year. I think most of us would agree, andindeed this was an import of the excellent memorandum distributed tous sometime back, that there are different kinds of models on this:those that are forward-looking and those that are backward-looking. Iassume that most of this is based on the MPS model. If you used onethat is more forward-looking, I think that would suggest a bettertradeoff, with more disinflation at a smaller cost. Of course, thestaff readily acknowledges this in saying that the assumed tightermonetary policy could yield a much bigger payoff if it increased ourcredibility. And that, of course, is a very important issue from thestandpoint of our policy decision later on. I don't think most of uswould be willing to argue in favor of a tighter policy if we thoughtthe payoff on inflation was going to be quite as small as what hasbeen projected in the Greenbook.My own feeling is that the payoff would be larger because Ithink people are becoming more and more forward looking. If we candemonstrate to the public that we really have a strong commitment to[reducing] inflation, then I think perhaps we could have much betterresults than the staff is projecting on the inflation side. Now, wewouldn't quarrel much with the staff's near-term projections for thesecond and third quarters. I would guess that the near-term risksmight be skewed a little toward the down side because I think therereally is something to this real estate credit crunch. We hear thisfrom too many places. We had an interesting statement by a majorregional developer who is a very astute man, I think. Hesaid that funding has virtually dried up; he cited one large city inthe country where only one out of eleven major real estate developerscan get any credit at all. And if that is true, of course, then itcould have some early impacts and would bias the next couple ofquarters to the down side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Twelfth Districteconomy remains pretty strong despite slower growth in recent months.Employment in the West grew 3.2 percent in the past year, which issomewhat slower than the kinds of growth rates in employment that wewere seeing in 1989 when they averaged 4.1 percent. All of thatslowing in growth can be attributed to the state of California.California's growth in recent months has been quite similar to that ofthe rest of the nation but the other states are doing extraordinarilywell. For example, if you look at the seven fastest growing states inthe nation, all seven of them were in the Twelfth District. Theoutlook for western agriculture is positive overall, although thissummer's harvest is unlikely to be as profitable as those in recentyears. Inventories of many agricultural products are higher than theywere a year ago and the acreage that has been planted in the West ishigh as well. Even drought-affected crops such as cotton and rice areonly going to be cut about 10 percent, so we'll see a large increasein output. At the same time, costs for some farm inputs are updramatically. In California we're in the fourth year of drought. Andin California that means you irrigate in a different way. Instead ofusing surface water, you go to well water or ground water; and thatcosts a lot more money and is going to cut substantially into theprofits of farmers. In a state like Idaho where they also use a lot-10-5/15/90of irrigation, they have a shortage of water and the difficulty thereis in obtaining irrigation pipe. Apparently, it costs three times asmuch this year--if you can get it--than it did last year. So, theagricultural situation really isn't that bad overall, but it's quitelikely that agriculture won't be quite as prosperous financially as itwas in the last year.I might note parenthetically on this issue of creditavailability to farmers and to small businesses that we had two banksgive us some very interesting observations, and I'd be interested ifothers ran into the same thing. One of the large banks said thatthere is a substantial restriction on credit to small businesses.Another banker said there were restrictions to agriculture, but hesaid it wasn't related at all to what has been happening with regardto regulators' views or associated types of events. He said it'srelated to environmental concerns. Banks, whenever they take overcollateral when there's a default on a loan, are then responsible forthe environmental consequences. So his bank, for example, which is alarge bank, was no longer making small business loans to any gasolinestations, dry cleaning establishments, or any farms which had in-ground gasoline or diesel tanks. And any time they were doing largeprojects they would have to send out an environmental appraiser aswell as a value appraiser. He said this was having a very significanteffect on lending. My understanding is that apparently this is such ahot button with the industry that there are a couple of Congressmenwho are now in the process of introducing legislation that willrectify this situation. It's a little different wrinkle that I hadn'theard before but apparently, at least among our bankers, it's verysignificant.Turning to the national economy, our outlook for the year1990 is very similar to that of the Greenbook. We do part a bit in1991, but it's a result of the difference in monetary policyassumptions. We don't have the federal funds rate rising as rapidly,and we get a result which actually is quite consistent with theGreenbook's results. With an increase in rates of about half of thatin the Greenbook we get growth in 1991 of 2 percent and, indeed, thereis no basic drop in the underlying inflation rate until 1992. Thankyou.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we have to find a way ofproducing excess crude oil and just [unintelligible] into the market;that did wonders in 1986. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, you know wherethe strongest growing states are; I can tell you where some of theweakest growing states are.MS. SEGER. It isn't Massachusetts any more?MR. SYRON. No, it's New Hampshire, actually. The economy inthe region continues soft, although it's not in a steep decline.Employment fell about 1 percent in 1989. We expect it to fall byanother 1 percent in 1990 and we expect the unemployment rate region-wide to go north of 6 percent. These assumptions are based on a modelthat was run without incorporating a national model with as muchcredit tightening as the Greenbook has in it. Actually, it'sinteresting that by state, New Hampshire is by far the softest,-11-5/15/90followed by Massachusetts and then by Connecticut. The reason forthat, I think, is that construction has turned down so much.Construction [spending] region-wide has fallen about 10 percent, butit has fallen 25 percent in New Hampshire. This is really micro data,but with it being a very important industry in southern New Hampshireparticularly, and becoming almost an economic [unintelligible] in itsown right like a traditional manufacturing industry, that's a swingthat couldn't be avoided. There is a substantial real estate overhangin the District. Housing sales activity remains soft; housinginventory stays high. I think housing remains soft in part becausepeople are very unrealistic in pricing. We don't seem to be gettingreal price adjustments. Using the ultimate in anecdotal information--what I am doing myself, and I just sold a house--I think you can movehouses but you have to sell them for about 18 to 20 percent less thanthe price at the peak. And people just generally aren't willing to dothat. I think it's going to be slow to come back because we're atquite a regional disadvantage now in terms of wages in light of thevery strong growth that we had for some period of time. And,obviously, we have serious tax problems; they are worse inMassachusetts but there are tax problems in Connecticut as well assome in New Hampshire. To some extent, in a regional sense, there wasno one to take the punch bowl away and what happened was that theregion just got carried away.Going to the credit crunch issue, we think there is somethingthere but it's very specific to small-to-mid-size businesses and tothe construction area. It's hard to say that in the construction areait's because of tighter supervision [of lending institutions]; we hadother problems in that area. In the aggregate data a lot has beenmade of the System's preliminary data saying that lending in NewEngland is down 8 percent over last year. We actually took that dataand then adjusted it for two or three different things: the largevolume of loan sales by some of our large banks that are in trouble;the sale of credit card portfolios; and the writing off of some of theother real estate owned and other adjustments. All that gets thereduction down from about 7.9 percent to about 1 percent. So, creditis growing more slowly but no way near as slowly as the data indicate.Outside the computer area, where I think we have specific problems, alarge number of firms report that sales, while they haven't kept uptheir strength, are not off dramatically either, particularly in thenational market. Interestingly, our large [unintelligible]producers--and by that I mean firms such as Ratheon, General Electricand United Technologies--are anxious about the outlook and they areplanning for a slowdown; but given lead times, they haven't felt mucheffect on production. And they have had some success in convertingplants to other products. Interestingly, they find their exportbusiness and even import substitution are actually quite good. Forexample, United Technologies just became a preferred supplier for--Iguess we call them transplants--foreign-name plants producing modularsfor doors and different things like that. So, the export business isbecoming more important to us, both directly and indirectly. When wetalk to people around the District, we're finding that inventories arequite lean. Again, it's hard to sort out exactly, but they are quitelean at the retail level as well as at the manufacturing level.As far as the national economy goes, we're in substantialagreement with the Greenbook. We had thought perhaps that inventoriesmight affect us--that there was a chance for some breakout on the up5/15/90side in inventories because we think things are potentially a littlestronger. We're inclined to discount the retail sales report becauseof the noise and just see what happens when we get the next PCEreport. We're encouraged by the improvement in the PPI but it's stillobviously [unintelligible] with substantial problems of inflationfourth quarter to fourth quarter. In looking ahead--and this was aquestion I was going to ask but it was asked by Governor Angell amongothers--if we assume essentially no change in monetary policy, ourfeeling is that an already discouraging Greenbook inflation forecastwould be significantly worse with the prospect of being substantiallyworse. And in that context, we'd be concerned about laborcompensation given some of the [upward] creep we've already seen inthat area. This will be covered during our policy discussion, but itmay be easier to take out an insurance policy now rather than to waituntil we get into a situation where we really have to crunchsignificantly later on. I think it is true that credibility isimportant and can make it easier for us on the way down; but I'mstarting to become concerned about losing credibility with inflationcreeping up on us and our not having been able to change materiallythe direction of that. That will increase the cost of our ultimatelyhaving to deal with it, and I think we ultimately will have to dealwith it. This is a speech, and I guess I should omit that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, overall conditions in the Districtare pretty much unchanged from the last meeting. We seem to havestabilized at a level reasonably consistent with our outlook for thebalance of the year, namely sustained growth at, say, a 2-1/4 percentrate. I have a couple of specific comments. First, on the autosector, which Mike has covered: At this point it looks as if some ofthe uncertainties in the industry early in the year have beenclarified, with the very large unsold inventories having been workeddown now to I think reasonable levels, particularly for this time ofthe year. Production levels in the second quarter will be lower thanlast year by about 12 percent on average but significantly higher, ofcourse, than in the first quarter. And the early outlook for thethird quarter is that production levels will be higher than was thecase last year, but last year's third quarter was comparatively aquite weak quarter. I think there's a slight change in sentimentamong the auto dealers. They have gone from being very, very negativeto at least being cautious. But my understanding is that on anational basis some 50 percent of them are still losing money. Andclearly, it takes very big incentives to move cars at this point. Thesales outlook for the year--adding cars and light trucks together--I'mtold by the industry is about 14-1/2 million units. They think that'svery disappointing. But having said that, they think their trend lineis about 15 million units; so it seems to me that on a broaderprospective 14-1/2 million in sales is a pretty reasonable year. Amajor uncertainty, of course, is the labor negotiation coming up inthe fall. It is just far too early to tell how that's going to workout. It certainly does have the potential to have a big impact onproduction.The steel business seems to be reasonably good; productionlevels are in the 85 to 86 percent area. Sales of some steel productsare coming in at about 100 percent of capacity and backlogs have nowmoved up to 82 to 83 days. As a consequence, we are seeing some price-13-5/15/90increases in the steel business and, given these kinds of pressures,those increases are sticking. The expectation is that prices will goup about 5 percent on average next year. In construction,surprisingly, both commercial and residential numbers in the Districtcontinue to move ahead of the national numbers. But I think we'regoing to see a big change and that there will be some reduction.Clearly, there is a curtailment of credit for commercial projects.But everybody I talk to says it's simply a result of having had fartoo much money going into too many projects and it's going to take awhile for the absorption rate to dig into the vacancy rates. Whilethe construction numbers probably will be a little lower than was ourearly expectation, offsetting that is our expectation that theopportunity for exports for the year will be a little better than wemight have guessed. The level of the dollar has not been impedingsales and any reduction in the dollar along the lines that Samsuggested simply will add to a more positive outlook there.In the agricultural sector, I was really pleased to hear thatplanting conditions have been excellent. In fact, in Iowa a number ofpeople describe conditions as the best they've seen in a good manyyears. The corn crop is largely in; the soybean crop will go inwithin the next two weeks. These better conditions will be reflectedin a good increase in the demand for agricultural equipment. Industrysales of large tractors and combines are running significantly aheadof last year.On the inflation side, the outlook is certainly less clear;it's difficult to tell how the first-quarter aberrations are going towork out as we go along here. But we are still, I think, a bit moreoptimistic than Mike in that we see some improving trends in inflationas we get out toward the end of the year. Market pricing formanufactured products continues to be very, very competitive. There'sa lot of pressure [to hold down] price increases, given capacityadditions as well as foreign competition, [but] I think we're going tocontinue to see some price pressures. In the services sector, though,there are some increases that are more disturbing; that would be mostparticularly true in regard to health care. But on the wage side,basically increases seem to be continuing okay. One very unusualexample: I talked to somebody who negotiated a six-year contract withthe machinists union the other day, which provides for an annual costincrease of 2 percent and some unusual features. I think that's anindication that wage pressures continue to be pretty tight.On a national basis, we think that the outlook for growthcontinues to be positive. But certainly we're going to need to seesome improvement in the inflation rate. We continue to be optimistic,as I say, but pretty soon we're going to have to see that evidenced bybetter numbers on the inflation side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Since our last meeting, Mr. Chairman, theeconomy in the Sixth District seems to be doing a little better. Forexample, the unemployment rate in March for all of the states combinedwas the lowest that we've had in 15 years. That was mainlyattributable to better performance in Alabama, Mississippi, andLouisiana, resulting from stronger agri-business as well as offshoreenergy exploration and development. We're also benefiting in the-14-5/15/90Southeast and particularly in Atlanta from job relocations, which aresignificant in some cases, to the area and to the city. Otherwise,the weaknesses and strengths in the District are pretty much the sameas in the country as a whole, and I won't repeat those. We have verylittle real evidence to contribute from the credit availability surveylast month to suggest that there were any major credit problems. ButI must say that the bankers in the District don't miss any opportunityto remind me about the problem that they're having. They indicatethat loan officers are increasingly reluctant to make commitments andto approve applications either because the bank has had, or isanticipating, an examination or because of the publicity. The datafor District banks do show some deceleration in loan growth, but Iwould repeat that we don't find evidence of any substantial problem.Business contacts, and this includes our directors, seem tome a little less concerned about a recession than earlier this year,but they are complaining that the deceleration in growth is placingthem under pressure within their own businesses. For the most partthey have not seen price pressures accelerating and from this pointthey don't see inflation as a problem. As I've said several timesbefore, many of the people that I talk to are not convinced thatthere's anything wrong with the current inflation rate, and thatcontinues to disturb me a little. And they are worried, too, aboutour reaction and what will happen if we seek to bring inflation downtoo aggressively.Turning to the national economy, we did not as usual assumeany policy change over the two-year time horizon, so our forecast isnot especially comparable to the one in the Greenbook. But as I lookat both of those forecasts, I think our forecast has a slightly morepositive and optimistic view about the underlying rate of inflation.Some of the unanticipated increase in consumer prices in the firstquarter we see as basically temporary and not so much of that iscarried forward in comparison to the Greenbook. So, we're continuingto forecast the CPI to turn out between 4 and 4-1/2 percent over thenext two years. Beyond that we see very little improvement andperhaps even a deterioration as we look past 1991; obviously, in theBoard staff's forecast that improvement occurs later on. I think theGreenbook has done a very good and very reasonable job of distributingthe weaknesses that result from a policy tightening.I'm anticipating our policy discussion to some extent, but Ithink that a case can be made for some policy tightening at themoment. One argument would be credibility to be sure. Anotherargument that has some appeal is that it probably will be increasinglydifficult to make a move later on this year. Having said that, Idon't think the timing is really right at the present time. There arestill enough pockets of weakness both nationally and regionally thatthe risk of a downturn could be fairly high. The April data suggestto me that there's a bit more weakness out there than is built intothese forecasts and other forecasts. The current concern about creditavailability adds to that concern. And finally, it seems to me thatwith the budget summit that is starting today, a tightening of policybefore this meeting is concluded might very well reduce the pressureson the negotiating parties to actually restrain the budget, meaningless would be done. So, to me the arguments are persuasive that weought not to move at the present time.-15-5/15/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. The District economy looks largely like thenational economy. There are distinct pockets of great weakness,although overall I think it's probably continuing to perform, as ithas for some time, a bit better than the national economy--whether youlook at the overall growth of nonfarm employment or at specificindustries that continue to perform very well, such as paper andforest products, mining, and tourism. There are some other surprisingbits of positive news that I'll just pass on. One is that majorretailers, at least in the District, continue to post very goodresults. And home sales in the Twin Cities in the first quarter wererunning 15 percent above last year's first quarter and that had been asteady number month-by-month. So, there have been some pretty goodnumbers there. Also, the extent of the drought in the District hasbeen narrowed as a consequence of some fairly heavy rains in March andApril and so far in May. And there's some [unintelligible] number ofgood reports not only of crop prospects but about capital spending inagriculture for this year.I might as well give you my two cents worth on the creditcrunch. We're certainly hearing a lot fewer and a lot lower volume ofconcerns from agriculture and small business than we were hearing afew years ago when the Farm Credit System was in distress and whenthere were serious problems in agriculture and so forth. That's whenwe heard a lot about it. I must say today, relative to that period,it's absolutely quiet for the most part out our way. A major nationaldeveloper that we're close to has reported difficulties--not his ownbut of competitors--in obtaining credit. In fact, he has reportedthat on a couple of deals where he was not the low bidder and did notget the contract initially the low bidder couldn't get financing so hewound up with the contract. In terms of economic activity, of course,there is no depressing effect. The project is going to get done; it'sjust a question of who is getting the credit.MR. LAWARE. At a higher price.MR. STERN. And he's rather happy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In other words, tighter credit leads tohigher prices!SPEAKER(?). The high deal wins.MR. STERN. Well, from the point of view of GNP you get alittle more! As far as the national economy in concerned, I certainlyagree with the underlying thrust of real growth as presented in theGreenbook. On the inflation side, I take that message to heart aswell. Having said that, though, I must say that I don't have anyanecdotal evidence suggesting that inflation pressures are building atthe moment. It seems to be pretty much the status quo. And somebusiness people at least are concerned that an effort to bringinflation down from 4 or 5 percent or wherever it is would be bad fortheir business because, of course, what they envision is that arecession would accompany it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.-16-5/15/90MR. MELZER. I would say that in terms of our broad view, wewouldn't be as concerned as the Board staff about monetary policybeing somehow badly out of position here. Our outlook is for modestgrowth, containment of pressures in the short run, and gradual long-term progress. But we wouldn't envision the kind of tightening that'simplied; in fact, I think it's much too early to tell. If you look atpage 5 of the Bluebook and what has been happening to money, credit,and reserve aggregates over the last couple of months, you have towonder whether there's a significant tightening going on already withthe funds rate at a constant level. Again, having said that, I thinka month or two is much too short a period of time to react to. Ingeneral I think we've been well served this year by not letting veryvolatile expectations whip us around. I think our "steady-as-it-goes"policy has been quite good.On a District basis, I would say we're growing modestlybetter than the national economy. Even without auto workers comingback, we've had growth in manufacturing jobs. On the agriculturalfront, the flooding in Arkansas has created some problems, although Idon't expect them to have national implications. I think some wheatcrops will be plowed under and some cotton, rice, and corn crops willbe late getting in. But basically at this stage, there hasn't been amajor impact. On the price front, I haven't picked up much commentaryabout the minimum wage [increase]. I did pick up some comments inArkansas where firms have below minimum wage employees; they arecomplaining about the compaction effect on their salary scales and thefact that it has a much broader implication in terms of their coststhan just on the people below minimum wage. A couple of people saidthe way they are dealing with it is with gradual, phased-in priceincreases over the first six months of this year, so they aren't facedwith a step increase in their prices around midyear. One finalcomment: Our large reporting banks in the three-month period ended inApril have actually had a decline in loans outstanding. It's in othercategories. There is still growth in real estate and C&I loans, but adecline in personal loans and big declines in some other categories.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. In the District, commercial real estate varies agood bit, but on the whole I think it's a major drag on the economy insome areas. I think the risks in the District are on the down side.In retail sales we're seeing some small increases, and capital goodscontinue to be a positive. Manufacturing generally is still slumping,but there's some sense that that slump may be bottoming out. Overall,I'd say we have modest growth.On the national economy, I come out about where Tom Melzerjust did. I think our "steady-as-you-go" policy has served us well.We've resisted being jerked around. My own sense is that the risks tothe economy continue to be about even. There is a risk that inflationmay accelerate, but I think there is a risk that the economy may notbe as strong as it is currently. I sense that the business communitystill feels that we will avoid a recession, but I must say that Ithink it would not take a lot of monetary tightening to change that.My sense is that we ought to push the "steady-as-you-go" policyanother couple of months.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.-17-5/15/90MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the Tenth District,the economy continues to grow moderately slowly. Recent developmentshave been somewhat mixed. There has been a good deal of press givento the agricultural sector. The wheat crop, for example, has beenestimated by the Agriculture Department as being near double lastyear's crop. That optimism isn't totally shared by some of the wheatgrowers themselves, although we're within probably 30 days of harvestin much of the Tenth District area. It does look very good, and Ithink the farmers are pleased with it. It's a question of how itcomes out. We are always reminded that a wheat farmer has to lose hiscrop at least nine times; in other words, he's very pessimistic untilit's in the bin. They're still not prepared to say it's going to bedouble what it was last year. The outlook for farm income for 1990 isvery good not only because of the wheat but also other crops, so thelast two-year drought will not affect the 1990 crops yet to be plantedand harvested. On top of that, crop prices have firmed up recentlyand there's a good deal of excitement about red meat prices. Forexample, prices of cattle, including replacement cattle for the feedlots, are essentially at an all-time high. Inventories of the latterhave not been rebuilt; they were run down over the last three or fouryears. So, if you combine not only a good crop year together withlivestock prices, then the outlook for agriculture is very bright forour area. A somewhat damping effect is the rain that Bob talked aboutin Texas, which also has occurred through much of the Tenth District.That has restored the moisture level, but now farmers can't get thecrops in [the ground], so it's uncertain. With respect to energy,despite the weaker oil prices, the District rig count did increase inApril and remains above the year-ago level. We do have a good deal ofauto assembly [capacity] in the District and that [activity] has beenvery sluggish, as has been detailed around the table. In themanufacturing sector that's laid against a very brisk business inaircraft manufacturing. In residential construction, contracts fellslightly in March, but nonresidential contracts increased, whichdoesn't tell the same story that apparently is told elsewhere in thenation. We do still have a large overhang of commercial properties incities such as Denver, Oklahoma City, and Tulsa. But District-wide,the nonresidential commercial contracts have increased recently.With regard to the national economy, I have little or noquarrel with the Greenbook forecast. We go through an exercise inwhich we hold monetary policy steady as it has been going into ameeting such as this. Then, after we receive the information withrespect to how the staff has treated monetary policy in the Greenbook,we do another exercise and lay them side-to-side. This time they comeout fairly close, with the exception that we have a little less growthin 1990. That may reflect your pattern of increased interest rates;that isn't clear to us, I guess, when we get your information. But onthat we don't quarrel. We think there will be a little less growth in1990. The growth and the inflation aspects of 1991 look to be aboutthe same, given the staff's pattern of the interest rate levels.We have found little evidence of a credit crunch,particularly in the agricultural sector. The agricultural banks arevery liquid; they say they can't find the loans to absorb their liquidassets into loans. Where we do hear some evidence that credit is notavailable is in areas such as Denver that have just come off thebottom and where the larger banks have been hit and now have a ratingthat makes them very cautious about credit. I don't think it has-18-5/15/90anything to do with examiners coming in and knocking them. It'ssimply a fallout of what they've been through in the last year or two.They are on the way up but they're very cautious in their creditterms. It is not price as far as we can tell.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, the impression Iget from business people, particularly on the manufacturing side, ismore in line with Mike's forecast than it is with the last three weeksof data. I just don't have any sense that things suddenly fell out ofbed on us here. Exports are holding up quite well. More generally,people are saying that business at least has stopped getting worse.The computer business appears to be showing a renewed spark, and Idon't know what to make of that. Some of the commentary I hear evenfrom suggests that maybe there's a little more tothat than even they thought.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's probably stock adjustment; it wasso weak for so long.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's probably part of it; theysure feel better. So, as I said, the impressionistic information ismuch more in line with Mike's forecast than these very recent data.Our own forecast is quite similar as well, although the policyassumptions are different. We don't have a rise in short-terminterest rates anything like what is in Mike's forecast and theresults are about the same.On this credit crunch question, I've read all the surveys andlistened to all the comments around the table, and I still can't quiteshake a sense of uneasiness that there may be something there that wejust haven't seen yet. Of course, I have absolutely no evidence ofthat. But possibly, just possibly, the money supply, especially M3,may be saying something about that. But who knows? I'd like todismiss it completely, but I can't quite bring myself to that.As for inflation, I blow a little hot and cold on thequestion of whether the underlying inflation rate has changed. WhereI am at the moment is that if it has changed, it has changed only atad and maybe it is basically unchanged in core terms. But whateverconclusion you draw about what's happened to the core inflation ratein recent quarters, I think what you have to be impressed with,notwithstanding all this talk about credibility and all the rest ofit, is that the only way that the core inflation rate is going to comedown is if there's a lot more slack in the economy. With thestructure of the economy today, there just doesn't seem to be much tosuggest that that's going to change in a downward direction in anyappreciable way, given the kinds of resource utilization patterns wehave right now. But that, I think, is going to create an acutedilemma for this Committee very soon, and I'm thinking in terms ofthis budget package. I don't know whether they will get one or not.I suspect that there's probably a better chance of that today than atany time in the recent past. And then all of a sudden we will havewhat we have all said we needed--what we have all been pleading for,begging for, and cajoling for. And it seems to me that the policydilemma that the Committee is going to face in those circumstances isgoing to be rather awesome even if long-term interest rates come down-19-5/15/90by themselves, which I'm sure they will. But I think that issomething that we're going to have to reflect upon a good deal. Idon't think that's an urgent matter because I don't think they can cuta deal that fast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I wouldn't hold my breath.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I still think it has to be thoughtabout a bit. If there is a deal of some substance, it's going to makethings very difficult for us in an ironic kind of fashion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd like to have that type of problem.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You may. But, as I say, in thecontext in which that core inflation rate is either a tad higher orstuck, that's going to be a pretty difficult environment for us.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, on the local economy: Potomac,Maryland is generally doing quite well. However, the residentialmarket is way overbuilt, overdesigned, and overpriced. But consumerconfidence remains high and the public is generally blase aboutinflation as evidenced by the continued good business done by theSutton Place Gourmet!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is your wife the source of this?MR. LAWARE. I continue to be concerned, though, about theability of policy to deal with inflation. At the same time, I don'tbelieve we have a lot of maneuvering room because we are in aprecarious position. I believe on the one hand that we have the riskof higher inflation and on the other hand that we're very close to thepossibility of tipping over into recession. I think the risk, if wego into recession, is greater than the risk of more inflation becauseI suspect that the underlying structure of inflation is not as firm oras high as may have been indicated by some of the recent statistics.I think that the credit crunch is real, and I don't thinkit's necessarily confined to real estate. I'm convinced that it'sgoing to get worse and that it is not necessarily the result of theregulators; I think it's a general concern on the part of lendersabout lending, about capital ratios, as well as about tougherexamination standards. So, I just don't see that going away, with alldue respect for the regulators recently urging the lenders to lendmore money. I think the real estate market is under identifiedpressure and also some that hasn't shown up yet. Included in thelatter, I would say, is the RTC situation; if this accelerates, shortterm we're going to get an even further depression of real estatevalues. And I think there's some real buyer resistance out there withregard to the price structure, particularly with that RTC overhang. Idon't think that has adjusted itself. And I'm concerned that in arecession situation, the change in revenue flows would really tanksome of these [firms involved heavily in] junk [financing] situationsand that the ripple effect of that kind of a credit problem would bevery severe. On the whole, I think the downside risks are quitesevere, and I'm frustrated about inflation on the other side. Onbalance, I just don't think this is the time to make a change.-20-5/15/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. There is not much change in the Fourth Districtsince the last time we met. There are high levels of economicactivity. We had a meeting with 25 economists representing businesseslocated in the District. To make a short story out of it, they see nocredit crunch within the District, continued export growth, no cutbackin capital spending plans, and real growth in the neighborhood of 2 to2-1/4 percent for next year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In the District or in the United States?MR. HOSKINS. They are District economists forecasting forthe national economy. The only surprising or perhaps worrisome trendas reported by these forecasters is that out of the 25 none of themhad a recession in the forecast horizon, which means they are probablywrong. My infamous stainless steel strip new order measure reached a5-year high in April; that's seasonally adjusted. It indicated a verystrong export side as well as domestic. It's muddied up a little bysome inventory building by automobile companies in anticipation of astrike in the third quarter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I thought we agreed that that[indicator] doesn't work.MR. HOSKINS. It gets the direction right usually; themagnitudes are terrible.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I thought you were giving us a bearishforecast.MR. HOSKINS. No; the other anecdotal information surroundingthis particular firm is that in two lines they are already sold outthrough the end of year and most of these sales are export oriented.So the steel side, at least the stainless steel side, seems to bedoing quite well. They tend to argue that it's a proxy for theeconomy. We've tested it, as the Chairman has indicated, and it doesless well than the [leading indicators] over time. They did postprice increases a month ago of 4 to 7 percent, and they had no problemmaking that stick.In terms of the national outlook, I want to thank Mike againfor making, I think, a real attempt to show us what we need to do ifwe want to tackle the inflation issue. Most of the risks in theforecast, it seems to me, are weighted toward having a little moreinflation or perhaps having it stay the same. I understand that thereare always going to be risks of fragility in financial markets; we'vetalked about that now for six months. And there is always a potentialbudget deficit deal. But I think we have to gear our monetary policyto the objective that we can achieve. I agree with Dick Syron thatcredibility is important, and I'm not sure we're maintaining it. I'mnot unduly pessimistic about inflation, but we do have an objective ofbringing it down and not much seems to be happening. I might quibbleon the cost of bringing it down, though.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.-21-5/15/90MR. KELLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, when Mike finished hispresentation a little while ago he made the remark that there are alot of jokers still in the deck to be turned over. I certainly agreewith that. But when you're playing a hand of cards there are thosethings that you know and those things that remain to be seen. If welook at the things that we know, they don't look that bad. Obviously,as the cards turn over, things could change a lot. But we know,looking at interest rates, that we lowered the federal funds rate inDecember and interest rates have been up ever since then. We have hadsome tightening done for us by the market. Along with that, theaggregates have now slowed down a lot. I don't want to prejudge orput words in Don's mouth--he hasn't made his presentation yet--but Isuspect he thinks they're likely to speed back up. But if they keepdoing what they're doing now, then we're going to have a pretty slowrate of growth in the aggregates in 1990. Looking at the grossnational product, the best guess is that its growth is now runningaround 2 percent and the two preceding quarters before that were 1.1percent and 2.1 percent. That's clearly slow; it could reaccelerate.There has been talk around this table that at a 2 percent growth ratewe could make slow progress, but nevertheless progress, on inflation.If you look at inflation as measured by the CPI, we had an appallingfirst quarter but the two quarters before that were both under 4percent; and I think the increase is probably slowing downsubstantially from that bad first quarter now.John talked about the credit crunch. I think everybody wouldagree that there's something going on out there and we don't know whateffect it's liable to have. Nevertheless, there is some constraintand it could be substantial. So, the things that we know, taken all-in-all, suggest that the state of the world is not terriblyunsatisfactory. I think our policy pretty much has done what wedesired it to do; it's too early to say that it has been ineffectivein making some progress on the core rate of inflation. Core inflationcould certainly change on the up side and, if it does, we undoubtedlywill have to react. But I think that's far from sure. As aconsequence, for now "steady-as-you-go" makes sense to me.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Yes, Mr. Chairman, we do have some good news outthere that I think we ought to talk about. We only did $50 million inforeign exchange intervention during the intermeeting period and I'mmost grateful for that. In fact, I'm so grateful that I didn't eventalk about the ESF after having an antagonizing document in front ofme. But there's more good news than that. I counted out about 15segments of industries in which expansion seems to be the order of theday. Quite often, I think we become somewhat impacted by those thatare having the pain; those industries having a slowdown are more vocalthan those in which things are looking up. I was used to that withfarmers always describing things as mediocre or middling during timeswhen we had boom conditions and most of the rest of time describingconditions as poor. In terms of the small business outlook, I thinkwe had a diffusion index this morning that demonstrated the same sortof thing: that is, if you have as many people saying the outlook ispositive as you have saying that it's negative, then it's really boomconditions. So, I think we have to steel ourselves to the fact thatthere is going to be some pain out there. And, of course, when thatpain involves people getting used to house prices not rising as in the-22-5/15/90past, and in some cases coming down, we're going to feel that and seethat. But that may be better news in regard to attitudes about moneythan we realize. When people see house prices going up 15 percent peryear, I'm not sure whether that in some ways undermines their sense ofvalue for money. And when all of a sudden the peak on selling theirhouse passed, a lot of people said: "My goodness! Why didn't I sellit earlier?" It's sort of an attitude of: I want money; I'd like tohave dollar balances.So, I think this kind of pain may be a precursor for somebetter inflation numbers. The fact of the matter is, however, thatthere are some troublesome things on the inflation front. Basically,commodity prices are still rather troublesome, as far as I can see. Idon't care what index you look at, unless you get into some veryspecialized ones, there does not seem to be the kind of improvementthat you'd expect to see. Look at corn prices, soybean prices. Wheatprices went up because there was an announcement of a large increase.But it really is a troublesome indication to see commodity prices moveup as much as they did and then not move back down. I would agreethat at a time when the pain seems to be pervasive in many households,and when M2 and M3 seem to be growing very, very slowly, thatinformation ought not be ignored. I'd like to close by suggesting,when we are talking about a soft landing, that in any way the landingoccurs it certainly has been soft but there is an element in which anairplane wing as it approaches the ground gets what we call "groundeffect." Ground effect means that you have an opportunity to havemore lift than you otherwise would have because of the proximity ofthe ground. As we're approaching the 90th month of this expansion, wehaven't had any abrupt pullups that might result in stalled spinsbecause after a stalled spin the wind does not produce much groundeffect as the plane comes crashing in.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It gets too much ground effect!MR. ANGELL. But the implication is that I think we have tobe prepared to understand that our economy may have more ability tooperate below 2 percent for longer periods of time without gettinginto negative numbers. To me that's an encouraging bit of news. I,for one, do not believe that there are factors out there that areproducing a recession in the immediate horizon.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. John LaWare gave my talk, so I'll just piggybackon his. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Actually, I feel a little better today aboutthe inflationary risks than I did maybe a couple of weeks ago, withsome of these more recent data. But once again, you can't tell muchfrom one or two months of numbers. I still am generally concernedabout the outlook, but these recent numbers cloud it up a bit.Consumption has been fairly modest, but the first-quarter real GNPnumber looked stronger than I would have expected. We see investmentplans running at 7-1/2 percent, which is pretty strong; I don't knowif that will actually materialize, but the plans are running fairlystrong. My concern is that with inventories fairly low--and I realize-23-5/15/90that there are incentives to keep them that way--demand seems to besufficient both on the investment side and the consumption side thatthe economy is poised to pick up if demand pressures develop. And myconcern is that they might develop from external sources. I didn'thear too many people that concerned about export demand, but havingjust been overseas and having talked to people there I still have someconcern about that. I feel more comfortable that the Bundesbank isgoing to deal with the inflation risk in Germany. Still, we see ratescoming down in France and other European countries; and in fact, eventhough I think East Germany and other east European countries aregoing to be facing recessionary-type conditions, I think all theirconsumption is going to turn to the West. Even if it's lower than inthe past, they're going to be buying goods. The outlook for theSoviet Union is grim because I don't think they're going to be able tosell anything. They may be able to barter a few things and they willbe able to sell energy and some of their raw materials, but nobody isgoing to buy any consumer goods from the Soviet Union. All industrialcountries are strained in terms of their productive capacity. Japanis still growing strongly in spite of their financial shake-out. AndEurope continues to show signs of strength. So, I'm fairly optimisticabout our export prospects and the improvement in our externalposition. But I do worry about what kind of pressure that's going toput on the inflationary situation going forward. So, I do think thereare some risks. Some of the financial indicators suggest it. Eventhough long-term interest rates have come down more recently--almost ahalf percentage point from where they were--they are still up over theintermeeting period. And as Governor Angell pointed out, commodityprices have been under some upward pressure. They look a littlemilder now, depending on which index you look at, but still they areup. What worries me the most is that the trade-weighted dollar isturning down. Even though the dollar had shown strength against theyen, a lot of that has changed recently. As someone reported, thetrade-weighted dollar is down 14 percent from its peak last year. Ifthat kind of trend continues, we may be faced with some prettysignificant external strength, and I don't know how much room we havefor that. So, that's a worry.I'm not as concerned about the credit crunch issue; I haveheard a lot of anecdotes and I think it is a potential risk, but justlistening to what people have said around here it seems like some ofthat is [unintelligible]. The aggregates have turned weaker, but Iwould argue that that has to do with some portfolio shifts that haveoccurred with the change in interest rates more recently, and I thinkthat will subside and we will see a return to more significant growth.So, I think we have to be very watchful and cautious. I think therisks are on the inflation side, but given the more recent data Idon't know if it's worth pressing immediately.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Why don't we break at this stagefor coffee and come back?[Coffee break]MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Kohn?-24-5/15/90MR. HOSKINS. Don, if we have credibility in the marketplacewith respect to our [commitment to] price stability, why would themarkets have any problem with alternative C?MR. KOHN. I'm not sure I understand. Alternative C would--MR. HOSKINS. Would be a tightening in policy.MR. KOHN. Right.MR. HOSKINS. All I'm suggesting is that, if we werecredible, that would mean we would see a drop in longer-term rates.MR. KOHN. If alternative C increased our credibility andreduced expected future inflation, that's correct. My guess, as notedin the Bluebook, would be that the initial response to such a policyprobably would be a rise in bond yields. But, as I think the Bluebookalso noted, to the extent that this was seen as the Federal Reservegiving extra emphasis to its inflation objective over time, those bondyields would move lower in nominal terms. Now, it's also fair to saythat the real bond yield might be higher in that case because I thinkthere would be a higher path of expected future real short-term ratesthan perhaps is built in now. But nominal rates could be lower aftera bit, especially if the dollar firmed up after our tightening.MR. HOSKINS. Let me follow with just one question on theaggregates. If we didn't do any tightening through the rest of theyear, what would be your estimate for fourth quarter-over-fourthquarter [money growth]?MR. KOHN. We have a 5-1/2 percent estimate now for M2;that's down from around 6-1/2 percent at the last meeting. The reasonfor the decrease is two-fold. One is the incoming data, which wereweaker than we expected, and we scaled down for that; the other is thechange in the interest rate path, which is worth probably about half apoint. So, if you told me to change only interest rates, and Isuppose there really wouldn't be much feedback on the economy in 1990from assuming a different level of interest rates, I'd probably tellyou M2 growth will be around 6 percent. But it also probably would bestrengthening a bit as the year went on, or toward the end of theyear, if the economy were picking up a little more speed than we haveprojected.MR. HOSKINS. That 5-1/2 percent was with the Greenbookinterest rate path?MR. KOHN. Yes, with the assumption of rising interest rates.So, it would be 6 percent with steady interest rates and nominal GNPas in the Greenbook.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Don, if you go back to the period before thelatest period, there was a sharp increase in long-term rates. I knowyou can't answer this specifically, but in your view what explainsthat rise mostly? Was a change in inflationary expectations mainlywhat caused that? Or was it some development worldwide or here thatcaused the real rate to go [up]?-25-5/15/90MR. KOHN. Well, I guess I'd have to say it was a combinationof both. Certainly, the inflation data were far worse than peopleexpected. When the March CPI came in, I think that caused an upwardrevision in expected inflation. On the other hand, the incomingeconomic data continued to suggest that the economy was chugging alongat least at a moderate pace and wasn't weakening. I think it was acombination of those two things. Because the dollar was firm throughthat period, although a lot was going on in Germany and Japan at thesame time, I'd be hard pressed to argue that inflation expectationshad picked up to such an extent as to overwhelmingly explain theincrease in nominal rates. I think real rates at least held steady orprobably were a bit on the firm side through that.MR. PARRY. But through this period, then, if most of it wasdue to expectations of higher inflation, there has not been atightening in monetary and financial conditions. There was adiscussion here that implied that this was a tightening and thathasn't occurred to the extent that it's--MR. KOHN. Well, if instead of just focusing on the lastcouple of weeks or month or so you go from the end of the year, Ithink it's true that some of that increase is definitely an increasein real rates. But the equilibrium real rate--where real rates needto be to keep the economy in check--is higher. So, that increase inreal rates would be restraining, but only relative to a lower level ofreal rates. It was an endogenous response, I think, to what has beengoing on. And the previous increase in rates did embody anexpectation of Federal Reserve tightening. That was very clear in thestructure of rates until the most recent employment report.MR. PARRY. Right. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Don? If not,why don't I get started on the round table? Reflecting what I'mhearing among the Committee, I think what we're observing is somethingthat I suspect has not been evident in recent decades. I never recalla set of economic forces precisely that goes with what is developinghere, and I've been trying to forecast the economy for well over 30years. On the expansion side, I think the evidence is very clearlymounting; we are past the maximum durable goods squeeze and I thinkwe're beginning to see some flattening of profit margins at thisparticular stage [after earlier declines]. As a consequence, capitalinvestment is clearly showing some quickening pattern, and I thinkthat shows up in the orders and the appropriations and in variousqualitative measures. On top of that is this extraordinary inventorysituation, which continues to squeeze down--the issue Dick Syronraised. Of course, what that implies is that if we ever get to thebottom when we're getting a squeeze and there is any evidence oftightening worldwide--so that there are shortages not only in theUnited States but elsewhere--then the lead times will begin to moveand we really will begin to get the type of classic acceleration thatwe've seen many times in the past. At this stage the evidence on theorders side is that they continue to improve gradually although theyare by no means accelerating; the orders levels are just creeping up.The backlogs in real terms probably are flat to down, but that is amajor improvement from a year or so ago when the economy wasdeteriorating in the total durables and manufacturing areas. If-26-5/15/90anything, I would say the evidence of all of this is [that economicgrowth is] probably mildly accelerating.The trouble, however, on the other side is that we havesomething more than a merely minor financial disturbance. I thinkthere may well be more to this credit crunch than we're looking at; orto put it more exactly, I don't think we're through it yet. Theconcurrent data that we pick up all over the place suggest that therehas been, as has been stated, a mild pulling back. But there is noevidence that it has stopped. For example, all of the evidence aboutforward commitments, specifically on real estate projects and loans,is that this phenomenon is nowhere near over on the real estate side.And we don't know at this stage to what extent it has spilled over inany other direction. I find the money supply data--specifically M3,as Jerry has pointed out--mildly disturbing because they say ineffect, even if you take out the thrift part of M3, that there reallyis something that is constraining financial capacity even though theunderlying orders patterns suggest that there's something of a[unintelligible] considerably more forward momentum here. The data wehave on the credit crunch are, except for anecdotal evidence, notforward-looking. They are all historical--all basically something inthe past. The trouble with the past is that as we continue to pick itup [in these data] it gets worse. And before we're out of this, thishas to stabilize and turn around--or at worst just stabilize, even ifit stabilizes at pretty low levels--because it has to be having afairly significant contractionary effect out in the distance throughthe late spring and into the summer on a lot of construction projects,which are a very substantial part of the goods markets.So, where this all leads me is to the same type of dilemmathat I found myself in at the last meeting, where clearly there aredangers on both sides. When we look ahead, the probability is thatour next move will be on the up side because I do think one has topresume that this credit crunch is limited. The trouble, however, isthat at this point it is still growing; and to move to tighten at thisstage while the evidence is that the credit crunch is still occurringI think would be a mistake. Also, despite the fact that I think weprobably will be required to move up before we move down, I wouldn'tbe inclined at this stage to be asymmetric on the up side. This mightseem an odd way to put it, but although the odds suggest that that'sthe direction we will be going in, I'm not sure that we shouldposition ourselves in that manner until the credit crunch matter hasstabilized. Nonetheless, I do think that the inflation problem isvery troublesome. And while I would feel comfortable with "B" eithersymmetric or asymmetric, I must say I would prefer symmetric and wouldhave the policy record relate the concerns that have been expressedaround this table on the issues of inflation and the instabilitiesthat they create. But, like the last time, I think it's a tough call;and I suspect it may be no less easy as we get further on into theyear. So, my bottom line at this moment is "B" symmetric, but withextensive language in the policy record on the issue of inflation.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I could support your position butfor somewhat different reasons. It seems to me that the uncertaintiesabout the direction of the economy are perhaps the greatest reason tosupport alternative B at this point. I must admit that looking at thedata and hearing the discussion today, I would never use the term"credit crunch" in the classic ways that I've heard that term used.-27-5/15/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm using it as a forecast.MR. PARRY. Okay. Then I would hope that we can in ourseparate Districts and here at the Board find a way to monitor thatvery closely. A credit crunch has real implications.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It does, and I would say that the moneysupply will tell us perhaps as much as anything. If you look at theway the numbers have flattened out--I don't care what you say--thathas come as a big surprise to me. There's something wrong about thosenumbers. And that's what bothers me.MR. PARRY. Well, we have [unintelligible] than last year.If you recall at this time--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I wish that they could be explained bythe April phenomenon. I'm uncomfortable with that explanation.MR. PARRY. Well, it seems to me it is something that weought to monitor very closely.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to reiterate my view thatthe progress we make toward achieving our long-run objective and thetransition cost of moving to that are going to be affected a greatdeal by the credibility of our policy. --thelarge regional real estate developer who told me that only one out ofeleven developers in a given city could get credit--said that hethought our credibility as an inflation fighter had all butdisappeared. He could find nobody who thought inflation was going tocome down, and he was obviously disappointed that we didn'tAnd that made me think about itsomewhat differently than I otherwise would have because I think thisfellow is unusually perceptive.MS. SEGER. He's also about ready to retire.MR. BLACK. No he isn't; he's even younger than I am, Martha,if you can conceive of such a thing! So, I think we ought to pay alittle more attention to the long-run issues in the position we taketoday than we typically do, instead of our perceptions of what isgoing on in the short-run part of the economy. And we [ought] tofocus on what this is going to do to our credibility. So, I wouldfavor "B" for now, but I would go asymmetrical. You've taken care ofa good part of my concerns by suggesting that you really favorasymmetry but that you're not quite ready to put that language in thedirective. I think we need a signal out there that we really haven'tabandoned our quest for price stability. I'd like to see us put thatasymmetry in the directive. But the behavior of the aggregates is aconcern to me to some extent. I would be alarmed if they don't pickup before long, especially M2 and not so much M3, because I think wemight have squeezed too much. But overall some kind of signal--not adiscount rate increase but something from thisCommittee--really would be very helpful right now, because I agreewith you that our next move will be to tighten. Of course, likeeverybody else, I'm guessing on that.5/15/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I favor "B" symmetrical. I think the risks areabout even. I'm not willing to concede at this point that the nextmove is up. It may very well be, but I think we're in an uncertainenough situation that I'd like to stay symmetrical and make a judgmentas the information comes in and as we learn more about the kind ofsituation that we're in.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think there are enoughuncertainties in the economy that we should not move at this time; weought to stay where we are. So, I would support alternative B. But Itend to agree with you that our next move is going to be on the upside and, therefore, I would have a slight preference for asymmetriclanguage.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, for the reasons you stated, I'dalso be in favor of alternative B and would have a preference forsymmetrical language. The only other thing I would add is a questionof timing. Now, [unintelligible] I would not expect a lot to come outof the budget negotiations. But it does seem to me that this could bean awkward time to be adjusting policy if in fact there is at least apossibility that something could come out of the budget discussions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. My preference would be alternative B,asymmetric, given that I believe we're going to have to have somegreater restraint in the period ahead if indeed we're going to makeany progress toward lower inflation rates. However, I don't seeanything on the horizon that would urge us to move in the intermeetingperiod--between now and early July, for example. I can't imagine thatthese numbers are going to reverse so quickly that they would triggera further increase in the intermeeting period. There are ways,however, to get the message to the market for the credibilityargument. One is, as you've suggested, that it be stressed in thepolicy record which is read by the market; on the other hand, we couldhave an asymmetric directive. Either would give the view that we'restill interested and concerned about our credibility and will moveagainst inflation. As I say, I would prefer "B" with an asymmetrictilt simply because of the communication. But I could, and would,accept your proposal that it be stressed in the policy record.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Some people expressed the view prior to thecoffee break that "steady-as-you-go" has served us tolerably well--atleast so far--and I think that's true. For the time being, I favor acontinuation of that policy. That would be "B" symmetric, in myjudgment. I do think, though, that it's a matter of timing. I don'tpretend to have any special insight about this, but it does seem to methat at best we can argue that the core rate of inflation remainsstuck in the 4 to 5 percent neighborhood in which it has been for sometime. And at the same time, as I think Manley was describing, the-29-5/15/90world more generally has become a somewhat more inflationary place.Some of the European countries in particular have taken advantage ofwhat's going on in Germany to stimulate their economies and so forth.And I think that does raise the odds, as you expressed, that we aregoing to have to tighten at some point in the future if we're going tounstick inflation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I would support your position of "B" symmetrical.I don't think the condition of the economy is that clear. Also, I'mvery concerned about the fragility of the financial system. I'm notjust talking about the credit crunch angle, although that's part ofit. But there are many, many financial institutions out there--S&Lsand banks alike--that are pretty shaky, and there are more on the listof those that will be getting shaky. I would like to support SiKeehn's point about the timing. If we tighten today, the day of thebudget summit, I think we'd look like we had no sense at all. So, allthat means that I would support your position.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I think this is a matter of timingand I don't think [unintelligible] from one meeting to another isgoing to make a lot of difference. We are always going to work andlive in a world that has a great deal of uncertainty. As the meetingsgo by the calls get tougher and tougher, and I'm not sure we can makeit any easier. I understand what people are saying about perceptionsbeing important at this time; the budget issue is one that I think isvery important. But that can almost play both ways. I would favoralternative B. When we come to the matter of symmetry or asymmetry, Ithink the credibility issue is very important. For that reason Iwould tend to favor asymmetric language--though that's almostsplitting hairs, depending upon what the policy record says. If thepolicy record is strongly worded enough and if it indicates the samething--essentially that if economic data start to come in and leanmore strongly than this most recent information and we don't see anyimprovement on the inflation front and the credit crunch reallydoesn't develop into something that's equivalent to the markettightening for us, then we understand that we are going to have totighten in the future. With that kind of language, I could more thanlive with symmetry, though I prefer the asymmetry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Our goal is to achieve long-run pricestability. We have to make those decisions in the context of short-term policymaking and there is always lots of noise in the data whenwe do that. M2 is slowing; the yield curve may be flatter than itwas; maybe commodity prices always give us conflicting signals in theshort run because of the noise there. I asked Don Kohn questionsabout where M2 was likely to be at year-end if we do nothing; hisanswer was 6 percent or higher. We have done a good job. I'm notpessimistic about the long-term inflation outlook in the sense of itrising. We have had three years of 4-1/2 percent or so growth in M2.To give that away by producing a 6 percent growth in M2 this year isnot an acceptable policy to me if our goal is long-run pricestability. In terms of where I'd like to come out at year-end--and-30-5/15/90that will condition the way I would vote today--I would like to see M2come in at 4-1/2 percent or below, fourth quarter over fourth quarter.It seems to me that then we would be making progress toward pricestability. In terms of what M2 means right now, it's positive from mypoint of view in that it's slowing. But I'm not sure that it's goingto stay there. Somebody already has used the expression thatinsurance may be appropriate at this point in time. It's a lot easierto lower rates if we make a mistake in this environment than it isgoing to be to raise them down the road. In terms of the short-termoutlook, one can just simply look at the Greenbook, which alsosupports the notion that if we do nothing at best we'll stabilize theinflation rate and at worst we will have a rising inflation rate. So,I prefer alternative C.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I am obviously more uncertaintoday than I have been in the past couple of meetings. I couldsupport alternative "B." I would have a fairly strong preference forasymmetric language. Your prescription of a narrative in the policyrecord reflecting inflation concerns and that sort of thing is okay,but if we're talking about credibility and sending some signals, thatbrings in a lot of nuances and subtleties it seems to me. I think anasymmetric directive would give credibility to the verbiage that wouldbe in the policy record and for that reason I think we would have someopportunity to strengthen at least the credibility [of our inflationeffort].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. My preference is for "B" asymmetric. But Icertainly wouldn't make a big deal over that, given your preferencefor statements in the policy record showing our concerns. It'ssplitting hairs to make that point. However, like Dick Syron, I'm alittle worried that if over the intermeeting period we get a fewstronger numbers, our credibility could slip rapidly. I was veryconcerned for a few weeks before this meeting that we were right onthe edge of totally losing our credibility when we got the CPI andpurchasing managers' survey results; all the data were coming instrong. Of course, the more recent numbers have to some extent bailedus out. Maybe that's an indication that there was an illusion in thedata. Still, even if we go for symmetric with a slightly strongerrecord of our concerns, we should be prepared--if these numbers slipin the intermeeting period--to be able to swing all the way to anintermeeting move. I think we're in a situation where if, say, thecredit crunch concerns start to dissipate and all of a sudden we getone or two strong numbers, we may not make it to the next meeting withour credibility intact. We ought to be flexible enough to be able toreact to that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, you know, what we react to and acton is not [just] what we write down.MR. JOHNSON. I understand, and I agree.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What we act on is basically what--MR. JOHNSON. The facts.-31-5/15/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, not on facts, but the attitudes ofeveryone. Essentially, what we put down on a piece of paper is whatthe Committee obviously wants to do, but I think the reality is a lotmore subtle than that. And it depends on how events unfold.MR. JOHNSON. Sure.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's nothing that says we can't movewith symmetrical language.MR. JOHNSON. Sure, I understand. That's why I'm saying Iagree with what you're proposing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I'm somewhat tempted, Mr. Chairman, tocounterbalance by having a governor vote for tightness to offset Mr.Hoskins' dissent so that we don't continue this issue about presidentsversus governors on the tightening side. But I guess that reallywouldn't be a logical basis for me to cast my vote. I would note thatof the presidents who are voting only two out of five of them couldmuster a tightness in their [policy stance]. But of the ones who arenot voting, four out of five can muster tightness, which I thinkprobably is what gives the presidents the reputation for being hawks.You presidents really are hawks when you don't have a vote!MR. SYRON. We want you to tighten now so we won't have totighten later when we do vote!MR. ANGELL. It seems to me, Mr. Chairman, that you arecorrect that there is some uncertainty right now. And thatuncertainty is such that, even though I'm in the mood to tighten and Iwas hoping we would be tightening, I do believe that it would be muchbetter for us to wait a couple of weeks and see what happens in thattime. We could act at that point in time rather than run the risk oftightening and then have conditions go in such a direction that ourcredibility is lost on the other side and that we would not be able todo what we need to do when we have to do it. So, in that sense, I'mvery sympathetic with your position, Mr. Chairman. I certainlyunderstand why prudence is in that direction. I would prefer that thedirective would read tighten now, but I can vote in the affirmativewith the understanding that we're very close together with someconsensus here which says: that we deem this attack against inflationto be a very high priority; that we think following that prioritygives the economic expansion more of an opportunity to develop and tostrengthen and to lengthen than not to do it; that we are steeled tobe ready to do what has to be done some time in the future; and thatthat is not to be deterred because there's a little bit of pain[involved]. I had been hoping we could get there in a painless waybut, frankly, what I have learned in 4-1/4 years tells me it's tougherthan I thought. I know from the experience in 1986 that once we'veeased it sometimes takes a lot longer for us to change direction totighten than it does to stop tightening and ease, because everybodylikes to ease. I just have a very strong compulsion at this point to-32-5/15/90be looking for an opportunity to get the fed funds rate up to where Ithink it ought to be. I'd be much more satisfied with an 8-3/4percent fed funds rate than with an 8-1/4 percent rate. I just don'tthink today is the time to do it. I certainly hope we'll be ready todo it when we need to.MR. HOSKINS. That sounds like alternative "C" to me, Wayne.MR. ANGELL. Well, I don't get credit for it. Alternative B,asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. "B" symmetric, please sir.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just to come full circle, I findmyself quite sympathetic with Governor Angell and Governor Johnson.But I can associate myself with the prescription that you put on thetable, Mr. Chairman. I also think, though, that this "beefed up"language--if I can put it that way--in the policy record is veryimportant. And even though I have an uneasiness about this creditcrunch issue, I would agree with Bob Parry that it would be a mistakein this key part of the policy record to frame this position on thosegrounds, partly because I'm afraid that that is susceptible to theinterpretation that we intend [unintelligible]. I would be inclinedto take that beefed up language and couch it more in terms of theeconomy, as you did a few moments ago, and the concern about theinflationary process.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I also think that Wayne Angell saidsomething which is important: that the surest way to get a recessionis to allow inflation to take over.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No question.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's an important issue. Thepresumption that we are caught between inflation and recession is amisunderstanding of the way the system works. We are always againstrecession. The question is: How do we avoid it best--by tightening[or] easing? Sometimes it can be either.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As I said, if that language can havesome of that flavor and stay away for that purpose from this creditcrunch matter, I'd be a lot happier.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I wanted to go last so I didn't feel thepressure of others wanting to speak after me: "B."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't feel the pressure. Let's try avote on the recommendation that I made, which is "B" symmetric withappropriate policy record language indicating the concerns aboutinflation.-33-5/15/90MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. Taking account of progress towardprice stability, the strength of the business expansion, the behaviorof the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange anddomestic financial markets, slightly greater reserve restraint orslightly lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in theintermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expectedto be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from Marchthrough June at annual rates of about 4 and 3 percent respectively.The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to theManager for Domestic operations that reserve conditions during theperiod before the next meeting are likely to be associated with afederal funds rate persistently outside a range of 6 to 10 percent."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Hoskins NoGovernor Johnson YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Seger YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next meeting is scheduled for July2-3.END OF MEETING-34-