Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 2-3, 1990A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Monday, July 2, 1990, at 3:10 p.m., and was continuedon Tuesday, July 3, 1990, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT:Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneBoykinHoskinsKelleyLaWareMullinsSegerSternMessrs. Black, Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis,and Boston, respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Kohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPatrikis, Deputy General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey,Promisel, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Siegman,Simpson, and Stockton, Associate EconomistsMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1. Mr. Boehne entered this meeting after the action to approve theminutes for the May meeting.2. Attended Tuesday session only.Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Danker, Chief, Banking and Money Market AnalysisSection, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board ofGovernorsMessrs. Feinman and Krane, Economists, Divisions ofMonetary Affairs and Research and Statistics,respectively, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Beebe, T. Davis, Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel,Senior Vice.Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofSan Francisco, Kansas City, Chicago, and Atlanta,respectivelyMr. Cook, Ms. Lovett, and Mr. McNees, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, New York, andBoston, respectivelyMr. Thornton, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of St. LouisMs. Krieger, Manager, Open Market Operations, FederalReserve Bank of New York3. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussionof the economic outlook and its longer-run objectives for monetaryand debt aggregates.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meetingof July 2-3, 1990July 2, 1990--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can we get started, please? If somebodywould like to move approval of the minutes--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So move.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Cross, would youcarry us through your operations since the last meeting?MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Cross?MR. CROSS. I'm sorry, it was Honduras rather than Costa Ricain the ESF arrangement.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions? If not, would somebody liketo move to ratify the transactions?MS. SEGER. Move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Ms. Lovett, wouldyou take us through domestic open market operations?MS. LOVETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Ms. Lovett?MR. HOSKINS. I noticed in the New York Fed's [report on its]financial panel that there was a comment by Scott Pardee indicatingthat he felt the pegging of the funds rate was not allowing marketforces to show through and was creating a situation whereby evenmoving the funds rate a little would be viewed as a very strongsignal. Can you evaluate that? Do you sense the same thing?MS. LOVETT. Well, in the six weeks since you met last, ithas been the case that market forces have shown through by the timethe maintenance period has come to an end. So, we ended up withfederal funds either being quite comfortable on the settlement day orquite tight on the settlement day. Some of that has been reflected inbanks' behavior, based on their expectations of what the funds ratewas going to be. In the first couple of periods they were quiteconvinced it was going to be a soft settlement day, and so it was. Aswe got into the June 13th period they were so sure it was going to becomfortable that they waited until the very end even though there wasa real need for reserves. Some market [participants] chance this;they put off [action] until there is no more room.7/2-3/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions? If not, wouldsomebody like to move the ratification of the actions of the Desksince the last meeting?MS. SEGER. I'll move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We'll now move on tothe "Chart Show" by Messrs. Prell and Truman.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We'll be referring tothe charts in the package with the bright red lettering, which youshould be able to distinguish from the other materials before you.[Statement--see Appendix.]MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for either gentleman?MR. FORRESTAL. Ted, that 3.9 percent inflation rate forGermany [for 1991] looks awfully high by historical standards. Why doyou think the Bundesbank won't resist that?MR. TRUMAN. Politics.MR. FORRESTAL. Politics still?MR. TRUMAN. Our sense is that they would resist somethingabove 4 percent but that for a period of time they will toleratesomething in the high 3s. That's part of the forecast. And, as Isaid, they may [unintelligible] more, in which case the forecast[unintelligible].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I'd like to ask a question of Mike on the basicassumption that a shift in credit supply conditions has occurred.Throughout the Greenbook and the Bluebook there was certainlydiscussion of these events. Could you give me some idea as to howimportant those conditions are in terms of the forecast? Did theyrepresent some percentage of GNP that did not occur as a result?MR. PRELL. Well, we don't have a quantification. It iswoven into the forecast and, as I suggested, is not a big effect. IfI had to quantify it, I'd say it's a fraction of a percent.MR. PARRY. A quarter of a percent, then?MR. PRELL. It's just very hard to trace this through. Myguess would be maybe a little more than that. Part of the problem isthe semantic difficulty of identifying what is the credit crunch. Ifyou build in the recognition of all the declining investmentopportunities in real estate and so on and call that a part of thecredit crunch you have a bigger effect than if you are thinking simply7/2-3/90 -3-of the shift in credit terms offered to people of a given level.Congress is--MR. PARRY. Well, I was thinking of risks of changes insupply, which could originate from both of those factors.MR. PRELL. Right. Well, I think it's a fraction of apercent. Implicitly, given the changes we've made over time as wethought we recognized this, I'd say it's considerably less than apercent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, there's one way of coming at thatin a slightly different manner. The data that have just come in fromthe survey on lending terms suggest that the combination of increasedcollateral requirements and increased spreads on loans over openmarket rates has a [unintelligible] of something like 25 basis points.So another way to look at this is to think of it in terms of how wewould view the real rates if we had tightened the funds rate by, say,25 basis points.MR. PRELL. I think the difficulty with that, Mr. Chairman,is that those effects seem to have been greatest for relatively smallbusinesses. And as best we can assess it, the role of smallerbusinesses in total investment, for example, is not overwhelming. Butthen there are these secondary effects. Looking at corporate bonds,if you took the--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, Mike, I think Bob was raising aninteresting question about something we're all aware of. I can seethe [unintelligible] and the point at issue is that it's crucial forus to get a feel for what the order of magnitude is. It's clearly nota percentage point, but how do we know [how much it is]? If the realinterpretation of what I said is correct, it's less than 25 basispoints. But there are a lot of other forces going on and this reallygets down to a very tricky issue of what the definition is. What inthe world does a term mean? We are looking at such complex forceshere. How does one get a feel for how to separate them?MR. PARRY. Well, did you make any adjustments in the modelto reflect the kinds of things that typically would not be captured bya model?MR. PRELL. [Unintelligible.]MR. PARRY. So, what you had in there are the typical typesof changes in the supply of credit due to diminished prospects withregard to growth of income, employment, etc.MR. PRELL. Well, if this forecast were spit out by a model,then yes, I'd have a better basis. But, of course, we always areadjusting for various surprises, and to isolate this one would be verydifficult. But I think one needs to lay on top of those directinterest rate effects whatever allowance one makes for collateralrequirements. I suggested that perhaps the decline in consumersentiment might have been affected to some degree by all of the pressdiscussion of shortages of credit and the possibly bad effects onbusiness. That might be why consumers are less confident than theywere before. So I think it gets to be very, very difficult.7/2-3/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think Bob is saying that in avery structural sense consumer confidence is an element in the modeland interest rates are an element in the model but the credit crunchis not. And the issue here is how you embody that [in your forecast],other than, say, through consumer confidence or some other variable--or in this particular case, I would assume, add-factor adjustments.How do you capture that? That's the issue he is raising.MR. PRELL. I don't have an answer. I'd like to, but it'svery hard because there are too many things going on at once. Wewould have to settle on exactly what categories these things wouldfall in. The land price story, if it is significant, is another thingthat affects people's thinking on a number of decisions, and thatisn't obviously related to the credit crunch. So, though I'd like to,I just don't have a good answer.MR. PARRY. Don't get me wrong; I don't think you'reunderstating these events. I just wondered how you did it, that'sall. I think the effects are probably on the low side of what you'resaying. It is difficult to know how to deal with it.MR. MELZER. Mike, on Chart 9, the alternative fiscalscenarios, I wanted to ask you just what happens in your model for thelonger-term growth rates of money where interest rates are adjusted tokeep output close to the baseline path? Is there a change in themodel in the longer-term growth rates of money yet?MR. PRELL. We have to have substantially higher money growthin order to accomplish this. Let me see, I must have those numbershere. Let me check and give you some idea.MR. KOHN. The rule of thumb we have been using is that [adecrease of] about 2 percentage points on the funds rate for the yearwill give you about 2 more percentage points in M2 growth on thestandard M2 demand [function]. Now, whether that still pertains isanother question.MR. PRELL. I don't have the corresponding money numbers but,clearly, having a little higher nominal GNP level here andsubstantially lower interest rates implies through the money demandfunction much more rapid money growth over the period.MR. MELZER. My point in asking and my general concern aboutthis is that, basically, I would view a dramatic shift in fiscalpolicy as some sort of a short-run shock, and we can use monetarypolicy to try to offset it. But we're going to be giving up somethingin the long run to do it and I guess the model would incorporate thatin a sense with higher longer-term growth rates in money.MR. PRELL. Well, longer term, perhaps one begins to look atthings differently. But it's a matter of many years before thesefiscal effects presumably would die out. We need to make someassumptions about what would happen to fiscal policy beyond thisperiod. But in this period, obviously, we have to have thataccommodation. And in this period, because of the balancing fiscalcontraction, aggregate demand isn't growing much more rapidly and wedon't have that inflation effect. If you maintain consistently higher7/2-3/90money growth throughout the future--sort of along the lines of theBluebook simulations--then you do begin to see these effects mount.MR. KOHN. I would view this more as a shift in the level ofthe money supply as interest rates fell or rose--fell, in this case--and then growth would be along whatever you thought the oldequilibrium was relative to whatever inflation rate you want it to be.I don't see why this would result in a permanent increase in thegrowth rate of money; rather, I think it's a level adjustment.MR. MELZER. One other question I had with respect to rates:What occasioned the dramatic change in your assumption on the path ofinterest rates between this meeting and the prior meeting?MR. PRELL. Several things were involved. One was the factthat in the near term the economy seems to be weaker in an underlyingsense than we had anticipated previously. A second factor was ourdecision to make fiscal policy a bit more restrictive in 1991. On topof that, we already had brought our interest rate bulge down; we hadthought rates would be going up and spiking in the first part of 1991and then coming off. Those first two things moderated thatconsiderably. Then we decided that it would be sensible, as abaseline for the discussion here, not to assume any significant changein rates because it still appears that we would have some milddisinflationary trajectory going into 1992. We felt this kind ofscenario was in line with what we perceived to be the general policyobjectives of the Committee, consistent with the symmetric directivesrecently and so on. This seemed a sensible baseline for thediscussion.MR. MELZER. Thank you.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mike, again in the area of thebudget, but leaving aside RTC-type things, could you give me somesense as to the sensitivity of the [1991] budget deficit estimate toeconomic assumptions? What is [the effect of a difference of] 1percentage point of GNP or 1 percent on the unemployment [rate] orsomething like that on the actual budget deficit excluding--MR. PRELL. I can give you, for example, the CBO's rule ofthumb. A one percent change in real growth starting at the beginningof a year yields--if you take the lower growth scenario--$7 billion inthe first year.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. How much?MR. PRELL. It's $7 billion in the first year and $26 billionin the second year. Was it real output that was your primary focus?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What I was trying to ask was this:Looking at your earlier charts on page 3 for the differences in 1991between the staff numbers and the Administration numbers for GNP,unemployment, etc., if you had to make a very rough ballpark guess,what does all that translate to in terms of the budget deficit?MR. PRELL. For 1991, I would take it to be a fairly sizabledifference once one builds in the difference in interest rateassumptions. For example, their Treasury bill rate in 1991--these are7/2-3/90not published numbers yet--is an average of 6.8 percent. So that's alittle lower than our forecast entails. Looking across the boardthat's probably worth somewhere between $5 and $10 billion; I don'tknow the particular phasing. If you add on the output pathdifference, I would think we're running a difference of something inthe $10 to $20 billion area in terms of the economic assumptions.Inflation differences are very small; the projections aren't verysensitive to inflation differences. Clearly, this is small potatoesrelative to all the other aspects of [unintelligible] deliberations.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, that was what I thought.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Somewhat related to Jerry's question: How likelyis it, if Congress goes for expenditure cuts on the budget and highertaxes, that that actually would produce a larger deficit because theimpact of that fiscal restraint would be to slow growth even further?MR. PRELL. Well, our simulation suggests that it's withinthe powers of monetary policy to offset any [expected] drag. It mighttake aggressive action, if you believe these models, but it's doable.I guess that's the most--MS. SEGER. And you think the timing would work out and allthat?MR. PRELL. Mechanically, the models say you can do this. Iguess I should say, to follow up on the earlier question about 1991budget deficits, that I wasn't really building in the differences inthe 1990 forecast, which would start things off a little worse andwiden that gap.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The growth in output I think [dependson] a judgment as to when, for example, any tax increases that occurare effective.MR. PRELL. Sure.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We will know what that date is well inadvance. We won't know the expenditure numbers that easily. I thinkwe'll have some judgment as to the fiscal tax results. Now, if youwant to think in terms of appropriations and forward orders, currentcontract awards and that sort of thing, we can track those thingsfairly well and they're not going to fall on their face overnight. Inother words, it's going to be a very extensive lag so that a lot ofthe initial effect would be anticipatory. You can get a good deal ofanticipatory effect from monetary policy because people expectinterest rates to change and reduce some of this. But unless a changein orders arrives at somebody's desk, he is not going to change[inventory policy]. I have been reading in the newspapers that therehas been a contraction in the budget and there's nothing we can do[unintelligible] change inventory policy or any policy. But when youget something it sure will. And I think it's that sort of timing thatwe have to be sensitive to. My impression is that it's very difficultto write the budget deal without some significant [unintelligible] intheir fiscal impact. And it should be of a nature that we have more7/2-3/90than adequate lead time to respond, if in fact our decision is to doso.MS. SEGER. My second question relates to what I thought Iheard you say when you were talking about housing starts. I believeyou said that you thought the credit availability problems forbuilders were a one-shot phenomenon. I hope that's true, but I'm notsure.MR. PRELL. Well, I tried to say two conceptually separatethings. One is that to the extent that it lowers activity, that's aone-time effect.MS. SEGER. Right.MR. PRELL. That's a one-time effect, and then a growth pathcan be pursued as determined by subsequent interest rate and incomemovements as well. The other thing is that to the extent that somebuilders have been displaced--for example, by their friendly S&Lhaving been shut down or the loan-to-one-borrower restrictions havingmade their S&L less able to provide credit--we think that in time theywill find alternative funding if they have viable projects. Therewill be people who want to make those loans. On a technical side, wethink that institutions will find ways, such as participating loansand so on, to deal with the loan-to-one-borrower limitations. So inthat sense we think that the level problem will diminish over time.MS. SEGER. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We were too focused on bidding ManleyJohnson farewell and we forgot that we have a new member who now hasthe floor.MR. MULLINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My [question relatesto] either the prospect or reality of higher state and local taxes ina number of populous regions. How is that included in the model?MR. PRELL. Clearly, that has happened already. I heard anews story that something like 10 or 11 states had tax increases goinginto effect yesterday. And in our forecast we expect, among theactions taken to close the budget gaps in a number of states, more taxincreases. We have in the forecast a significant increase in theaverage indirect business tax rate of state and local governments.That tends to give a little boost to inflation as we go out through1991 in this forecast.MR. MULLINS. Okay.MR. PARRY. I have a question about timing in terms ofmonetary policy reactions to a change in fiscal policy. If greaterfiscal tightness were imposed and one wanted, say, to keep outputclose to the baseline path, what do the different lag structuresassociated with monetary and fiscal policy tell you in terms of thetiming requirements for monetary policy?MR. PRELL. Well, unless we go to extreme cases, there is notiming requirement. If you act later, you have to act with greaterforce.7/2-3/90MR. PARRY. Do more.MR. PRELL. Just to give you some sense, though, of thesensitivity of these numbers: We did another simulation where insteadof waiting until the fourth quarter, as we've assumed in this, weadjusted the federal funds rate by 150 basis points in the thirdquarter of this year and then let the rate drift up very gradually,pretty much back to the path seen here. And that has essentially thesame output effect. So, it took 50 basis points less if you moved onequarter earlier. That gives you some sense that there is considerable[room] to maneuver, if you're willing to move in rather gross ways inyour policy adjustments--and if you believe the model.SPEAKER(?). That's one big "if."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm trying to remember a comparablefiscal action that has taken place, and the only thing that comes tomind is the Johnson Administration's surtax and subsequent, orconcurrent, monetary ease. What actually happened then in thiscontext? Do you remember offhand?MR. PRELL. Well, that was before my time. However, when Iarrived at the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank in 1970 it was legend.There were a lot of economists in the System who were still feelingthat that was one of the biggest mistakes they had ever made. Theyhad neglected to take a sort of permanent income view of a one-timetax surcharge. I think it was expected to have significant effects onexpenditures and in retrospect it didn't seem to have that. Now, inthis case, the presumption would be that we're talking about somethingmore permanent and one wouldn't have that kind of surprise. But Ithink that was the analysis. There may be people around the table whohave a direct recollection of what went on within the System.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That was a temporary surcharge?MR. PRELL. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, basically, the model would take somemarginal propensity to [consume]--0.7 or whatever the number wouldbe--out of GNP when in effect it was probably 0.1.MR. PARRY. Well, it warmed Milton Friedman's heart becausethe permanent income hypothesis explained it pretty well.MR. PRELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The real issue is that there is adifference here, and we have to be careful that there's not anotherproblem we haven't captured. The complexity of this issue is rathermind-boggling.MR. PRELL. We recognize that this [presentation] makes itall look more pat than it is. I hope I threw in enough cautionarywords on that part. But as I said, I think it gives one some sense ofthe orders of magnitude that conceivably could be involved.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't know if my memory is verygood this evening but I think there was another element in that7/2-3/90surcharge in 1968. And that is that for a long time prior to thepoint when the surcharge was supposed to come into play, there were anumber of senior Federal Reserve officials, including Chairman Martin,who were pushing publicly and privately very, very hard to get somekind of a tax to finance the war. I certainly wasn't around or closeenough to the situation to know whether or not all of their pushingput them in a position where there might have been some understandingof a [quid pro quo]. Certainly, the visible case was the one thatMike cited: that it was treated--whether because it was misunderstoodor for other reasons--as if it were a permanent large tax increase[unintelligible]. But I suspect there was a little more to it thanthat.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. To be sure. Any more questions? David.MR. MULLINS. I have one question on the bottom panel ofChart 4. Since we talked about Friedman some, we can talk aboutModigliani some. Your model, I guess, is meant to suggest a reboundin consumer spending because household wealth is relatively high. Howhas that notion worked as a predictor in the past? For example, onecan't help but notice the little dip in October of 1987 in totalwealth. Can you trace out the consumption impact of that?MR. PRELL. Yes, in a rough way. The fact is that after thatperiod the personal saving rate did rise. There was not a recession,as some people expected, because there were some strong interest-income generating sectors--stronger than most people had realized atthe time. The net export increase was sizable; the investment gainswere sizable. That seemed to generate the income. And even ifconsumers wanted to spend less of it, they still increased theirexpenditures, and thus we glided through that period. But the indexof the wealth effect would be the personal saving rate. So there'snothing in the data superficially, given everything else that wasgoing on, to suggest that there wasn't the predicted effect.MR. HOSKINS. Just one question for Mike. It really is not afair one because he probably hasn't looked at it. But, if the averageerror in the forecast one quarter out is plus or minus 2 percentagepoints when we have normal times--that is, no fiscal policy change--what would you [estimate] the error is going to be with a fiscalpolicy change?MR. PRELL. Well, I don't know. If I knew what the fiscalpolicy change was, we'd be able to [unintelligible]. I'm not sure theerror would be any larger, but given that I don't know the [fiscalpolicy change] or the underlying strength of the economy, I'd saythere is a very wide range of possibilities.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no further questions, canwe proceed to our usual roundtable discussion? Who would like tostart off?MR. BOEHNE. In the Philadelphia District, my sense is thatboth business sentiment and economic activity have deteriorated sincethe last meeting and that the outlook is more bearish now than even amonth ago. Real estate is the weakest spot, with increasing reportsof builders in trouble. The number of bankrupt properties is rising.One of our major firms that is closely tied to capital spending7/2-3/90reports that new capital spending authorizations have moderatedappreciably during the second quarter. The only major exception isfor environmentally related projects. Spending commitments are offfor steel, chemicals especially, pharmaceuticals, electric powergeneration, and oil and gas. And the prospect for continued weaknessin capital spending authorizations is there. Retailers reportessentially flat sales, and I would say that merchants are morecautious about the outlook than a couple of months ago. Manufacturinggenerally appears to have flattened out but at fairly low levels. Andexcept for autos, I think most of the manufacturers in the District donot expect further slippage from these low levels. In general,bankers are increasingly gloomy; they are worried about loan quality,profit margins, and the next examination. Lending for real estateprojects has been curtailed sharply and lending to small business--often collateralized with real estate assets--is under much morescrutiny. My sense is that against the background of a generallyslowing economy and a general tightening of credit standards, mostcompanies are falling short in terms of their targets and plans forsales and profits. I think all of those are ingredients for a periodwhen business confidence is quite vulnerable and is susceptible tosome significant deterioration in the months ahead.Now, translating that into the national economic outlook, Icontinue to think that the modest growth forecast, as outlined in theGreenbook, is most likely. But in my judgment, there has been asignificant increase in the amount of downside risk to the economy inthe last few weeks. So, while I would say that modest growth is themost likely outcome, I'm much more concerned now about it coming topass than I was in May.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Well, I guess this is a Northeast economic story.In New England our situation continues to worsen, and I'd have to saywith some signs of cumulation. But I don't think this is largelybecause of national factors. Our own expectation for the region,given an economic performance nationally something like that in theGreenbook, is that the region will continue to decline well into 1992and then level off but be slow coming back. Retail sales are nowquite weak with aggressive pricing; there are some bankruptcies, andinventories are becoming a problem. There are some questions aboutweather influences because we have had a cool, rainy spring andpurchases of things like gas grills and that sort of thing--once itgets past the fourth of July--may tend to be put off for another yearunless they are priced very aggressively. Contributing to all this isthe banking situation, which I think we'd have to say continues todeteriorate. We now have people actually becoming somewhat blase,about banking, which I guess could be either good or bad. We have hada bank failure about every two weeks for the last two months.MS. SEGER. The people are blase or the outside--MR. SYRON. As these things happen successively, I suppose itis human nature that they draw less attention in the press. It'sreally noticeable that they draw much less attention in the electronicmedia and on the radio than one might have thought. Now, these are[mostly] small institutions. With the exception of one $2-1/2 billionthrift institution, these are institutions of less than $1/2 billion-10-7/2-3/90in size, so the impact is not enormously great. But to cite oneexample: A story that a $1/2 billion institution was going to beclosing was in a gossip column in one of the newspapers two daysbefore and it ended up having some problems but no severe runs oranything like that. Interestingly, consumer confidence--and thedecline we have had is pointed out in Mike's chart 4--is remainingabout the same. It's no longer falling in the region, which is alittle hard to figure out, but it is at a quite low level. Looking atsectors, construction is obviously at dead center, particularly insouthern New Hampshire where it was very big. And that is going to bea drag on the New England economy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Seasonally adjusted, it will soon turnnegative!MR. SYRON. It's almost conceivable! Interestingly,employment in services has been falling as well, particularly infinance, insurance and real estate, and also in wholesale and retailtrade. You just notice the availability of labor where there reallyhad been a problem with availability in the services sector. It isnow much less of an issue at the wholesale and retail stores; thestores are actually tightening up and have not put as many salespeopleon the floor as they had before because of the concern that they have.Interestingly, the credit crunch question, although I'm not surequantitatively or qualitatively that it has gotten any less pressingone way or the other, is becoming much less newsworthy and is drawingmuch less attention. We took some loan data and adjusted for sales ofloans and items that were changed to writeoffs and things like that,and we found that loan data pretty flat except for real estate, andthere was some decline in consumer loans. Manufacturing was reallyone bright spot, believe it or not. Sales were mixed for ourmanufacturers--from 0 to 15 percent. The two [unintelligible] see anincrease [unintelligible] holding up relatively decently but a lot ofthese things are special factors. For manufacturers, exports are moreand more becoming an important source of sales. Also, a lot of thesethings are in areas you might expect--in aerospace, as it has gonenationally, some types of electronics and defense-related products.Our computer sector is still quite weak. For the longer term there isquite a lot of concern about what defense means, and regionally Ithink we will see a substantial drag from state and local fiscalchanges. The Massachusetts budget deficit is about $1.4 billion forthe current fiscal year and the next fiscal year is forecast to beabout another $1.4 billion. They are trying to arrange for some sortof [financing], part of that out 30-40 years. Connecticut has asubstantial problem, so there is going to have to be very significant[unintelligible].As far as the national economy goes, given the policyassumptions last time, our view is that the Greenbook seemed a littleoptimistic; and given the policy assumptions this time, it seems to usslightly pessimistic. I'd emphasize the "slightly," particularly onthe unemployment rate. As has been noted, it does seem to put a lotof weight on this credit crunch issue. I think that is so; at leastit's discussed frequently--let me put it that way. And it's very,very hard to know what that means. There are lots and lots ofunknowns out there; things are definitely softening but it's hard tosee whether this is a pause or a trend. In terms of policy, we needto see something on whether this will continue or not. There are a-11-7/2-3/90lot of weather-related issues in the retail sales data, particularlyin fuels and personal consumption expenditures and in some of the GNPaccounts. I'm also skeptical of the month-to-month retail salesnumbers. So, I don't know that we can think at this point that theconsumer sector is really going to weaken. The export sector looksrelatively healthy; residential construction look weak. On the otherhand, the purchasing managers survey this morning looked reasonablygood. The indicators of a recession don't suggest a [high]probability of that. Unemployment hasn't risen; claims aren't rising,even though we've seen poor employment performance. We just have anawful lot of unknowns out there, not the least of which is what isgoing to happen with fiscal policy. We'll get into a discussion aboutthis later today or tomorrow, but I think it's a very difficult periodto make a decision to change [policy].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What is new in this whole process isthat I don't think any of us has sat through this type of unravelingof an accelerated financial expansion. If you look at theflow-of-funds table, we go from double-digit [rates] to squeezingdown, and that effect, I think, is really what we're hearing about.The question is: How does one read that? I think it explains the typeof phenomenon that we see in New England at the extreme. But the restof country is definitely [unintelligible].MR. SYRON. Well, on this business of a credit crunch--and Ithink we have had some severe problems along that line--in looking atthese figures it's interesting that, once you've adjusted them, a lotof the fall-off is in areas you wouldn't expect to be price-driven--i.e, in consumer lending. There is just no avoiding it; that's what'sgoing on.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the Twelfth District economycontinues to grow, but the pace of growth has slowed recently.Employment grew at a 2.8 percent annual rate from January through May.That compares favorably to the U.S. rate of growth of employment of1.8 percent, but it does represent a slowdown. From May of 1989 untilJanuary of 1990 employment in the District was growing at rate ofabout 3-1/2 percent. Conditions remain good in the trade and servicessectors. Retailers report healthy sales, confirming moderateemployment growth in recent months. In most parts of the West, homesales are still strong and median prices are rising but at a muchslower rate. Reports of particularly robust activity come fromSeattle, Sacramento, Oregon, and parts of Utah and Idaho. However, inthe coastal areas of California, which are primarily Los Angeles, SanDiego, and San Francisco, sales volumes and median prices have fallenfrom the high levels of a year ago. Although sales of more affordablehomes continue to be robust, construction activity has fallen from thehigh levels of a few months ago. Nevertheless, the level of activityremains high with construction employment still registering solidgains over year-earlier levels. Manufacturing activity continuesmixed. Production of commercial aircraft, aluminum, and someconstruction-related products is reported to be strong. However,employment gains in commercial aircraft are limited by both capacityconstraints and also by improvements in labor productivity. It'sinteresting to note that Boeing has actually laid off some people andapparently has done that, as they explain it, as a result of increased-12-7/2-3/90labor productivity. High-technology-related industries are relativelyflat overall with wide variations among firms and product lines. Andlayoffs and plant closures associated with defense cutbacks continue.If I may turn to the national economy, we're in generalagreement with the outlook in the Greenbook for this year, but we dohave a few differences. Adopting the Greenbook assumption of nochange in the current level of short-term interest rates, our forecastwould be about a quarter of a percentage point stronger, at least in1990 and continuing into the first part of 1991. I'm not sure exactlywhat the causes of these differences are, but I have a feeling thatthey might be accounted for to some extent by differences in theimpacts of credit availability effects. Even in the absence of creditavailability effects, we expect real GNP growth to be less than thatof the growth of potential, putting some modest upward pressures onthe unemployment rate and containing inflationary pressures, at leastunderlying inflationary pressures. Therefore, we anticipate inflationin the GNP fixed-weight price index to average about 4-1/4 to 4-1/2percent over the next 18 months, which I believe is slightly higherthan that in the Greenbook. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, the economy has not changedappreciably in the Southeast since the last meeting. Growth iscontinuing along the slow path that we've been experiencing for sometime now. We are seeing a fairly healthy expansion, I think, inservices and in our export industries. Offshore energy exploration isalso moving up higher and we continue to receive reports of severelabor shortages in the energy sector in Louisiana. Othermanufacturing areas are quite weak, mainly due to the conditions atthe national level for the automobile and construction-relatedindustries.I don't have to go out and ask people any more what theythink about the economic situation; I'm inundated with advice aboutwhat we should do. But I must say that people are expressingincreasingly their concerns about current conditions and the outlook.Now, that certainly has been true for some time in the real estate andhousing areas, but increasingly we're hearing it from others as welland particularly from bankers. In recent weeks they seem to be a lotless concerned about regulatory pressures than they were and much moreconcerned about loan demand that has weakened across the board. Thatis one very notable change from the views a few weeks ago. And Iwould echo what Dick said: that the publicity about regulatorypressures seems to have waned quite a bit.Looking at the national economy, our staff has somewhatfaster real growth, especially in the early part of the forecastperiod, in comparison to the Greenbook forecast. The differences arebasically because we have a small reduction in Federal spending and wehave in fact [unintelligible] as much of an impact from the tightercredit conditions. We are also a bit more optimistic about the priceoutlook even though the forecast shows a somewhat tighter labormarket. But as we go into 1991, our forecast does converge a littlemore on the inflation side. As I try to look at the outlook, likeeverybody else, I'm beset by a number of these uncertainties. I mustsay that one thing weighing heavily on my mind is that our bank-13-7/2-3/90directors, who have been very steadfast in supporting our anti-inflationary policies, are now leaning to the view that some reductionin restraint is needed right now. What is significant about that, Ithink, is that it is not only the business directors who are sayingthis but also the bank directors who have typically favored arelatively tight policy in comparison to the other directors. Thebusiness and financial contacts that I have spoken to in recent weeksare much more blunt in this regard--virtually without exception urginga reduction in rates. My take on this is that the negative sentimentsreally reflect the pressures, the temporary pressures I hope, to slowinflation after a period of pretty comfortable business conditions.Businesses seem to be having trouble, at least in the Southeast,raising final prices as much as they had expected to, and now theyhave to find ways to cut costs to preserve their margins. It seems tome that this is the pressure and the ultimate adjustment that we'vebeen trying to achieve for a long time. But having said that, I stillfind myself now feeling--and even more so--that the risk is on thedown side and that there is a greater chance of growth falling shortof rather than exceeding our expectations.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, on balance the economy in theDistrict is largely unchanged from the last meeting: mixed to juststable, at least at a moderate level. Clearly, there are some sectorsthat are weaker. Retail sales are down and I must say anecdotally Iam hearing that June sales really have been very soft as compared tolast June. Construction activity is down, both residential andnonresidential; yet our numbers I think are still running ahead of thenational numbers. The Chicago purchasing managers report came out theother day; for June it was down a bit from May. Production, neworders, and order backlogs were lower. The manufacturing sector isgenerally unchanged, but there are some areas that are better. In thesteel business, for example, as the year is moving along, theshipments level is being increased. They started the year offthinking it would be an 80 million ton year. Now, the numbers are upto as high as 84 million tons--a little lower than last year, butstill a comparatively good year. Operating levels, at least at thecompany I talked to, are at about 89 percent. The electroniccommunications business is strong; the order rate is moving up and isnow back up into the double-digit area. The paper industry is flatbut at a high level, operating at about 98 percent. But having saidthat, an awful lot of capacity has come on in the paper business and,therefore, pricing is very, very intense. Liner board, for example,has gone down from $410 a ton to $370 a ton. In the manufacturingsector, not surprisingly, agricultural equipment is very strong;production levels are about 5 percent higher this year than last year.Sales of agricultural equipment at retailers are moving at a very goodpace. Construction machinery, though, is weak; and in response to thedecrease in construction activity, that category is down.The auto sector continues to be very, very uncertain; thesales level in May and early June certainly was weak and as aconsequence the forecast for the year is beginning to be pulled down abit. One company's forecast is down to a little under 14-1/2 millionunits for the year and that's depending on 14-1/2 million for thesecond half. Even those levels, of course, are dependent ontremendous incentives. The incentives continue to be over $1,000 per-14-7/2-3/90car in order to maintain these even weaker numbers of sales. Autoinventories at retail continue to be at reasonable levels; dealersjust aren't buying and, as a consequence, many of them are losingmoney. GM is quoted as saying that 35 to 40 percent of its dealersare currently losing money. The auto production levels in the thirdquarter will be significantly higher than last year but there is acomparative issue involved because the third quarter of last year waspretty weak.In the agricultural sector, what started off a couple ofmonths ago as being a near perfect growing season looks not quite aspositive as a consequence of the heavy amount of rain we've had in theMidwest. We are having, to quote a new term, "ponding" in some areasand severe erosion. And as a consequence, the corn planting has beendelayed and some of it has been shifted into soybeans, which can beplanted a bit later. Depending on how things work from this pointforward, I think we're still going to have a good production year, butit just isn't going to be quite as strong as it might otherwise havebeen.On the pricing side, our outlook is more positive than thestaff forecast. I am continuing to hear awfully good reports. Theraw materials prices are stable to down. One large manufacturer Italked to says that his firm's raw materials costs for all of thisyear will be 1/2 percent lower than last year. In other respects Ihear very good news on the raw materials side. Finally, with regardto the credit crunch, the banks that I talk to are saying that theycertainly are being more careful in their approach to credit lending.They are lending very, very carefully, but everybody says that thereis more than enough credit for good credits. And, of course, theywould emphasize the word "good."Just briefly, in a national context--and I think our view isreflective of our District outlook--we have been a little morepositive than has the Board staff in the past and we continue to beso. Our outlook for this year particularly is stronger than thestaff's and for next year we are a bit stronger. The differencereally is in personal consumption, to some extent in nondurables butto a greater extent in the durables category and [more specifically]in household durables. Our outlook for home starts is a little higherthan 1.3 million, whereas the Board staff's is a little under 1.3million, and that works its way through in the household durablescategory. With regard to inflation, our outlook is a bit differentfrom the Board staff's also. We think as we get into next year thatthe numbers will begin to show some improvement. And our outlook forinflation by the end of next year is certainly lower than the Boardstaff's. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. In terms of our long-run outlook, we're rightnear the central tendencies in both years; we tend to be at the lowerend in terms of nominal GNP, real GNP, and the CPI, and a bit at thehigher end on unemployment. The one comment I would make is that in1991 we're looking for somewhat lower inflation, just a quarter of apercentage point from the lower end of the central tendency. I wouldsay that's based on the progress in the trend growth in money and thedecline from double-digit rates in the 1986-to-1987 period to less-15-7/2-3/90than 4 percent now. Essentially, I think that kept us fromoverreacting earlier this year to the temporary runup in prices. Andit also influences us now in the sense that we have built such a goodbase here that I think there's some reluctance to trade away a lot ofthat. Now, there's concern about the recent slowdown in money, but ingeneral where I come out--and not everybody would agree with this--isthat I'd need to see more before I reacted to that, particularly inthe context of trading away some of this longer-term progress.As far as the District goes, the situation still looks prettygood right now. We have had growth in nonagricultural employment inthe most recent three-month period that's right in line with thenational numbers and over the last year almost right on top of them.Our manufacturing component is actually a bit stronger; it's growingsluggishly but that compares to declines nationally in the most recentthree months and over the last year. On the horizon, however, thereare clearly some problems. We have a lot of auto industry exposure inMissouri--in St. Louis and Kansas City. Chrysler has a shift that isscheduled to go out this fall and as I recall it involves about 1,900workers. And recently McDonnell Douglas has talked about layoffs;they have not made any specific announcements but the rumors are that4,000 jobs in St. Louis will be eliminated, and that would be 0.3 to0.4 of a percentage point in terms of our metropolitan areaunemployment rate. The interesting thing about that is that I wouldattribute those layoffs solely to current inefficiencies. That is, itmay put them in a better position as contract cuts come a couple ofyears down the road, but basically this is dealing with currentproblems. And I think it caught people a bit by surprise in that theyweren't really looking for any winding down until 1992 or some timearound then. On the banking side, asset quality continues to improvein our District. Nonperforming loans are going down; real estateproblems have gone up a little but they are still well below nationalaverages. In St. Louis, for example, nonperforming real estate loansare less than 2 percent, compared to much higher numbers in some othermetropolitan areas. On the agricultural side, the weather hasaffected the wheat crop. We have had, of course, very wet weather.It also has affected planting but I think corn is the only crop thatwould possibly be affected by that; soybeans and cotton are in prettygood shape.I wanted to comment on one other thing quickly. We had aseries of meetings a week ago with our pension fund managers. I thinkit's dangerous to draw conclusions from a relatively small sample ofmanagers, even though they're very professional, but what struck mewas that I did not pick up from any of them a great deal of anxietyabout the outlook. Basically they are assuming a soft-landing type ofscenario. In other words--or I guess to put words in theirmouths--they are assuming continued sluggish growth, a continuedunwinding of inflationary pressures, and a gradual decline in interestrates. I would say that, in effect, what most of them were doing waslooking through current [profit] margin pressures, which are veryevident, and the effect that will have on earnings. They feel that agradual decline in interest rates will offset that and that from avaluation point of view they will be okay. The flip side of that--andwe didn't ask this across the board but we talked to one group--is toask what they would worry more about. And I think in general theywould be much more worried in a longer-term context about a resumptionof inflationary pressures as opposed to some shallow recession. Of-16-7/2-3/90course, they were quick to add that once a recession started who knowswhether it would be shallow. So, that was kind of a soft question.Generally, in the bond part of the portfolio there is usually not muchof an interest rate bet; in fact some of them won't make any at all.They just stick right around the Shearson-Lehman index in terms oftheir duration. But there were two standouts, one on either side.One manager is betting on declining rates and another on rising rates.So, overall, there's a pretty neutral view there.MR. PARRY. We're not supposed to adjust policy based onthat, are we?MR. MELZER. No.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. With regard first to the District economy, forsome time I have reported that it was doing better than the nation asa whole. We just had some data revisions; the series we follow mostclosely are nonfarm employment and income, and the data revisionsconfirm those reports. Both for 1989 and early in 1990 at least, theDistrict has outperformed the nation. I think essentially what isgoing on is that the natural resource industries in the District,which sometimes act as a drag, have actually been pulling things up.In that regard, I'm referring to mining and forest products and paperand, of course more recently, agriculture. In fact, the farmers inour District have just about run out of things to complain about andthat almost never happens. We too have had a lot of rain but it wasmuch needed. So, people's spirits are up and that has positiveimplications not only for morale and farm output but for implementspending and so forth. On top of what has happened to naturalresources, as I have reported before, the diversified economies in theTwin Cities and some of the other mid-size metropolitan areas havedone pretty well throughout most of this expansion. We recently hadmeetings not just with our directors but also with our advisorycouncil on small business, agriculture, and labor. And, based onthose meetings, I would say the general tenor is positive. It is notebullient; there certainly is not a great deal of confidence goingforward, but in general they are relatively satisfied with what ishappening at the moment. There are a couple of exceptions, both ofwhich are obvious: anybody whose business is related to defense isconcerned as are those in construction--although they are notconcerned about new home sales, I must add, which continue to runabove year-ago levels in many places in the District. Generally, Idon't think the District is going to continue to outperform thenational economy much longer. It is likely to perform much like thenational economy; that is, I think things are going to become a bitmore sluggish as we go ahead.Commenting very briefly on the national situation, I have a[unintelligible] sense that, as Tom Melzer and a couple of otherssuggested, we may be poised for some progress on inflation in terms ofdisinflation here. I say that in part because of the slow growth inmoney that we've had over an extended series of years now, but alsobecause in terms of anecdotes from people in the District I reallyhaven't had any reports of growing inflation pressures in at least ayear. Of course, the latest aggregate price statistics look a bitbetter. Now, the obvious kickers are the services sector and some of-17-7/2-3/90 -18-the things that Mike pointed out in his report about the[unintelligible] and so forth. Nevertheless, I think we may be closeto a point where we finally start to see some progress there. As faras real growth is concerned, I'm pretty comfortable with the Greenbookforecast or maybe even something a bit better. I think most of thefundamentals are in place for some acceleration of growth. But havingsaid that, I must say that the statistics for the last few months onemployment and consumer spending, and my impression of what ishappening with home prices, raise the yellow flag.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, our projections for GNP are prettyclose to the staff's; they are almost right on the button for thisyear, but they are a little lower next year than the staff isprojecting. As we see it, this seems to be pretty compatible with thekind of growth we've had in the aggregates recently and theGreenbook's assumption that we'll have the same degree of restraintover the forecast period. We would guess that the risk of error wouldbe on the down side and perhaps very much on the down side for thenext six months or so. I say that partly because there doesn't seemto be a real thrust in the economy anywhere right now, with theexception perhaps of exports, and also because of the sharpdeceleration in the aggregates. The staff memo did a good job ofeliminating a lot of the worries I had about the slowing in theaggregates, but as the staff admits--and, of course, we all know--thiscould be reflecting to some degree a slower growth in the economy thanwould be healthy. And we, like Bob Forrestal, Si Keehn, Tom Melzer,Gary Stern, and maybe some others, are more optimistic than the staffabout the degree of inflation that we will have, and we have felt thatway for some time. We think the staff is about right for this yearbecause of what is already in place for the first quarter, and thatputs us at 4-3/4 percent on the CPI for the year. But we're expectinga deceleration in 1991, down to the neighborhood of 3-3/4 percentmaybe, because of the drop in M2 growth in the second quarter and alsothe projection on the part of the staff that we will have a constantfederal funds rate over the forecast period. And, finally, we thinkthe credibility we will get on our anti-inflation policy, if in factwe do hold the federal funds rate steady over the next 18 months inthe face of rather sluggish real growth, really ought to have at leasta moderate [salutary] effect on the rate of inflation that we actuallyachieve. I was intrigued by Si Keehn's comments about "ponding" inhis District; we've had a little dry spell, Si, and I think we wouldbe happy with a little "puddling."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, on the national picture our viewis not very different from the staff's forecast. We see slightly morestrength for the rest of the year and about the same for 1991. Idon't quite share my friend Bob Black's and others' optimism oninflation. I continue to remain a little pessimistic there.With respect to the District, the economic recovery continuesbut its strength seems to have diminished in the last two months. Atthe May meeting I spoke about how, for the first time in three years,the recovery in the Eleventh District had time finally to spreadacross all sectors and all geographic regions in the District. A7/2-3/90definite slowdown has occurred recently, probably in response to theslower growth nationally. Our manufacturing industries are still out-performing the nation. We actually have slow-to-modest employmentgrowth, but the gains have been concentrated in chemicals and energy-related manufacturing. Electronic equipment, apparel, paper andseveral other sectors that had held up manufacturing strength haveslipped recently. Defense contractors, of course, have been cuttingback heavily. In spite of lower energy prices, drilling activity hascontinued to increase significantly and all the leading indicatorssuggest that this should continue for several months to come. Retailsales have softened and construction contracts have declined. Mostdisturbing, however, is the noticeable slowdown in the service-relatedsectors. This has been an area of persistently strong growth, but themost recent three-month period marks the weakest growth this group ofindustries has exhibited since a recovery began three years ago. Inspite of what I've been saying, for some strange reason businesssentiment seems to have improved a little lately, perhaps becausesteady slow growth in a stable, predictable environment has finallycome to be viewed as preferable to an uncertain stop-and-goenvironment. Nonetheless, the talk of credit shortages--and I'm notjust talking here about real estate nor just for the smallest firms--is becoming more widespread down our way. To keep [my report]balanced, I guess I should say that our directors are probably notquite as optimistic as I am.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, the good news is that the droughtis over as far as our District is concerned. We had "ponding" and"puddling" but the fact of the matter is that the farm sector stillremains the primary source of the strength in this rather slow-growingDistrict economy. With respect to the agricultural sector, the wheatcrop, which has been mentioned here already today, is in a sense[unintelligible]. Mother Nature plays tricks on the farmers as shedoes annually, I guess. But overall the wheat crop is projected to beat or near a record level. As a matter of fact, earlier today Ireceived a report that wheat in western Kansas had yielded 10 percentmore than it ever had before.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Better subtract the fraction of a bushelthat Wayne brought back and we lost!MR. GUFFEY. The fact of the matter is that some of the wheatcrop, which 30 days ago looked outstanding throughout most of ourDistrict, has been lost because of high winds and wet weather. Butoverall it apparently will come out very well. In addition, there hasbeen a delay in planting corn and the corn acreage will be down thisyear, but that is [offset] by the soybean crop because of the laterplanting date for that crop. Red meat prices for the farmers stillare very good and as a result the agricultural economy looks verystrong.With respect to the credit crunch that has been mentioned,with some diligence [in our search] we simply don't see it in our areaof the country. As a matter of fact, the complaint is that there isvery little loan demand and liquidity is very high in most of thesmall agricultural banks particularly, as well as in some of thebigger banks. Employment continues to grow throughout the District;-19-7/2-3/90in fact, in each of the metropolitan areas the unemployment rate islower than the national rate, and there is some strain on skilledlabor in the District. The District automobile manufacturing sectorremains in the doldrums. There is some continued modest improvementin the general aviation manufacturing area. As for construction, homebuilding is at a low level and there is very little commercialconstruction taking place because of the overhang that still exists inthe energy areas such as Denver, Oklahoma City, and Tulsa. Althoughthere is some [construction] in Kansas City and a little in Omaha, byand large it does not measure up to year-ago levels. In the energysector, the OPEC overproduction has driven down prices, as notedearlier today. However, the rig count in the District still remainsfairly stable and in fact is higher than a year ago. Overall, I wouldcharacterize the District as being in fairly good shape in most areas.I hear very few comments from people that I or my staff have been incontact with concerning the economy itself. People are pretty wellsatisfied, but one has to lay that against the fact that some of themsuffered rather dramatically in the 1980s, so they think currentconditions are pretty good.On the national level, we have no real divergence from whatwas presented in the Greenbook with the exception that in 1990 we'reabout 1/4 percentage point stronger [on GNP] than the Greenbook andinflation is roughly 1/4 percentage point more. We're back togetherin 1991, however. So, over the total horizon our forecast is notgreatly different than the one the Greenbook portrays.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, to start with, our ownforecast continues to be very, very similar to Mike's forecast both interms of GNP and inflation. There are some minor differences aroundthe edges but they are really quite small. But insofar as the kind ofbias [unintelligible] around the forecast is concerned, I associatemyself with the comments that Mr. Boehne made at the opening of thisdiscussion. And that is, if somebody put a gun to my head and said"You have to put a forecast down," that's the forecast I would putdown. But I don't think I'd have quite the same confidence in thatforecast that I would have had three or four months ago--again, forsome of the reasons that Ed Boehne mentioned. Anecdotally, there aresome aspects of the consensus forecast that look pretty good.Certainly, the impression I get is that the export sector still isquite strong, quite similar to Ted's forecast if not even a bitstronger in volume terms. Again from what people say, the capitalgoods sector seems to be hanging in there but it is not robust by anystretch of the imagination. One interesting thing that someonementioned to me just the other day--I don't know, Bob Parry, if youpicked this up--was that this was the first instance that thisindividual could remember of a domestic airline failing to exerciseoptions on Boeing 737s that they had had for three years. I get thesense that the capital goods sector is okay, but certainly not robust.The real estate sector is a tough call. Two or three thingsstrike me there: one is that I do get the sense that the second- andthird-level effects of the contraction of real estate are beginning toshow up a little more directly for derivative products. That's not byany means confined to the Northeast. On the other hand, having spenta lot of time over the past several weeks with both bankers and with-20-7/2-3/90my own examiners, some of whom I think are pretty darn good at thisreal estate stuff, the feeling I get is that while there is more badnews in the pipeline there isn't a sense of any kind of rout yet tocome. There may be pockets geographically or otherwise in which thatis true. But even in terms of what my own examiners tell me, drawingfrom the credit files and so forth, they see some things out therethat still worry them, but they do not see a collapse in real estatemarkets generally.On the other hand, for what it's worth, those same examinersare more concerned today than they were 6 or 12 months ago aboutanother round of LBO-related problems. This is stuff that they don'tfeel they know enough or are sure enough about to be able tosignificantly downgrade some of these [unintelligible] credits, butbased on their experience their comfort zone is lower. [They cannot]justify substantial changes in classifications but they do tell methat they are more concerned about some of the LBO-related loans thatare in there right now. So, there are some good aspects in that theydon't see, nor do I sense from the major banks, a further black holewith regard to the real estate situation, although in the case of someof the small banks and some of the regional banks in the Northeast Idon't think they would be quite as confident because thoseinstitutions have a much higher concentration in real estate loansthan big banks. In the minds of everybody I talk to who has a broad-based business concern or lending concern, the big question is theconsumer and what the consumer is thinking and going to do. I comeaway with an impression, not unlike what Gary Stern was saying, of sofar so good. But I have this nagging feeling that any kind of a shockcould knock consumer spending off in the wrong direction.Now, on the credit crunch issue more generally, I think weall have problems trying to rationalize [or to] quantify what we seemto see. I think that's partly because it is a financial shrinkagethat has many different aspects to it. Much of it is demand-sideoriented; some of it is supply-side oriented. But a lot of it is areaction of both supply and demand to excesses of the past. When youtry to put that all together, it's very hard to quantify; but Icontinue to think that there is something of consequence going on.Take the example that Joan Lovett referred to in her remarks about theChrysler matter a couple of weeks ago, where it was announced thatChrysler was being put on a credit watch list for its commercial paperratings and, just on the basis of the announcement alone, within threeor four business days Chrysler had drawn down its bank lines by almost$3-1/2 billion to replace commercial paper that it couldn't roll over.That was just on the basis of an announcement! Now, one of theinteresting things about that is that Chrysler had fully paid backuplines throughout the banking system. The bankers are saying to mepoint blank that if somebody comes in looking to draw on their linesand they don't have fully paid lines, forget it--the loans simplyaren't going to be made. I think that is symptomatic of this very,very cautious, and ultimately healthy, process of shrinkage andconsolidation that's going on. But any way you cut it, I think thereis clearly something there. Again, I go back to Mr. Boehne's comment.On the inflation front, my sense of the situation at themoment is that the so-called core inflation rate hasn't changed.Maybe it is poised to go down, but when I read articles like I read in-21-7/2-3/90this morning's paper about automobile price increases I have towonder. In that sector everything is--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible] your core inflation ispsychiatric--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. --identified with responding toproblems [by raising] prices. I don't think that quite tells me we'reout of the woods yet on the inflation side. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Well, the Fourth District is a little more likeSi Keehn's District than it is Ed Boehne's. There is not much of achange from the last time I reported. In terms of the manufacturingside, I would say we're more upbeat than the national counterpart,perhaps because we focused on capital spending and it turns out thatin real terms capital spending plans for most firms are runningincreases of between 5 and 10 percent, whereas the CommerceDepartment's [number] is running at 3-1/2 percent. Again, like Si'sDistrict, steel is relatively strong. I don't have a really goodexplanation for that. In carbon, they are looking for a pretty goodsecond half. And in stainless, a major firm in our area has veryclose to a record year in terms of its order book in the next twomonths. Also, a good portion of this is driven by a very strongexport sector in the District. The weakness, as you might suspect, isin retail sales and construction.In terms of the credit crunch issue, we have talked to oursmall bank advisory council and, of course, to all of the major banks.Small bankers report no change in their standards; they are worriedabout the regulators coming in. And these small banks are seeing moredeals come across now from S&Ls that have been closed; developers aremoving over and searching the banks. So, there are plenty of deals infront of them, but most of them aren't very good. In terms of largerbanks, we see rather flat to modest growth in loan demand--nothingspectacular. The one thing that I do sense in talking to mydirectors, who have been and remain very concerned about inflation--and it's very apparent more recently--is that there is some concernabout the economy. When I press them on their own firms, all of themare doing all right--some robust and some flat, but nobody's goingover the cliff. Their perception is that somebody else is going overthe cliff, but they don't know who at this point in time. So, thereis a greater degree of caution in the minds of the business communityin the District, it seems to me, than there was just last month.As far as the national outlook goes, we're a little strongerin terms of real growth than the Greenbook and a little lessoptimistic about reductions in inflation. I think the difficulttimes, looking at what has happened to money, are making some sort ofsense out of that. Staff [unintelligible] but the confidence levelaround the forecast of velocity leaves me a little cold as well. Theproblem with retail sales is also a bit of a concern. I don't like tobe much of a fine tuner; it has been going on for a time so I'mcomfortable watching things for a while.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.-22-7/2-3/90MR. ANGELL. I was a little struck, Jerry, when you said thatwe could knock consumer spending off in the wrong direction; I wasrather startled by that. That's a new worry, because I presume youmeant it might be knocked down. And, of course, if it is knocked downthat means the saving rate is higher, and it means we would be gettingthis long-awaited adjustment in household behavior. I think it's anadjustment that comes quite naturally, given what has been showing upin the housing sector. It's quite clear that during most of thepost-World War II economy, American households one-by-one went frombetter to worse [unintelligible]. The last old word was that the moremoney you borrowed to buy a house, the more money you made; and theonly sad thing was that you didn't buy a bigger house. Of course,farmers learned that if you borrowed money to buy land or machinery,you made more money; and the oil people learned that if you borrowedmore money to drill holes in the ground, you made more money.One-by-one all of these notions have bit the dust; housing in a senseis the last one. So, I'm somewhat optimistic that the U.S. savingrate will stay at the 6 percent level, whereas the staff isforecasting that it will fall back to 5-1/4 percent. So in this newenvironment of opportunity, we get just what we've been asking for fora long time. It does appear that what everybody said--that realinterest rates do not determine savings rates--was wrong, like mosteverything else we were taught. And it does appear that we're makingsome real progress.Now, my forecast is somewhat weaker on nominal and real GNPthan the staff's, but not as much as you would think, given my 6percent saving rate, because I do anticipate that the export sector isgoing to continue [to support domestic output]. I have a great deal[unintelligible] and if we have more capacity opportunities and wehave rather low profit margins in the domestic sector I think oureconomy is responding in rather an amazing way. I just note thathardly anyone talks about the fact that the trade deficit and thecurrent account deficit now are projected to be less than half of whatthey were at the highest point. And it does seem quite likely now,from my perspective of course, that we're going to move into abalance-of-trade surplus position before my term is over. So it justlooks to me as if--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. When is your term over?MR. ANGELL. It's a secret! I know this sounds toooptimistic for most of you but I'll add to it by joining in with SiKeehn, Tom Melzer, Gary Stern, and Bob Black. I also believe that1991 is the year that we will get the rather dramatic move oninflation numbers. The way the numbers are set I think the year-over-year CPI is not going to change much from the present 4.2 to 4.4percent level until about next January. And then all of a sudden Ithink we're going to be seeing 3 percent numbers. But you betterdiscount that, because I've been saying that the last two years!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Well, I'm also in general agreement with theGreenbook except that for 1991 I'm not quite as optimistic about therate of growth, given the interest rate assumptions. I don't think wehave much room to maneuver. I think we're walking along a path that'srather close to the edge--if not the edge of the cliff, at least the-23-7/2-3/90edge of the ditch. And I believe that the downside risk is greaterthan the upside risk, maybe significantly greater. I sense that thisreal estate malaise is spreading. It's not contained; it's creepingdown the East Coast; we have it right here on the Potomac. And Ithink that's a matter of serious concern. The loan demand that hasbeen cited as being relatively soft is a reflection of attitudes andconfidence--not only individual confidence but business confidence aswell. I think the publicity about taxes and the savings and loan[bail-out] costs and the debt problems of Trump and RJR and the wholejunk bond story and all the other stories that are out there in thepress can further depress the markets. Personal consumptionexpenditures are not exuberant by any means, and in a consumer-driveneconomy that doesn't spell much of an increase in growth to me. Thesaving rate is more likely to stay at 6 percent or even go higherbecause I think consumers are far more cautious than the Greenbookforecast would indicate. So, I think these psychological factors, ifwe did happen to slip into a recession for a couple of months, wouldaccelerate the downhill slide. The watch words ought to be "be alertand be cautious."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, in the brief time that I've beenon this Committee I can't remember an intermeeting period where itseems to me that less has changed. I almost have the sense that sinceMay 15th we've been in a kind of suspended animation, with nostartling new strengths or weaknesses showing up. Maybe the mostimportant news is what didn't happen. Inflation was scary in thefirst quarter; we all expected and hoped that it would slow, andfortunately it has done that. So far the credit crunch hasn't eatenus alive. It still could, I suppose, but usually these things have away of either gaining momentum or losing momentum. My sense is--and Ihope it's correct--that it is not gaining momentum. Short term, Ihave some of the same concerns that Governor LaWare noted in the sensethat a couple of things that are going on are unavoidable. One is inthe area of construction. Commercial construction, housing--realestate generally--has probably not seen the bottom yet; and I worryabout whether it could drag other things along with it excessively.The automobile industry has been borrowing from the future for sometime and that's going to catch up with them sooner or later. And Imust say that the notion of answering slow demand with rising pricesstrikes me as bizarre, and that's what they have just done. It'sclear that things are going to change if we have been in a period ofsuspended animation; maybe no one will agree that we have. Butshortly we will know much more than we know so far about the fiscaloutlook. For better or worse, that's going to become clear quitesoon. And perhaps as the next year develops, we're going to know muchmore about the impact of foreign events on our economy. They promiseto be profound, perhaps more so than they have been in the past. Butit seems to me that, for now at least, we can feel pretty good aboutthe fact that our strategy continues to look like it's working andthat we are on track: that we largely have the conditions that we hadhoped to get, and that there is a reasonable prospect that the resultsflowing from that will be the ones that we had hoped for. So for themoment, I feel that the thing to do is to sit tight and watch closely.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.-24-7/2-3/90MR. MULLINS. I really don't have much to add to theextensive review given by the presidents and my fellow governors.When I look at the data, it's clear to me that the economy is weakerthan was projected earlier, but there are no compelling signs that weare headed for a recession. There are some positive signs, perhaps,on the inflation front but mostly in terms of breathing a sigh ofrelief that the early numbers for the year were transitory. I thinkone would have to look really hard to see strong evidence of anybreakout on the down side. I would argue that there is greater riskon the down side. The consumer risk has been talked about. It istrue that the retail sales numbers were only for one month, but theywere accompanied by downward revisions for March and April, and thebreadth of that retail sales report was not too encouraging since allcategories fell except one. Pretty soon we will know whether we willget the bounceback we are hoping for or not. I tend to agree withGovernor LaWare, though, that there are a lot of bad vibes comingacross to consumers through the tube and through their home prices.And the confidence survey shows confidence to be a little low,although there doesn't seem to be any hard evidence that there's anykind of dive.I also worry a little about the services sector. We have hadno real growth in employment in that sector, at least recently. Andit seems to me that sooner or later they're going to have to deal withtheir cost structure. Inventories, the way I look at the data, showno real evidence of impending recession; the same is true for capitalgoods. Construction is obviously not in great shape. Exports havebeen really helpful. I wonder about the buoyancy of western Europe.The industrial production numbers of Germany have not seemed to me tobe all that encouraging. On the inflation side, again, I don't seeany major changes. I just went back and looked at a whole series ofcommodity prices a year ago versus now and it looks like there'snothing to be upset about there on the up side, and there may be someencouragement on the down side. Lumber is way up due to the spottedowl [unintelligible]. Scrap steel was higher than I expected, perhapshaving to do with the auto companies thinking about strikes coming upand so forth. The one factor, which has been discussed here a little,that I find puzzling and concerning is the slow growth in monetaryaggregates--not only M2 and M3, but also demand deposits, whichpresumably are mostly corporate demand deposits. When you look at aperiod in which all the aggregates have been growing more slowly thanprojected and add to that the notion of some sort of credit crunchgoing on, it's conceivable that monetary conditions are implicitlytighter than intended or projected. Over time that's going to behelpful on inflation but perhaps [adds] some risk to growth in theeconomy. So, I wonder about the implications of that. And while Igenerally would not disagree with the Greenbook, I guess that's whatmakes me believe that if there is a risk, it tends to be more on thedown side than the up side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I have a couple of comments. First of all, I doagree with Mike and the Greenbook that the economy is sluggish. Infact, I would even use the word "weak" to describe some sectors. I'mpleased to see some of the estimates getting down more in myneighborhood, which is a very low number for economic growth this year-25-7/2-3/90and no growth next year. Maybe I'll have some company for next yearas well.I will note just a couple of concerns that I have. Autoshave been mentioned quite a bit, and I too was surprised by theannouncement in today's Wall Street Journal about price hikes. Ichecked with two friends of mine, including one who isand his explanation was that theyadded on to the sticker so they can give bigger incentives. I'm not amarketing person, so you can explain to me later whether that makessense. It still has a negative impact as far as the public isconcerned. And I don't think it's too bright, especially when some ofthese same people have been telling me for some time that there hasbeen a problem with sticker shock, particularly in parts of thecountry where income levels are a lot lower than they are aroundWashington. So, that's a problem. Also, the consumer debt load is agrowing problem and the auto companies have been having troublegetting some of the would-be buyers qualified to get loans even bytheir own captive finance companies. You would think that they wouldbend over backwards to get the sale made, but I think that sayssomething. On the credit availability side, I picked up some commentsthat some of the dealers themselves have been kicked out of commercialbanks for their floor planning. So, credit availability is enteringinto autos in that way rather than on the individual consumer side. Italked with people at has beenexpected to fill this void by providing funds for floor planning; butbecause of their own problems, they're not always able to do that.And a growing number of car dealers are having financial difficulties,to the point of going bankrupt. The number of dealers going bankruptin the first 6 months of this year is equal to the number that wentinto bankruptcy in 1987 and 1988 combined and is 50 percent above thenumber that went bankrupt in all of 1989. So, I think this is gettingto be a serious problem and it [unintelligible] in a couple of ways.One is that they are not going to be around to make sales; the secondis that they're unwilling to come up with a good order stream becausethey're just so stretched themselves that they cannot afford to carrydecent-sized inventories. Everything I heard I don't view as atemporary phenomenon--something that's going to go away in the nextcouple of months, unfortunately. Then, of course, the auto makershave the UAW to negotiate with. I can't get anybody to admit, by theway, that they're adding to production in order to stockpile; thatjust does not seem to come through. In fact, what I hear more is thatthey're having a hard time getting enough orders from dealers to dotheir build out just so they can handle the production for which theyalready had ordered parts and supplies.Another area I want to say a few words about is housing. Iprobably deal with less-than-spectacular builders, but I don't thinkthe problems are all going to be resolved in a hurry--particularly insmaller towns. I don't believe that it is easy just to walk out andfind alternative sources of funds. Even though it would be nice toassume that, that doesn't seem to be the case. A personjust called me this morning from California with another whole raftof stories about small and medium-size builders who are havingproblems getting financing. In some cases they are builders ofsingle-family homes; others are builders of small apartments--10 to 12unit apartments, not the big ones by developers who have been engagingin all sorts of wild extremes. I would like to think that housing-26-7/2-3/90starts have bottomed out, Mike, but I'm not necessarily convinced thatthat's the case.Finally, on inventories, even though the aggregate numbersmay look pretty good, there are growing examples of firms in theretailing industry, and to some extent in manufacturing, whoseinventories are creeping up above where they would like to have them.So, these are the areas that I'm most concerned about at the moment.In looking ahead for 1991, my problem is that I can't see what's goingto give this rather sad-sack situation a boost and turn it around,particularly with the talk about the tax hike. I had the TV onyesterday and it seemed to me that every program--every one of these"Face the Nation" kinds of shows--was going into this subject of thetax hike and President Bush breaking his pledge of no new taxes. Youwould have to be deaf and a low-grade moron to have missed this. AndI think that is going to have a real impact going forward.On inflation psychology, I talked to the head of a big papercompany and I'll just tell you what he said because I remember a yearor year and a half ago paper was one of the industries that we worriedabout having shortages of capacity and that were passing out pricehikes with abandon. Anyway, he said that they have ample to excesscapacity at the moment and that there's nothing in the way of priceincreases either in the works now or on the horizon. Many prices ofthis particular producer are actually well below where they were ayear ago and at the moment some prices are still declining. He thinksthe rest of 1990 and 1991 should be [a period] of price stability fortheir whole industry, not just for his company. There has been newcapacity added in the last year, year and a half, and there is goingto be more coming on all the way through 1991 which, of course, willmake it still tougher just to pass through any higher costs. From hispoint of view inflation is not a big problem, and he doesn't hearother business people that he speaks with mentioning inflation as abig problem either. He thinks the so-called inflation psychology ismuch more evident in the financial community than in the manufacturingarena. And I think he's probably right. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that concludes the go-around, butI think we have time, as the last item on this evening's agenda, forDon Kohn to at least discuss the longer-term ranges for monetarypolicy. Then we will call it an evening. Remember, we're invited tothe British Embassy for cocktails, I believe at 7:30 p.m., and dinnerthereafter. Don.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be referring totables in the Bluebook as I go along. [Statement--see Appendix.][Meeting recessed]-27-7/2-3/90July 3, 1990--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We left off yesterday with thecompletion of Don Kohn's presentation on the long-term ranges and weare now open to questions.MR. PARRY. The growth rates for M2 and M3 in 1990 and 1991,particularly 1991, assume that the special factors that impacted 1990will persist in 1991. Is that correct, particularly with regard toM3?MR. KOHN. Yes, especially with regard to M3. We areassuming that the thrifts continue to shrink in 1991 and shrink atclose to the rate that they did in 1990, or a little less. Themarginally solvent ones will remain under pressure and there areenough assets and liabilities out there in the conservator thrifts tokeep the RTC going at a pretty good clip for the next six quarters atleast. So, we built in a continuing shrinkage of the thrift industryand [continuing] activity of the RTC. We built in moderate growth inbank credit--about 6-1/2 to 7 percent--which would be a slight pickupfrom now. So, we have diminishing effects relative to the secondquarter when we had no growth in M2 and M3. We don't have that builtin; we have that moving down or decreasing over time. But there arestill some effects, yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no other questions, I wouldlike the members now to address the issue of the 1990 ranges--whetherthey should be the current ones or perhaps the alternate ranges--and Ialso would appreciate having the members' views on the 1991 rangeswith respect to M2, M3, and debt. We will have to vote separately onthe two sets of ranges, but I think it would be useful in thisdiscussion around the table for the members to combine both years.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, first of all, I would like tocompliment the staff on the excellent Bluebook. It's always good, ofcourse, but the provision of the extensive longer-term alternativeswas very helpful. Before I turn to the longer-term ranges, let me saya few words about the alternative [strategies] that were set out inthe Bluebook. As I look at those, the first two scenarios are theonly ones that seem consistent with our policy of trying to push downinflation; the third does not really accomplish our objective. Thefirst scenario seems to me to be representative of the policy ofgradualism that we have been following. I certainly endorse thatpolicy; it is a policy that we ought to continue. It is a policy thatis very frustrating in the sense that it does not produce very quickresults, but I think we need to accept that anyway. It seems to methat a more aggressive policy at this time really would jeopardize theachievement of our long-term goal of price stability. One could argueabout the credibility associated with a more aggressive stance, butI'm not convinced that that's a practical solution. I think we oughtto be very pleased essentially with where we are with respect topolicy. We obviously would like to have had [better] results in termsof the inflation numbers, but that will come if we exercise patience.I think we've done very well considering the posture of fiscal policyover this time.With that as a preamble on where I'm coming from, let me turnto the ranges. I would favor keeping the range for M2 at its present-28-7/2-3/90 -29-level of 3 to 7 percent for 1990. Tampering with it six months intothe year would reflect a degree of precision that we don't reallyhave. There's a lot of uncertainty surrounding M2, and I think thatany potential shortfall for 1990 can be explained when you testify.Now, with respect to M2 for 1991, I realize that as a signal effectwe've had a tradition of generally lowering the range to indicate ourcontinued attention to inflation. But with all of the uncertaintysurrounding velocity and the state of M2, I would leave that rangealone. Also, we have projections from the staff that it may grow morequickly anyway. So, I don't think it would be good to change the M2range either for this year or for 1991; I would keep it at 3 to 7percent. I would keep the M3 range the same in 1990 as well. Anargument can be made to reduce that range for 1991; but again, givenall of the uncertainty surrounding the S&L situation and velocity andall the things that Don indicated, I think the argument is strongerfor keeping the range for M3 the same. So, I would not change theranges either in 1990 or 1991 for either M2 or M3; nor would I changedebt.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. I concur, Mr. Chairman, with Bob Forrestal'sstatement about how useful these longer-run [Bluebook] simulations arebecause I like to look at monetary policy from a particularly long-runviewpoint. As I studied these, I found myself thinking about the NealResolution. If we can assume hypothetically--I'm sure it's purelyhypothetical--that the Neal Resolution would pass Congress this year,we would be mandated to bring inflation down to zero by the year 1995,the last year shown in the simulations. Since we supported thisresolution publicly in part of the testimony [presented by] many ofus, the deceleration shown in the simulations in strategy II wouldseem to be the very least that we ought to be aiming for over the longrun. Two percent is certainly not zero, but it's considerably closerthan the 3-1/4 percent that we would have in the baseline simulation.And the simulations for strategy II do suggest that GNP growth wouldbe very modest over this extended period of time in order to getinflation down to the 2 percent level over the five-year period. Butas we are well aware, there are various kinds of models and theBoard's model is not a particularly forward-looking model. I thinkone that took more consideration of the rational expectations [theory]might show that there would be a [higher] rate of real growthconsistent with the progress against inflation that is shown instrategy II. In any case, the inflation rate in strategy II seems tome to be the minimum progress that would be consistent with our statedobjectives. To help achieve this minimum progress--and I would hopewe could do even better although I'm doubtful about that--I think weought to reduce the ranges for M2 steadily over this entire period oftime, with the goal of eventually bringing them down to 2-1/2 or 3percent no later than 1995. I had this sort of thinking in mind whenI argued--I felt very persuasively but later found out veryunconvincingly--in February that we ought to go to 2-1/2 to 6-1/2percent for 1990. So, I would like to see us do that, and we canexplain it on the basis of its behavior. There is some risk, Isuppose, that some might think that was a tightening move, which Iwould not consider it to be. In any event, I do feel very strongly,whatever we do with the 1990 ranges, that we ought to cut them for1991--in the case of M2, to 2 to 6 percent. I think the adoption ofsuch a range would send the public a pretty clear signal that we have7/2-3/90a continued firm commitment to our anti-inflationary strategy. And itmay be especially helpful to send this signal right now because of therecent fiscal developments and the likelihood that we're going to getadded political pressure to ease policy aggressively if anythingsignificant comes out of this. Now, if we did reduce the M2 ranges,it obviously makes sense to lower the M3 ranges too, although I reallydon't think that does a lot for us operationally. I'm prettysympathetic to Governor Angell's suggestion that we eliminate M3. ButI do think the staff produced a good memo that suggests that there issome marginal value in maintaining it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Yes. Even though I proposed eliminating M3, andI hold that position as the proper policy, I do not believe this isthe right time to make that move. I think it would signal somethingwe don't want to signal or to deal with at this time. In regard tothe 1990 ranges, I wish to reaffirm the ranges adopted previously. Ibelieve it's better for us to look at the target ranges as targetsthat we're planning to hit, based upon the assumptions we had at thebeginning of the year, and then explain why we didn't hit them than itis for us to move the targets to hit the growth path. So, I am not--and never have been before--very open to changing at mid-year. On the1991 ranges, I agree with Bob Black that strategy II is the onlyalternative that's consistent with our stated objectives. Frankly, Iwonder why I wasn't able to see a year ago that M2 growth might not belarger. But I really anticipated a somewhat weaker economy this yearthan we really ended up with, and my guess was that we might need the3 to 7 percent for this year. But it seems to me that the behavior ofhouseholds has changed and that many households, for example, findthat they probably want to hold smaller balances and hold less non-tax-exempt interest-rate debt. And as the consumer saving rate hasrisen, that in a way brings with it a desire to hold a lower balancelargely because of consumers' intolerance for debt, which I thinkfinally has caught up. It does seem to me also that there may beother behavioral changes in people's willingness to hold M2. So Ibelieve it's quite consistent to choose alternative I and alternativeII and to choose for 1991 2 to 6 percent for M2. Now, I would alsochoose 2 to 6 percent for M3 on the basis that I have a commitment toonly lower these ranges and never to raise them. And even though wemay think that 0 to 4 percent makes sense for M3 for alternative IIfor 1991, I would hate to see us chase it down to that aberration andthen end up moving it back. So, I prefer to leave the consistency of2 to 6 percent for both M2 and M3. I recognize that there could be ascenario developed in which M2's growth path in 1991 might push theupper boundary of that 2 to 6 percent; that kind of risk is there.I'm very, very pleased, Mr. Chairman, that we've been able to get M2growth down from those 9-1/2 percent [rates] that we had in 1985 and1986 and to squeeze that M2 growth down without ever having themonetary shock that all of our critics thought we were producing.We're looking at four-year average growth of M2 of 5 percent, three-year average growth of M2 of 4-1/2 percent, two-year growth of M2 ofabout 4.2 percent, and one-year growth, I suppose, of less than 5percent right now. So, we have the one-year, two-year, three-year,and four-year all there together and we're going to be able to get itto the 2 to 6 percent range without a monetary shock. It's justalmost an ideal situation. On the debt, I'd use 5 to 9 percent.-30-7/2-3/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Well, I agree with everything that PresidentForrestal, President Black, and Governor Angell have said. I thinkthat we are just about where we want to be, perhaps in the aggregatesas well as in the real economy. There is just an awful large numberof unknowns out there with respect to the real economy, the behaviorof velocity, and what is going on in financial markets. From a policyperspective, I come out with a somewhat different result, but it'slargely a matter of how one presents these things. I agree thatstrategies I and II are the only relevant choices, given what we needto accomplish. This really is a matter of velocity. In terms of howone presents this in testimony to the [Congressional] Committees andhow it's read in the broader financial public community, there is somevalue to indicating that we're willing to change targets as velocitychanges and to indicating that these [ranges] do not have [thecertainty] of a physical science by a long shot. It makes it easierwhen we do have a problem to have indicated beforehand that we madethese adjustments because of changes in velocity. Generally I alsothink that we should try to have targets that are somewhere in themiddle of the range that we adopt rather than going up [to Congress]and extensively explaining that we're not going to be in the range butthat's because of all of these [reasons]. I can see arguments on bothsides of that, but that would be my preference. Given that and giventhe slight change in or flat velocity between 1990 and 1991, I wouldbe in favor of the staff's alternative shown on page 17 [of theBluebook] for both 1990 and 1991. Because we would be making asubstantial change this year, I think that would require a change nextyear given that we expect a more normal pattern of economic growth inrelation to velocity. Having said that, I would not be uncomfortablewith--but I'm very worried about how to fine tune this image for1990--changing, say, to an M2 range of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent andwhatever corresponding M3 range would be involved and then going tothese ranges for 1991. But just as a matter of presentation, I'dprefer that we go up [to Congress] now and explain that there havebeen these changes and explain what our longer-term expectations areand how the monetary targets have to be adjusted for changes invelocity. So, that's the direction I would take.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron, what about debt?MR. SYRON. On debt, I'm comfortable with 5 to 9 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, according to our projections, thepresent 3 to 7 percent range seems likely to accommodate theuncertainty about M2 over the remainder of this year, although it'slikely to end up toward the bottom part of that range. Therefore, Irecommend that we reaffirm our M2 target for 1990. For 1991, at leastbased upon our projections, I would recommend a 1/2 point reduction inthe M2 target, but I certainly wouldn't have any problem if we reducedit a full point to 2 to 6 percent. On the basis of our projections a[reduction of] 1/2 point would accommodate the growth of M2 that wewould see and put M2 exactly in the middle [of that lower range].With regard to M3, the special factors that we've seen probably willcontinue to depress M3 in the second half of the year. And, ofcourse, that's going to place the aggregate well below the current-31-7/2-3/90range in December. But I prefer to retain the present M3 range for1990 and just explain to the [Congressional] Committee that there aresome very special factors--and uncertainty as to how long they'regoing to last as well--that may cause it to end up below the lowerend. For 1991, I would suggest a reduction of 1 percentage point inthe M3 range. Again, that would be consistent with the forecast of M3that we have for 1991. I must admit, though, that the uncertaintiesassociated with M3 are so great that my confidence in that range orthe range that is in the alternative in the Bluebook is not very high.With regard to debt, 5 to 9 percent in 1990 and 4 to 8 percent in 1991would be appropriate in my view.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Where I start on all this, Mr. Chairman, is withthe M2 growth rates that Governor Angell enumerated. We are well intoour fourth year of moderate growth in that aggregate and I think it'simportant that we sustain that kind of performance. It's importantprincipally because that's what is going to get us to our long-runobjectives and to the kind of overall economic performance that wewant to achieve in the long run. So having said that, I think weshould lower the ranges for 1991, consistent with the alternativesspecified here. I would apply that to all the variables although, asI said before, M2 is the one that I at least focus on principally. Ithink it's important that we consolidate what we have accomplishedover the past several years, and in my judgment that's the kind ofrange that will help us do that. With regard to 1990, the currentyear, I feel a little less strongly about what we ought to do with theranges. Despite some of the mysteries surrounding what has happenedto M2 [and M3] recently, it seems to me that we have enoughinformation with regard to the thrift contraction and so forth that itprobably does make sense to lower the ranges for 1990 as well. That'swhere I would come out with regard to that issue. As I think Donmentioned yesterday, and certainly we're all aware of it, if we wereto get some meaningful budget package and a meaningful shift in fiscalpolicy--and that's a big "if"--we might want to reexamine all this. Icertainly wouldn't prejudge where we would come out were that tohappen; that's going to depend on an awful lot of things, includingprogress toward our objective and what's happening to market rates andbank offering rates, and the list goes on and on. So, at this point Ithink we just have to put that issue aside and be prepared to dealwith it if and when it becomes appropriate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So you would reaffirm the 1990 ranges?MR. STERN. No, I would lower those because I think we haveenough information to make the case that that's the sensible thing todo.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So you'd have 2 to 6 percent in bothyears, then?MR. STERN. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What about M3?MR. STERN. I'd lower that as well.-32-7/2-3/90 -33-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. To the 0 to 4 percent?MR. STERN. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd like to backtrack just a minute andre-ask the question that [Don Kohn] raised relative to this issue.Whether or not we can forecast quarter-by-quarter what the level ofRTC resolutions will be, I feel uncomfortable arguing that the[anticipated trends of] the thrift changes alter our ranges. If infact we knew about it and were able to make that judgment at thebeginning of the year, then it can't be the thrift [developments] perse that create the [deviations from] our target.MR. STERN. Well, I have two reactions. One is that I don'tthink we felt that we knew the magnitude of the thrift [effects] withany precision. But I don't think it's just the question of thethrifts. The year is half over, so in some sense we have the 3-1/2percent or so growth of M2 behind us for six months. We're looking atrelatively modest projections for M2 growth for the third quarter aswell. Those may turn out to be wrong, admittedly; but if they are inthe ballpark, we have pretty modest growth for about 3/4 of the yearand that's a fair amount of information it seems to me.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me tell you the argument wewould get up on the Hill. We're supposed to run monetary policy, atleast in theory, on the basis of the targets that we set. If we settargets on the basis of the monetary policy that we run, they willargue that we have it backwards. Adjusting [the ranges] because ofthe fact that the money supply is veering off our targets is not anacceptable view up there. That's the reason I feel uncomfortable withthis form of explanation. If there's a proved [or] partly anticipatedstructural change, then that's a valid statement. But I don't knowhow we can argue that because, in fact, the degree of [thrift]resolutions going on is not all that different from what we weretelling the Congress they were going to be. It's just that the RTCdidn't even do it for a while and finally they are trying to catch upat this particular stage.MR. STERN. Well, I guess I can't judge the degree ofprecision with which Congress views this [target-setting]. I'vealways viewed it as clearly having a wide range of uncertainty.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, we can also raise some seriousquestions about the targets themselves; but I'm just talking about theissue of what's in the law and how we handle it. I hate to interruptat this stage, but I need to ask the question of Don: How do we handlethis?MR. KOHN. Well, I can't tell you exactly what we wereassuming for thrift resolutions in the face of the decline in thriftassets last February. I'm sure that the staff was not assuming asmuch as we got in the second quarter. But I think maybe the morefundamental point here is that, whatever our assumptions were, we havenever tried to set monetary targets in a period in which thedepository institutions system was shrinking the way it is now. Thisis unprecedented. I agree with your point and Governor Mullins' pointthat we knew something was going on; we knew things were going tohappen. I hope I'm not being too defensive if I say that in this7/2-3/90situation it's very difficult to judge how the whole thing is going toplay out. One can easily get surprised and have it then seen as moreof a velocity shift or a structural shift rather than a violation ofthe underlying policy. But there is some of the other too becausewe've had very weak bank credit growth; some of that may be arestraint on the economy, and one can't excuse that altogether. So,there is a mixture, I think, and it's not easy to sort out.MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, if I can follow-up: In thinkingback to where we were when putting together the flow-of-fundsprojection at the beginning of the year, our focus was very much onour view that the thrift industry was going to contract and that thatwould result in some disruption of the mortgage market. We were verymuch concerned about who would pick up the mortgages. We anticipatedthat banks would pick up many of the liabilities the thrifts weregiving up. I think we were sort of right in our analysis of themortgage market effects of the thrift institution change, but wedidn't anticipate the weakening in bank credit. And at that time wedidn't anticipate all of the hits on bank capital that would arise asreal estate loans were recognized to be less valuable and as theseother events occurred, especially in New England, that affected bankcapital and the growth of bank assets. That was another surprise. Sowe've had some significant surprises relative to what we were thinkingon the supply side of the credit market and at depository institutionsin particular.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me play Senator Foghorn or whomever.MS. SEGER. Is he in the Senate?MR. ANGELL. I doubt you'd be very successful. "Fedspeak" istoo much a part of you!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're right. The argument will be madethat that is precisely what the targets are for. In the event thatthe economy is weakening and money supply slows, the expectation up onthe Hill is that the Fed would then ease to push them back [on track].MR. PRELL. But the economy is roughly on the track that wecharted at the beginning of the year. The central tendency of theforecasts at this point looks very similar to what we had, except thatthe inflation rate is a little higher. Debt is on target, around themiddle of its range, and I think that's what we indicated. In a senseit's this depository element, which is so important for the monetaryaggregates, that has been disturbed.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What you're saying is that it was mis-estimated with respect to things on which we had no historicalexperience?MR. PRELL. Right, so I think there's a rationale--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh! Now, that's more like it. It's gotto be something on which there was a judgment about how markets wouldbehave under certain structural changes--not economic changes, not thebusiness cycle. We took a shot at it; we didn't quite hit it; and weare readjusting. That's a credible argument.-34-7/2-3/90MR. PRELL. Also, the Committee should have to decide what itis trying to communicate [via] the monetary aggregates. Are theycloser to ultimate objectives for your purpose in policymaking or arethey just instruments? In a sense it's as if you were shooting at themoon; you set your direction initially and then found you were offtarget. It seems to me completely reasonable to say you adjusted yourinstruments rather than shoot past the moon and then explain later whyyou missed. That may be an exaggeration of the differences here inthe way one can view it, but I think you have to decide just howimportant the monetary aggregates are per se as a representation ofyour policy.MR. HOSKINS. Don, I think you mentioned the other day thatwe did mid-year adjustments twice before. Do you remember in whatkinds of circumstances and for what rationales?MR. KOHN. Well, I think they were both M1 adjustments; theM1 ranges were increased [because] we had velocity surprises. Theyhappened to be in the direction of increases rather than decreases.MR. BLACK. Which were easy to explain to Congress at thetime--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. For 1990, I would keep M2 and debt the same, butI would make a technical adjustment on M3. The rationale for keepingM2 and debt the same is that we are fundamentally on target, thatthere are uncertainties, but the ranges that we have, with a 4-pointspread, are wide enough to accommodate that. I think that conveys amessage that we are fundamentally happy with the basic thrust ofpolicy. M3 I would adjust technically, largely for the argument thatwas just given. We have a target for M3 that we almost surely cannothit because we mis-estimated what it ought to be at the beginning ofthe year. We mis-estimated these deposit flows and I think we oughtsimply to face up to it and make that adjustment. So, I would go witha 0 to 4 percent range for M3 in 1990.For 1991, I think it is important to continue on this longer-run track of lowering the aggregates, conveying the notion that we areserious about working inflation down. I would lower the ranges for M2and debt by 1/2 percentage point so that we would end up with 2-1/2 to6-1/2 percent for M2 and 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for debt. I wouldkeep M3 the same, 0 to 4 percent, on grounds that we made a technicaladjustment now and we ought to wait and see whether that's accurate.If we have to adjust it again, we have to adjust it again.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to join thosewho start from the premise that strategy II on the long run--the onelabeled "tighter" [in the Bluebook]--is consistent with our objective.I also would join those who have indicated that where we are today isabout where we want to be and about where we had projected in thepast. I think it's rather remarkable. With that background, I wouldprefer to take the opportunity that I think is now available toratchet down M2, simply because over the long term 6 percent growth inM2 is the maximum growth that we can sustain and still achieve the-35-7/2-3/90objectives that we're looking for. As a result, I would ratchet downM2 by 1 percentage point on both the top and the bottom for both 1990and 1991, simply taking advantage of the window that seems to me to beavailable. With regard to M3, there's some debate as to whether ornot we should keep M3. There are those who have spoken on that in thepast--particularly Governor Angell, who says that he would not pursuehis feeling about doing away with M3. I would want to keep M3. Butas has been indicated in the discussions before by the staff andothers, it seems that M3 needs to be adjusted because of theuncertainties that have occurred. I don't like the proposal by thestaff of a 0 to 4 percent range; I don't like the 0. As a result, Iwould like to see an adjustment to a 1 to 5 percent range for M3 and Iwould maintain debt at 5 to 9 percent. I would do both of thoseadjustments, to M2 and M3, now rather than later.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Debt?MR. GUFFEY. Debt at 5 to 9 percent.MR. ANGELL. Both years?MR. GUFFEY. Both years.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I'm persuaded that to go tostrategy II may accelerate us a little toward that ditch I was talkingabout yesterday. So, I would rather stay with strategy I. Consistentwith that, I would like to keep the range of 3 to 7 percent for M2 for1990 but reduce it to 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent for 1991. I agree withPresident Boehne that we can make a rational and credible argument fora reduction in the M3 range and we should do it now. I don't get sodisturbed by 0 because I don't consider it nothing; I just consider it[another] point on a range. So far as debt is concerned, the 5 to 9percent for 1990 is acceptable, but I would move it down to 4-1/2 to8-1/2 percent for 1991.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. For M3 in 1991, 0 to 4 percent?MR. LAWARE. Yes, sorry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I have a couple of general thoughts on this. Iwould say first of all, in terms of long-run strategies, that I wouldbe in favor of strategy II. Generally, I think there is a lot moreinformational value in the ranges if we gear them to what we believelong-term trends are. In other words, I get very concerned about[moving around] these ranges over time. Given where we are and wherewe're headed, there is very much the prospect of ratcheting theseranges down at some point to accommodate some short-term velocitydevelopment and then having to bump them back up. And I think thatbecomes very confusing. Personally, I like to think of these rangesmuch as Bob Black does--in terms of where we want them to be in along-term sense--and I'd move them gradually toward that. I guessthat view leads to two points: (1) with respect to problems in thecurrent year, I would [allow actual growth outside] the ranges andexplain that and not reset them; and (2) as to the future year,7/2-3/90 -37-particularly with something like M3 which I think has limited valueanyway, I would set a range that's reasonable in the context of whatwe think the long-term trends are, knowing full well that actualgrowth probably will miss it. I'd telegraph that right up front andindicate that we are going to be putting less weight on it for thatreason.The other point I would make is that while I'm in favor ofstrategy II, I don't think we have all that far to go. If you takethe number Bob Black threw out--around 3 percent--as what we mightwant to get in terms of M2 growth, that would assume roughly 3 percentpotential growth in the economy, with roughly 0 percent velocity.Taking that as the center point of the range, that means we have thepotential of eventually getting down to 1 to 5 percent on the range.Therefore, we'd be taking a pretty big bite out of what we have leftif we ratchet the ranges down a full percentage point right now. So,all of that put together would lead me simply to reaffirm the 1990ranges. And in 1991, I would ratchet M2 down by 1/2 percentage pointand, if it is in a longer-term sense consistent with that, do the samewith M3 and debt. I look to the staff for guidance on that, butthat's essentially where I am.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, Bob Forrestal summed it up wellfor me when he started us off this morning. I think our strategy ison track. There are good prospects that it will work acceptably and Ithink we have reason to be fairly pleased so far. And I would like togive that strategy every chance to work. I think that strategydefinitely calls for an inflation result on the strategy II matrix,but I'm not quite sure what necessarily is going to be required in theway of aggregates growth to achieve that. As far as 1990 goes, I amdefinitely of the school of targeting and budgeting that would say weshouldn't shift in the middle of the game. If we are missing thetargets, then we should explain why we are missing them but not shiftthe target at that point in time. So for that reason, I wouldreaffirm all the ranges for 1990 and, if we miss on M3, explain thetechnical reasons why that happened. For 1991 I would stay with 3 to7 percent for M2 because, given where it is now and where it lookslike it is going to be in the rest of 1990, I would not be comfortablewith the prospect of having an even lower number, 2 percent, be in therange of acceptability. So, I would leave the target for M2 in 1991at the 3 to 7 percent we presently have. I have been convinced by Donand others that the M3 realities have changed. As a consequence, for1991 I would go to the 0 to 4 percent range because of those technicalrealities. On the debt side, I could be comfortable with either 4 to8 or 5 to 9 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, for reasons that I think are clearfrom the discussion, we are going through a period where theuncertainties are particularly high with regard to the aggregates.While it's clear we will be low in the range for M2 and below therange for M3, I think changing at this point implies a [degree ofcertainty] that we just don't have. Therefore, I'd be inclined tomaintain the 1990 ranges as they are. In your testimony you canexplain it. It does seem to me that the exchange that you had with7/2-3/90Mike and Don a moment ago begins to provide a good basis for reducingthe ranges. First, Don's model and our models are not perfect; theycertainly give as good an educated guess as we can come up with as tohow things are going to work out. So, I do think there's a basis forlowering [the ranges]. Secondly, Don used the word "symbolism" in histext and I think that is important. In effect, it's why we shouldcontinue the program of lowering the ranges. So, I would lower the1991 ranges. Specifically, for M2 I'd be a bit more comfortable with2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent. I don't feel strongly about it, but I have aminor preference there. I think we definitely should continuetargeting M3. In a period of uncertainty, the more alternatives wehave the better off we are; therefore, I'd continue M3. Somehowreducing it to 0 to 4 percent seems like a big drop; I have a minorpreference for 1 to 5 percent. I don't feel very strongly about debt,but it does seem to me that the economy may begin to pick up next yearas the forecast suggests that it might; therefore, I'd prefer to keepthe debt range at 5 to 9 percent for next year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I will have to confess thatthe arguments are very persuasive for leaving the ranges the way theyare for 1990 or for changing them!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's almost as good as your colleagueacross the way quoting that famous philosopher who said that 95percent of the putts don't go in the hole!MR. BOYKIN. Being forced to have to take some [position]here, I would lean a little toward the alternative of reducing [theranges for] 1990, although I don't know how to sort through how toexplain that and how it would be read. So, that's a slight but not astrong preference; I could certainly accept leaving the 1990 rangesthe way they are. Now, I do have a little more definite feeling on1991. Of course, I agree with continuing to indicate our long-termcommitment toward reducing inflation. And I would favor 1991 rangesof 2 to 6 percent for M2, 0 to 4 percent for M3; and 4 to 8 percentfor debt.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I favor strategy II for the long term. I thinkthat [presentation of alternative strategies] was nicely done. Ithink we ought to be comfortable, as many people around this tablehave already indicated, that we have made good progress toward that[objective], probably more than I thought we would early on. I agreewith Tom Melzer's point that it is important not to bounce the rangesaround. I would not want to see them have to be moved up because ofsuspected shifts in velocity. But that doesn't pose a particularproblem for me since I wanted a 2 to 6 percent range [for M2] anyway.I have some concerns about the aggregates and about the point thatDave Mullins made--that they all are sending us the same signal andthey are slowing rather dramatically. But since I was comfortable inFebruary with 2 to 6 percent, I think we ought to go to 2 to 6percent. There is a rationale to explain that: It is our bestestimate of where we are at this point in time and I think Congressought to have that information. I would accept all the other ranges--for M3 and debt--under the alternative for 1990.7/2-3/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN, That is, 2 to 6 percent on M2, 0 to 4percent on M3, and 5 to 9 percent on debt?MR. HOSKINS. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Both 1990 and 1991?MR. HOSKINS. Yes.MR. ANGELL. You want 4 to 8 percent for 1991?MR. HOSKINS. The 1991 alternative as listed by the staff [inthe Bluebook].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. 5 to 9 percent.MR. ANGELL. Well, for 1991 it's 4 to 8 percent.MR. HOSKINS. It's 4 to 8 percent for 1991.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me get this straight.MR. HOSKINS. I want the staff's alternatives both for 1990and 1991.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. It's 2 to 6, 0 to 4, and 5 to 9percent for both 1990 and 1991.MR. HOSKINS. No, it's 4 to 8 percent [for debt] for 1991.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, something I'm looking at has amistake on it. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Well, like everybody else here, I think it'sgreat to be a long-range thinker and strategist. I'm also lookingbackward 6 years to the first Humphrey-Hawkins meeting I attended in1984. Just to remind you folks, we had an M2 range of 6 to 9 percentand we have brought it down to 3 to 7 percent, which is quite asignificant change. The actual M2 growth ran 7.7 percent for 1984 andwe are estimating it at around 3-1/2 percent this year. I thinkthat's very significant. Also, these ranges have been moved down veryconsistently; we haven't had them popping around like popcorn, and Ithink that's good also. On M3 we went from a 6 to 9 percent rangedown to where we are now, 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent, and the actualgrowth went from 10-1/2 percent down to an estimated 1.1 percent thisyear. I'm just mentioning this because there has been a verysignificant amount of squeezing out of liquidity in the economy overthat period. So, having pointed that out and looking ahead withrespect to the strategies, I'm a baseline strategy supporter. Withall due respect to the forecasters, I'm just not convinced, lookingout 5 years at the additional inflation relief we would get from goingthe tighter route, that it's worth taking a chance on. I realizethat's a value judgment; but it's the way I feel. I'm also notconvinced that tightening policy will generate greater growth out in1995. So, I would go with strategy I.In terms of the ranges for 1990, I've never supportedchanging the ranges in the middle of the year; I just don't think it's-39-7/2-3/90a good idea. I believe that these ought to be set with some idea ofstability and [we should] just keep moving them downward; we can pause[in implementing the] decline, but I just think it's very disruptiveto have too much volatility in the ranges themselves. So, I would befor keeping the ranges where there are, including the M3 range of2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent. And instead of just dismissing this[shortfall] as a technicality because of RTC activities, I think a bigpart of the credit crunch story is in here. Maybe we ought to look atthis and ask ourselves whether we should be satisfied with a 1 percentincrease in M3 for 1990. If many people up on the Hill are continuingto get letters from their unhappy constituents, they might be askingthat same question or a similar one. So, I would support keeping thesame ranges for this year that we established earlier. And for 1991,I also would keep the same ranges for the main reason that we haveanother crack at these in February. There are a lot of uncertaintiesabout velocity and the economy in general--the RTC activities and awhole lot of other things. Therefore, there's something to be saidfor hanging in there with the existing ranges and then, with sixmonths' additional information and knowledge, if we're off we canadjust them at the next Humphrey-Hawkins meeting. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me make a general comment first,and that is that I cannot quite shake the feeling that there may besomething going on here that's a little more real. Even all thediscussion about the RTC represents something very real; and what itrepresents is that in the prior period there was a heck of a lot ofbad debt created in the financial system. So, it's not just a kind ofaccounting change. What I keep toying with in my mind is that thereis perhaps a small possibility that we are going through a phase herewhere this retrenchment of the financial system, as symbolized by theRTC and the slow growth of bank credit and the slowdown of overalldebt, is something quite real and something that need not even betransitory. If you look at the great bulk of experience over recentyears, we have had this very substantial disconnection, for example,between the growth of debt in the economy and the growth of GNP. Andit turns out that a lot of that disconnection reflects the fact that alot of that debt was bad debt. It's now showing up as RTC and bankwrite-offs and junk bond write-offs, etc. So, there may be somethinghere that goes beyond the so-called transitory factors.I tend to take a rather eclectic view of all these Ms, but Iam struck that even Mr. Kohn can't explain, no matter how hard hetries, a sizable part of the shortfall in M2 in the second quarter.So, again, I'm not quite sure that we fully grasp, or at least that Ifully grasp, all that's going on here in these relationships. Forthat reason I think we do have to be a bit more cautious about theinterpretations that we put on these things.Now, with that general point in mind, Mr. Chairman, for 1990I would keep M2 where it is at 3 to 7 percent and keep debt where itis at 5 to 9 percent. For 1991, I'd be thinking in terms of 2-1/2 to6-1/2 percent for M2 and 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for debt. For M3, I'mquite prepared to let you do whatever you feel most comfortable doing.But even in the framework of letting you do whatever you feel mostcomfortable doing, it's possible that a compromise--in the interest ofcohesion in the Committee--might be to put it at 1 to 5 percent for-40-7/2-3/90both years. But I have no strong feeling on that at all; I'm quiteprepared to let you explain it because basically you've got to explainit one way or another. Either you have to explain why we changed itor you have to explain why we didn't change it. And I would leavethat to you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. My preference would be to leave the 1990 rangesessentially the same. I don't like the perception of moving thetargets to fit the data; I think monetary aggregates are prettyimportant and not just instruments. It also bothers me--the pointthat the Vice Chairman made--that there's an unexplained component ofthis. If we really could explain it as just a portfolio shift fromone part to another part, I'd feel a little more comfortable with it.I think we ought to have the burden of explaining what's going on, andI generally agree with Tom's point that we ought to set ranges basedupon long-term factors and have the discipline put on us of explainingaberrations rather than shift the ranges to try to fit theaberrations. So, for 1990, I would keep the same ranges.On 1991, again, I don't like the idea of moving the targetsaround. I am concerned with lowering the tentative targets for 1991in the current environment of fiscal uncertainty as well as theuncertainty of what really is happening to the monetary aggregates.The way I would view the [appropriate] stance for monetary policy, Iwould hate for us to come back and tentatively have to move the rangesin the opposite direction. Also, I agree with Governor Kelly on M2;I'm not entirely comfortable with the notion that 2 percent would beacceptable. So, I would prefer that the M2 range for 1991 be kept at3 to 7 percent, although to be honest with you--maybe because I'm newon the Board and I have less courage than the old warriors--I wouldn'tbe uncomfortable moving it down 1/2 percentage point. On M3, I stillwould prefer to try to have a range that is more consistent with whatwe expect it to be over the longer term. I think the RTC is going togo in fits and starts. When the new guy gets in there, I wouldn't besurprised to see a period of time in which there is not a lot ofaction--a period in which they gear up and change strategies. So, Iwould prefer not moving that range to 0 to 4 percent, but keeping itat more the long-term average range. I wouldn't fight keeping itwhere it is, but I would feel comfortable with 2 to 6 percent, whichwould require the Chairman to explain the deviations in 1991 as well.For debt I think 5 to 9 percent would be fine and I could [accept] a4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent range as well. So, my general stance is thatwe ought to stick with the targets, especially as long as there isuncertainty. If there were no unexplained component, then I wouldfeel much better about shifting the targets. I guess I'm a littlemore cautious about 1991, given the current stance. If we move theranges down, [we might] then find ourselves in a position of having toconsider a move back.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. I have here in front of me aset of numbers [on the members' preferences], which led me to askwhether the coffee was ready. But frankly, whether it is or not, wewill have a short recess.[Coffee break]-41-7/2-3/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Our abacuses evolved the followingresults, which I will eventually put to an official vote: There is for1990 an overwhelming balance [of preferences] for no change for the M2range; a marginal [preference to] shift toward 0 to 4 percent for M3;and overwhelming, if not unanimous, support for keeping debtunchanged. For 1991, it's not that we're all over the place; we areclose. I inferred with great insight, because that's what itrequired, that the mode or mean was something resembling 2-1/2 to6-1/2 percent for M2. The predominance of 0 to 4 percent for M3 in1991 was rather large, and for debt it looks to be 4-1/2 to 8-1/2percent. So, what I shall do is to call for two votes, one for 1990and one for 1991.MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, there is language in the Bluebooksuggested, if the Committee did decide to reduce the 1990 range for M3and wanted to consider special language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, Norm, why don't you read it?MR. BERNARD. I'm reading from page 4 starting with line 72if you're using the draft directive; if you're using the Bluebook it'spage 27, paragraph 29. "In furtherance of these objectives theCommittee reaffirmed at this meeting the range it had established inFebruary for M2 growth of 3 to 7 percent, measured from the fourthquarter of 1989 to the fourth quarter of 1990. The Committee alsoretained the monitoring range of 5 to 9 percent for the year that ithad set for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt. With regardto M3, the Committee recognized that the ongoing restructuring ofthrift depository institutions had depressed its growth relative tospending and total credit, though to an uncertain extent. Takingaccount of the outlook for unusually strong M3 velocity, the Committeedecided to reduce the 1990 range to 0 to 4 percent."MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, since the other items seem to becompromises, I wonder why there isn't room for a compromise on M3, asthe Vice Chairman of the Committee suggested. That is, the 1 to 5percent range does accommodate what we expect to happen in 1990, Ithink, and it increases the odds for those of us who do not want tovote for an increase in the range to have a better chance of nothaving to do so. You did not have a majority vote, as I counted, onthe 0 to 4 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's correct; it was a very closeshowing.MR. ANGELL. So, I'm just wondering why we couldn't take thecompromise between those of us who are for 2 to 6 percent and thosewho are for 0 to 4 percent and come out with 1 to 5 percent.MR. KELLEY. If that is a substitute motion, I will secondit.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I was about to suggest that we do thisofficially. I will read it as 0 to 4 percent; you propose anamendment to raise it to 1 to 5 percent and we'll vote on thatparticular amendment. You may well be right that there is support forthat. I was puzzled a little about the reasons that we had discussedearlier about the restructuring of the thrift depository institutions.-42-7/2-3/90[I'd suggest adding] "more than anticipated" to the phrase "depressedits growth relative to spending and total credit."MR. ANGELL. Well, getting into this is a kind of trap. Ijust think that this will pose a problem for you when you start usingthat language up on the Hill. I think your suggestion is a greatidea.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unless the Committee votes for nochange, we have to use some language and this is the least--MR. ANGELL. I'd use the least language possible.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Frankly, I don't think that this iswhere our problem lies. Would the Secretary read the sentence withthe revision in question put into it?MR. BERNARD. "With regard to M3, the Committee recognizedthat the ongoing restructuring of thrift depository institutions haddepressed its growth relative to spending and total credit more thananticipated, though to an uncertain extent."MR. PRELL. Do you want to put "though still to an uncertainextent?"MR. ANGELL. No, take it out.MR. KELLEY. It doesn't ring right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think not; take it out.MR. ANGELL. I'd say "more than anticipated" period.MR. KOHN. And maybe then just say "taking account of theunusually strong M3 velocity" instead of "the outlook for".CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Taking account of what?MR. KOHN. Just take out "the outlook for" there since youalready would have said it's more than anticipated; so you're sayingit's unusually strong.MR. PRELL. You could make it "unexpectedly strong" if youwant to reinforce your earlier thought.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, use "taking account of theunexpectedly strong." Would somebody like to move that paragraph?SPEAKER(?). Sure.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.MR. ANGELL. Now, Mr. Chairman, I presume that has the 0 to 4percent range for [M3]?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's correct.-43-7/2-3/90MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I move to substitute 1 to 5percent for 0 to 4 percent in paragraph 29.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second? Let's vote on that.MR. BERNARD. You're voting on the 1 to 5 percent?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I assume there's no discussion.MR. KOHN. You could take a straw vote, Mr. Chairman; thatway we wouldn't have to record it.MR. ANGELL. Then we won't have to record it. I don't thinkthis is the kind of vote that we would want to record.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me put it this way: All thosein favor of 1 to 5 percent instead of 0 to 4 percent raise your hand.Opposed? The ayes have it; the amendment carries. We will now moveto a vote on the paragraph itself.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Hoskins YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Seger NoPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, we'll now move to 1991. As Iindicated to you before, we have 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent for M2; 0 to 4percent for M3, which is consistent with 1 to 5 percent; and 4-1/2 to8-1/2 percent for debt. Why don't you read the paragraph itself?MR. BERNARD. I'm reading from line 63 if you're using thedraft directive or from the top of page 27 [in the Bluebook], about 4lines down, starting with "For 1991." "For 1991 the Committee agreedon provisional ranges for monetary growth, measured from the fourthquarter of 1990 to the fourth quarter of 1991, of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2percent for M2 and--" Is it 1 to 5 percent instead of 0 to 4 percent?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, it's still 0 to 4 percent. Ifsomebody wants to propose an amendment, they can.MR. BERNARD. --"and 0 to 4 percent for M3. The Committeetentatively set the associated monitoring range for growth of totaldomestic nonfinancial debt at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for 1991."MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I would move to amend the 0 to 4percent on M3 to read 1 to 5 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.-44-7/2-3/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is a second. All in favor raiseyour hand. One, two, three, four. five. Opposed? One, two, three,four. I'm sorry, it's five.MR. ANGELL. Four.SPEAKER(?). You have 9 voters in here.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I will then move my vote to 1 to 5percent and let it carry.MR. LAWARE. What was the vote?MS. SEGER. Five to five.MR. ANGELL. Five to five.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Who's missing?SPEAKER(?). Governor Johnson is absent.SPEAKER(?). President Corrigan didn't vote.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let us now vote on the paragraph for1991, with 1 to 5 percent for the M3 range.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Hoskins YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare NoGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Seger NoPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, we now move to our regular short-term monetary targets. Don Kohn.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don? If not, why don't Iget started then on the Committee's [unintelligible]. The same forcesthat I discussed at the last meeting are still operative but, as bestI can judge, they turned up a notch. I think we are observing theunwinding from several years of excess credit expansion relative tothe economy. One can see that in virtually all the aggregates for themoney supply, obviously, and just as importantly in a wide variety ofother sub-elements within the flow-of-funds [accounts]. As you mayrecall, they exhibited some fairly significant credit acceleration, inpart as a result of real estate appreciation, mergers andacquisitions, LBOs, and some overall degree of exuberance in themiddle 1980s, which I think carried forward and is now gradually-45-7/2-3/90unwinding. I think what we are looking at is a credit slowing inwhich in large measure we're going back to historical relationships.And the only question that we really have to focus upon is whether inthe process the contraction is overdone, which of course is what onenormally would expect whenever one gets these types of adjustments.In any event, I think we're seeing the credit slowing interacting withthe hard asset balance sheet items--that is, the stock adjustmentprocesses--which I believe I mentioned at the last meeting. Motorvehicles--which had a long run with the number of cars on the road[increasing] as the number of two- and three-car families [rose]--anda variety of other elements all were above trend and then ran into astone wall in 1989. We're looking at that sort of adjustment. We'reobviously seeing the same problem in a more extravagant way in thecommercial real estate markets with the vacancies involved; we're alsogetting some of the problems in residential real estate, though it'sobviously far less of a problem than in commercial real estate. Thereis some slowing in the rate of increase in equipment stock as well.As I indicated last time and would reiterate today, I thinkthe reason why that process, which I believe historically would almostalways have dumped us into a recession, failed to do so was becausethe inventory management change has created a much less volatileinventory investment pattern and essentially removed a major factorthat tends to tilt the economy over into recession. In the very nearterm there's little evidence that I can see to suggest that in factthe economy is tilting over. The motor vehicle assemblies and theextraordinary electric utility output because of weather clearlysuggest that there is some temporary uptick--perhaps a small one--inthe June industrial production index. But from what everyone can seein there, one must conclude that it is probably temporary becausethere's really no other evidence of an acceleration taking place.While orders are holding up--or perhaps stated more appropriately theyhave stabilized [after] their decline--and we have some positive signsfrom the NAPM survey the other day, backlogs are stagnant; and somesurveys suggest they may even be softening slightly.On top of all this, there's at least a better case to be madeat this point that inflationary pressures are cresting. The wage dataare no longer carrying through with evidence of an acceleration. Anexperimental unit cost analysis of manufacturing, which the staff hasbeen working on, had earlier indicated underlying cyclically adjustedunit costs actually rising. In effect, one way of looking at it wasthat with price inflation steady while profit margins were going downmore than cyclically, the adjusted cost elements clearly were rising.That too now seems to have stabilized; but I would not want to put toomuch emphasis on those data because they do kick around a good deal.But at least they are no longer signalling a firmer inflationary tone.In any event, in this particular economic context I would saythat it would be inappropriate for the money markets to be tighteningeither on their own or through Federal Reserve action. While theevidence here is clearly difficult to come by, it strikes me that itis becoming increasingly evident both from fragmentary data andanecdotal reports, as well as history I guess, that the money marketsat the current funds rate are actually tightening. We are seeing upthrough May, the last survey period, some marginal evidence of anincrease in some loan rates and an opening up of the spread of loanrates against the funds rate. My suspicion, however, is that when the-46-7/2-3/90data come out for the current period--I don't know when that will bebut it's a number of weeks away--what we are picking up anecdotallyhas to show through in some evidence that there has been some pullingback. By pulling back, I mean essentially that commercial banks areconcerned about their capital positions and are doing some form ofmarginal credit rationing. I think the anecdotal evidence has reacheda point at this stage that it is extremely unlikely to be without anybasis whatever. To be sure, when one goes from excess creditextension to normal, it feels as though it's a tightening; and that, Iwould expect, is unquestionably the vast majority of what this creditcrunch is all about. But I would suspect that there is a little moreto this. The particular statistic that bothers me the most as aconsequence of all this is the unexplained part of M2, which hasclearly sneaked down into a no change range. According to what Donwas saying, it's holding--I would say has settled--several percentagepoints under where all the other factors that we're looking at wouldsuggest is likely. So, this is obviously not a definitive case whereone would say that there's clear evidence that this credit rationingis going on. I don't think we ever get that evidence except six yearsafter the fact. But from what I can gather and from the contacts Ihave I would say that at this stage the odds that we are not seeingsome actual money market tightening are very slim indeed. Put anotherway, the funds market is trying to ease and we are essentially holdingit in check.Our job is really not so much to focus on trying to fine tunethe economy; we can't do it. All that we can do is get ourselvesinvolved with money supply, credit, and financial systems; and as Iread the data at this particular stage I would say that we probablyhave been sitting here with an inadvertent minor tightening, which Ithink would be appropriate if the economy were showing somesignificant signs of firming. But at the moment the evidence of thatis really quite remote. As a consequence, I would be inclined to gowith an unchanged directive, asymmetrical toward ease, but with theexpectation that unless a firmer tone in the financial aggregates--andindirectly in the economy--began to exhibit itself fairly soon that itwould call for a small, 25 basis point, decline in the funds rate.So, I would like to put that somewhat complex issue on the table andwould be most interested in the responses I get to it.MR. SYRON. A technical question, Mr. Chairman. Are yousuggesting a 25 basis point cut anticipating we will have a conferencecall or are we voting for that now essentially unless there's a--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would say voting now. My view is thata conference call shouldn't be necessary. In other words, we'vediscussed at great length the types of things we're looking at, andunless something unusual happens of a nature that always indicates theneed for a conference call, I don't think that I could convey verymuch more. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I'm encouraged that my economic education seemsto be going along in pretty good style because you have expressedexactly the thoughts that I had intended to express. I stronglyendorse "B" with an asymmetric tilt toward ease.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.-47-7/2-3/90MR. KELLEY. I will second Governor LaWare's remarks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I'm basically in the sameplace. I came to the meeting thinking that there were three choicesavailable to the Committee. One was an asymmetric plain vanilla kindof directive; the second was a strongly asymmetric directive, which iswhat I think your suggestion amounts to; and the third was even thepossibility of easing right now. My own strong position was thesecond of those choices, the strongly asymmetric directive, so Isupport completely your proposition.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. I support your proposition, Mr. Chairman. Ihave a technical question: I'm not quite clear in my mind what datayou would be looking at to trigger the 25 basis point cut.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Basically the data that are coming outat the end of this week--including average hourly earnings, which isnot a minor player as far as I'm concerned. Also, the money supplydata early next week and--MR. FORRESTAL. The employment number.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. --the employment figure on Friday.MR. FORRESTAL. So, you're looking at a fairly near-termadjustment?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I would say within the next week to10 days. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I would favor alternative "B."However, since I think there is a good chance that economic growthwill be faster in the second half than in the first half, I wouldprefer symmetrical language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Where I stumble a bit with your suggestion iswith the automaticity of the move. I too have a great deal ofinterest not only in the upcoming data but in how the economy islikely to perform over the next several months given the situation asit has changed with regard to consumer spending and whatever wealtheffects we may get out of housing. I must admit to a lot ofuncertainty as to how that's all going to play out. I'm a littleconcerned by the asymmetric directive with the automaticity of movingon the basis of another week or two weeks' worth of data; that givesme some pause.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Obviously, if there is evidence offirmness in the data, that would suggest to us that the money supplydata are not as terribly [weak] as we think. I would say the moneysupply data are really the crucial data as far as I'm concerned,because we're getting to the point where what we affect essentially isthe credit system. And to the extent that the credit system is-48-7/2-3/90 -49-contracting--and it is showing as far as I can see no signs ofstabilizing--it means that the process is still going on. And if itis, what I'm arguing for is not an easing. I'm arguing for[unintelligible] holding. The question, therefore, is basically: Dowe want to be tightening in this particular context? I would say onlyif there is evidence that the economy is picking up, and I must tellyou that at the moment I don't see a single statistic out theresuggestive of such an acceleration. That's [unintelligible]basically. Obviously, we could wait for three weeks, two months,whatever. It may--MR. STERN. I don't disagree with your interpretation of thelatest data at all. It's just that I've watched these data bouncearound an awful lot.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, so have I. And this is the firsttime in six months that I have nudged off the middle because I wasunconvinced by all of this evidence until now. And it's not economicweakness; it's credit. I'm sorry, I interrupted you.MR. STERN. No, actually, I had concluded what I was going tosay. You've elaborated your views on how you see this. And, as Isaid before, my concern was with the automaticity of the move not withthe asymmetric language on "B".CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, there's no such thing as anautomatic move.MR. STERN. No, I would say I'm somewhat comforted by yourcomments.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's an asymmetric comfort then.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Well, I appreciate what President Stern hassaid. It really is a very important difference for me, Mr. Chairman,because I do want to vote with you on this. I would admit that I'mnot able to discern so accurately the need to stay symmetric versusthe possibility that incoming data will tell us that we need to ease.I would prefer symmetric language but I can compromise away from thatif we are going to be looking at the data and, if the data coming insay that we ought to subsequently make a decision to ease, I can gowith that. But I cannot go with the notion here that we really aregoing to ease, because if we really are going to ease, we might aswell do it now and then those of us who are going to vote "no" canvote "no." And I will just vote "no."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's a correct [interpretationof the] difference. It's [essentially] why we raise the issue ofautomatic; if it's automatic, then it can't be asymmetric.MR. ANGELL. So, I suggest that we not put into "Fedspeak"all this new language that the Vice Chairman is about to introduce inregard to super ease. I really don't think we need to fine tune ourlanguage. My understanding, based upon what you said, is that we'regoing to be recommending that we have no change in policy, alternative"B," which I can support with the "mights" tilted [toward ease]. I7/2-3/90can go with that. I don't want to make too much over littledifferences, but I do believe strongly that we have reached a pointwhere we're just about to succeed in something that we've been tryingto get done. You put it so well last year when you talked about theview that we have to err on the side of restraint. All of us knowthat there is risk in doing that. I want to continue to err on theside of restraint, but I definitely do not want to get this economyinto recession. I want us to reap the fruits of what we're about to[achieve], and I think the sooner we move the more likely the bondmarkets are to misinterpret and say that the Fed really gave up beforewe were there. I think the whole [issue] is that attitudes concerninginflation are at a very delicate point. I noted in the staff's layingout of strategy II on the long-run model, that in 1995 that results inthe highest real GNP growth of any of the alternatives. Now, I justthink it happens faster. I think the whole monetary world worksfaster than it ever worked before. And if we really stand here andare prepared to do what needs to be done, I believe we'll get lowerlong-term interest rates. Frankly, one reason that we got into slowmoney growth is because we lowered the fed funds rate in December, ranthe long bond rates up 70-80 basis points, and the opportunity cost[of] the M2 balances has [risen] so that the shortfall of ouraggregates is due entirely to our premature ease in December.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't think that's correct.MR. ANGELL. Well, I do.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's your evaluation. I think--MR. ANGELL. Well, you see, what has happened is that theopportunity cost on the M2 balances has changed and then you get thelagged effect of that change from March and you get low growth of M2in May. My view is that we need the lowest long-term interest rateswe can get for the second half of 1990. And I happen to think thatbeing patient here for a [while] will get us lower rates than we willget if we jump the gun on easing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The difference, Wayne, is that I thinkwe're closer to having success here than you think.MR. ANGELL. Well, I think we're closer in that respect too.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we're very close. If I believedotherwise, I wouldn't be arguing for the type of asymmetry that we'retalking about.MR. ANGELL. I'm somewhat impatient for patience.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I'd be in favor of alternative "B"with the current asymmetric language, and I'm entirely comfortablewith the explanation that you gave Bob Forrestal on what would tripusing the asymmetric language. Perhaps I have a slightly morepositive outlook on the economy than some, and perhaps more so thanyou, but I think it's awfully important that we provide an environmentin which we can continue to have these kinds of results. It does seemto me that the move that you suggest will give us that.-50-7/2-3/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Obviously, you know that I'm in favor of easing.I'm just sitting here trying to decide what we gain by doing it in acouple of weeks rather than now. I'm thinking about the lags that Ithought I had been taught about by Don Kohn and his pals. Whatever wedo today or in two weeks or three weeks is going to impact the economysome time in the future, not immediately. The way I read the economy,I'm not sure we have until Christmas Eve or New Year's Eve to havesome stimulus actually being felt. The employment numbers are not myfavorite numbers, but I do read them. As I remember, in the April andMay statistics the whole show was the hiring of temporary workers bythe Census Department. And from what I've seen previewed, those folksare leaving; a lot of them--something like 160,000--left in June.That number came from Barbara Bryant who heads the Census; it isn'tsomething I just threw out. That's going to have an impact on theemployment numbers again and not a very good impact. Some more ofthese folks are going to be turned out on the street in July. So, Ithink we're going to get some weaker employment numbers as we go alonghere. Also, I read the retail sales numbers as weak. I don't thinkwe have had three months in a row [of weak data] that have been flukesor aberrations; I think there's something going on there. I hate torepeat myself unnecessarily, but I believe that this so-called creditcrunch has had a big impact on construction in many parts of thecountry; it's worse certainly in some parts than in others, but it'snot confined to New England or Arizona. And I don't think that isover as an influence. I also believe that lower interest ratesamazingly would help the strength of the financial system; it wouldprovide some of the marginal institutions a better chance to make itbecause it would allow them to get a lower cost of funds ratherpromptly and improve their margins. And I think we need to do thatvery swiftly. I would argue that lower interest rates would help evenon the liquidation of the S&Ls by the RTC. So, I certainly agree withyour notion of some ease, but if I wanted to split hairs--which Iwon't do; I will support your position--I would feel more comfortabledoing it sooner rather than later.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the last several years ofmonetary policy have been some of our very finest; I wouldn't go backand change any vote that I've cast during that time. It has been manyyears since I went through an entire session without dissenting infavor of tighter money. I started off thinking about the short-runobjectives with exactly what you had in mind: an asymmetricaldirective because of this apparent softness in the economy and theslow growth in the aggregates. Then I started looking at the economya little more closely and I read Don's and his associates' memo. Andwhen I looked at the economy, I couldn't see what it was that wasgoing to make us turn down; and his memo on the behavior of theaggregates gave me a good deal of comfort. So, I became somewhatuncomfortable with the asymmetrical part of it, since I think ourobjective is price stability and we're going to have to take someresponsible risks on the side of restraint if we're going to getthere. I came out with alternative B, but I favor symmetry. Icertainly wouldn't dissent on this, but I do think that in generalit's better to have a symmetrical directive because that suggests weare able to go either way. I think that would give sufficient leeway-51-7/2-3/90to do exactly what you have in mind. I don't have any great problemwith asymmetry, but I have a slight preference, as I think GovernorAngell has also, for symmetrical language. But I think you're veryclose to where we ought to be on this. You made a good statement; Ifound particularly helpful your analysis of the current conditions,and I take some comfort in your view of inventories. I share thatfeeling. I don't know what's going to make us turn down. So, if Ivoted, I would go with symmetrical but not dissent on asymmetrical.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This may be hair-splitting a bit, but my preference would be "B" with a symmetricdirective. I don't see that there is accumulating evidence of atightening of credit markets. As a result, a symmetric directive--tothe extent that it will be read six weeks from now as a sort of"steady-as-you-go" policy--seems to me to be a reasonable outcome [ofour meeting]. On the other hand, if I have understood the discussionsaround this table in the past, particularly as articulated by Don,with a symmetric directive you have the ability to take one cut--ifyou will, a quarter point [on the funds rate], which is what we aretalking about--without the necessity of a conference call orconsultation. As a result, it seems to me that "B" with a symmetricdirective gives you what you want and I wouldn't object to that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. "B" asymmetric. I'll skip the subtleties.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I'd favor "B" symmetric but I could certainlyaccept "B" asymmetric as you specified it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. "B." I have a marginal preference for symmetricbut I can certainly accept asymmetric. I do have some of the concernsthat Gary Stern expressed on the automaticity of the approach, but Iam comforted by your explanation. I think it's important to have inthe Humphrey-Hawkins testimony an indication that we are not trying tolead the market down, but that we are not effectively trying to easepolicy--that there has been some tightening in policy not at ourvolition and that we see this as bringing policy back more to where weget the [unintelligible] rather than the other way around. I thinkthat's actually quite an important distinction.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. In my view, the economy has been weaker than[the staff has] projected and I haven't felt especially comfortablewith the low growth in the aggregates. I have been concerned, giventhe notion of the low growth and the credit crunch, that we might beimplicitly tighter than what the Committee had committed to earlier.To believe differently is to put a lot of faith in adjustments andstill accept an unexplained error. I don't believe that a tighterstance at this time is warranted. And I wonder whether a marginallylower funds rate wouldn't be consistent with maintaining the stance of-52-7/2-3/90monetary policy voted on earlier this year. The advantage of thisapproach is more discretion, more time to adjust to the new data; andit has less automaticity than the approach of easing directly. Ithink Dick's point is extremely important because that's exactly theway I view it--that we essentially are maintaining the intendedmoderately restrictive monetary conditions and, when there'sunintended tightening out there, we're simply not easing but movingback to that position. So, I would wholeheartedly support "B" withasymmetry toward easing or returning to the [degree of] restraint thatwe intended earlier.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I would favor alternative "B."Coming into the meeting I had felt that symmetric language would bepreferable. However, the explanation that you gave would cause me toaccept asymmetric language. But I do want to say that I agree withabout 85 percent of what you said, Governor Angell. I share a lot ofsympathy for not letting go prematurely just as we're about there. Idon't know what the next week or week and a half is going to show, butI have a slight uneasiness in the sense that it's almost preordainedthat there's going to be a downward move shortly. That may benecessary and it may be what's called for; I just can't read that.But I would accept asymmetry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Mr. Chairman, as someone who has worriedconsistently about the growth rates in the aggregates, I find myselfin one sense pleasantly surprised that the aggregates are at about thegrowth rates that I thought were appropriate for the year.Unfortunately, I'm uncomfortable with how we got there. I think yourexplanation may well have some merit for pegging the funds rate [when]the economy is weak. We're not running monetary policy by supplyingreserves; we're running it through interest rates. Having said allthat, and given the staff's forecast of where we're likely to be, I'mequally uncomfortable with the velocity projections. So, that leavesme in a position of great uncertainty. And in that position, I'd bemore comfortable with "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think that with the appropriatemoney supply targets, I'd like a vote on the asymmetric directive.MR. BERNARD. The operational paragraph would read: "In theimplementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeksto maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.Taking account of progress toward price stability, the strength of thebusiness expansion, the behavior of the monetary aggregates, anddevelopments in foreign exchange and domestic financial markets,slightly greater reserve restraint might or somewhat lesser reserverestraint would be acceptable in the intermeeting period. Thecontemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent withgrowth of M2 and M3 over the period from June through September atannual rates of about 3 and 1 percent respectively. The Chairman maycall for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager forDomestic Operations that reserve conditions during the period beforethe next meeting are likely to be associated with a federal funds ratepersistently outside a range of 6 to 10 percent."-53-7/2-3/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Hoskins YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Seger YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next meeting is on August 21st.MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, when is your testimony? Do youknow?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The 18th.MR. BOEHNE. The 18th. Is the Senate first or the House?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's the Senate first, and I think theHouse testimony is either on the 19th or the 24th.MR. COYNE. It's the 24th.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. On revisions with respect to theprojections, Mike Prell says as late as Monday morning will be noproblem. Any changes can be faxed in, I assume, by that time.MR. PRELL. We use the administrative message system, if it'sconvenient.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there is no further business, themeeting is finally adjourned.END OF MEETING-54-