Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 27, 1990A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 27, 1990, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT:Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneBoykinHoskinsJohnsonKelleyLaWareSegerSternMessrs. Black, Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis,and Boston, respectivelyKohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPatrikis, Deputy General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey,Promisel, Rosenblum, Siegman,Simpson, and Stockton, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Smith, Assistant Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMr. Bowen, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank ofSt. LouisMessrs. Balbach, Broaddus, T. Davis, Ms. Greene, Mr. Scheld,and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of St. Louis, Richmond, Kansas City,New York, Chicago, and Atlanta, respectivelyMessrs. Fieleke, Judd, Ms. Lovett, and Mr. Meyer,Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston,San Francisco, New York, and Philadelphia, respectivelyMr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bankof Minneapolis1. Attended portion of meeting devoted to discussion of foreigncurrency operations.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMarch 27, 1990CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare has moved that it is agood morning. Are there any seconds?MR. JOHNSON. Second.SPEAKER(?). It's too early to tell!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I have a motion to approve theminutes?MS. SEGER. I'll move it.MR. SYRON. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Cross, would youbring us up to date?MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Cross?MR. BOEHNE. When is the last time that the Fed did not sharein intervention with the Treasury?MR. CROSS. Well, there have been occasions when we didn'tshare for brief periods and in modest amounts. For example, there wasthe time--not within the past 18 months or so, I guess--when theFederal Reserve had very few, if any, yen balances and we wereintervening for Treasury. And there have been some other occasionswhere for one reason or another there has been some modest activity byone or the other. But basically, we have participated 50/50, roughlyspeaking, with the Treasury for a number of years. It might have been[since] about 1980, at the time of the Carter bonds. It has beenpretty much that way with these minor deviations.MR. KEEHN. Sam, related to that: Did they ask us to share,and what did we say by way of opposition?MR. CROSS. Well, the Treasury is very interested in havingus share; they regard that as very important. We told them that wehad reached a point where it would require a further expansion of ourauthorized limits in order for us to be able to intervene anymore. Asto taking that issue up at that point, particularly in the light ofthese doubts about the intervention with respect to the mark, we saidwe would wait and review the matter and look at the limits in thelight of our discussion with the Committee since we already had set upthis discussion and were planning to conduct a thorough review. So,we told them that we would not operate [for System account] until wehad an opportunity to have this more comprehensive discussion with theCommittee.MR. FORRESTAL. Did that make them very unhappy when you toldthem that?MR. CROSS. Yes.3/27/90MR. FORRESTAL. I had another question, Mr. Chairman. Goingback to the yen: Part of the weakness of the yen has been attributedto the rift between the Bank of Japan and the Ministry of Finance,beyond the more general political problem. But they did do thediscount rate increase of 1 percentage point. Does that suggest thatthat rift has been healed or is that ongoing and will it prevent theBank of Japan from taking further anti-inflationary steps?MR. CROSS. It's hard to say. The rift went on for so longthat by the time the 1 percentage point change was actually introducedit already had been totally discounted in the market and market ratesdidn't change. So, rather than being seen as a sign of forcefullygetting hold of the situation, it perhaps was taken by a lot of peopleas still a following of events--following the curve or trying to catchup and being dragged along belatedly when circumstances forced it.So, it did not come out with a result that was strong and positive.Whether these differences are going to be less in the future is alittle--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Actually, there is really a quiteimportant difference between the Minister of Finance and the Governorof the Central Bank of Japan.I'm not sure they're going to be able to patch that backtogether immediately. As far as I can see, it is subject tocontinuing problems. Any further questions for Sam? If not, may Ihave a motion to ratify his actions since the February meeting?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Sternlight either onactions or on leeway questions?MR. BOEHNE. I have a question. Peter, I thought that yourAnnual Report on Operations for 1989 had considerable food for3/27/90thought, and there were two points in that report that leaped out atme. One was your concluding comment, which I suspect you wrote withyour own hand, in which you talk about how essentially we have movedback to federal funds targeting, even though we don't call it that,and an almost wistful philosophizing about how there ought to be a wayto move away from that. I'd appreciate any comments that you mighthave on that. The other point that leaped out at me was thecollateralization of currency. You made the really rather astoundingpoint that for the first time since 1957 the System portfolio actuallywas reduced and that our leeway on collateral is really rather thin.I think that would be worth talking about. But beyond that, I thinkthat is a sensitive political issue. Some years ago--I forget whetherit was in '82 or '83--there was considerable Congressional interest inthe use of foreign exchange as collateral for the U.S. dollar. Wemade some pledges, as I recall. I think Chuck Partee and some otherpeople testified on that. If you link that issue with what was justtalked about a moment ago--in effect, the first split with theTreasury in a long time, and the issue as to who is the senior and whois the junior partner, which was a very sensitive one Congressionallyin the '73-'74-'75 period--it just strikes me that we may have a majorissue developing. These two volatile issues were sensitive separatelyand I would think that when you put them together it could be a majorissue. I don't want to step into the topic [on our agenda] later, butit does seem to me that we're opening ourselves up to bringing backsome of those issues that we have fought in the past. If they comeback together, we could have a big fight on our hands.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's leave that, because it does stepover into the other area.MR. BOEHNE. Okay. Then I will go back to my first questionabout the comments [in your Annual Report].MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I don't know that I have very much toadd to the kind of philosophical comment I put in the Annual Report.I do think that what we do now is somewhat different than the overtfed funds targeting of the 1970s. But it certainly has become prettydarn close to it in substance. You can call it a wistful look at thepast. I think there are regrettable things about fed funds targetingand I am hopeful of being able to get away from it more. I think it'sgoing to be difficult to do until we have more confidence in somethinglike a relationship of borrowing and the spread of the fed funds rateover the discount rate. But just in our day-to-day operations I thinkwe can carefully seek out opportunities not to let ourselves be tootightly trapped into the perception that we target the funds rate,because part of the box that we get ourselves into is built up justout of our own interactions with the market. We carefully appraiseeach day's operation. What is the market expecting of us? What willthey make of it if we do this or don't do that? And it's only byrather carefully taking opportunities to stretch their tolerance thatI think we can begin to build away a bit from an excessive focus onthe fed funds rate.MR. HOSKINS. Peter, I was interested in your comments onDrexel. In particular, do you sense any change in security firms'behaviors coming out of the Drexel [situation]? Secondly, do we sendany different signals to primary dealers now about how they managetheir affairs or--?3/27/90MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we certainly had been sending somevery clear signals to Drexel, too, about how they managed theiraffairs. We felt very deep concern about the charges they took andthe wrongdoing they admitted to, and we had them on very stern noticeabout what we expected of them just from the standpoint of being goodcitizens in the market. As to general changes in market behavior, asI mentioned, there is this greater tenderness about the financing ofinvestment banking firms that does still linger in the wake of rumorsthat were rampant for a while but have quieted down now. It has mademany firms look carefully at their own exposure just so they won't getthemselves in excessively exposed positions; they will take thatlesson to heart. In the areas that I regard as Drexel's greatestexcesses, in the junk bond underwriting, I think that lesson reallywas being delivered well before their demise just because that marketwas virtually coming to a halt during much of last year. You justcan't do those things, and probably shouldn't be trying to do thosethings, with highly leveraged buyouts to the extent that they wereduring their heyday.MS. SEGER. I just want to make sure I'm listening correctlyto what you said about Drexel. When a firm is a primary dealer do Iunderstand that that gives us the authority to advise them on whatthey do in the area of corporate finance as well as securities? Isthat what you're saying?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I would say we have a concern aboutall firms. Obviously, we want to be sure that the entity we deal withis properly capitalized and that it conducts itself properly.MS. SEGER. Right.MR. STERNLIGHT. But we have said in our standards forprimary dealers that we have a concern about their general financialstanding and the reputation of the parent or other affiliates as wellas the immediate entity that we deal with. It's not that we go out ofour way to give a lot of advice on how they conduct themselves; but ifwe felt disturbed about their conduct in some other area, we wouldfeel it was incumbent on us to say something.MS. SEGER. Where do we overlap the SEC then? Isn't thattheir basic responsibility: to oversee these firms?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, our role is not a regulatory role.It's just part of our business relationship with a counterparty. Wedon't want to do business with an entity whose reputation we're notcomfortable with.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. One of the things that the Drexelcase shows is that if there are serious problems in one part of thefirm, those problems cannot be isolated from the rest of the firm. Inthat case, even though the primary dealer that we do business with hadcapital in excess of regulatory guidelines and all the rest of it,once the name of the firm was so badly tarnished, people wouldn't dobusiness with the government security firm even in a context of bookentry transactions in government securities. So you can't fullyisolate or insulate the primary dealer from the affairs of the firm asa whole.3/27/90But if we ever have a need to raise a concern about theaffairs of a firm as a whole, we always do it in very closecollaboration with the SEC. We go to extraordinary lengths in all ofthese types of issues through the day-to-day, at times hour-to-hour,very close if not intimate, working relationship with the SEC. TheSEC is always center stage. Again, in the case of this company, italso happens to be true that some of the most serious problems thatwere encountered once the chute went up happened to be in entitiesthat were not regulated by the SEC at all. So both we and the SEC hadthe problem of these unregulated entities being the focal point ofsome of the greatest sources of tension as they applied to marketsgenerally. But, Governor Seger, we do try to maintain what we looselythink of as a fit-and-proper standard that's built into the written,published guidelines for primary dealers. What it essentially triesto say is that we recognize that even where, as in this case, thebusiness entity that we're doing business with is fine--indeed, thiswas a good government securities dealer--if the rest of the firm getsinto deep trouble, no matter how good the entity is that we're doingbusiness with and even though it may be a business entity to itself,it will be contaminated by the problems of the rest of the firm. Andthat, of course, is precisely what happened. We try to walk that fineline, and there is no case where we would make the point about anyother aspect of the firm without close consultation and collaborationwith the SEC.MS. SEGER. Well, that's why I asked: to see if I wasunderstanding Peter's comment about junk bond financing correctly.Because whether or not they choose to underwrite junk bonds is--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We would never say anything aboutwhether a firm should be doing junk bond financing or not. We mightmake a comment, as we did in this case, about the overall liquidity ofthe firm--about the ability of the firm to meet its obligations in theevent of adversity. And we might stress, as we did, that they oughtto be thinking seriously about how they would respond to problems.But we would never say they should or shouldn't do this or that. Wewould always be very, very general. If we thought something specificneeded to be said we would call Mr. Ketchum or Mr. Breeden or somebody[else at the SEC] and say: "Look, you ought to be aware of this." Wewere the ones that first called to the attention of the SEC the factthat the excess capital was being taken out of the broker dealer. Wenever told them what they should do about it, but we certainlyinformed them of it; and it was up to them what they did about it.MR. JOHNSON. Jerry, don't we have a legal authority to setterms and conditions for primary dealer status when they do businesswith the Fed?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Right.MR. JOHNSON. So, if they don't want to be part of that club,they don't have to.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's correct. Oh, sure.MR. JOHNSON. So it's not like we have regulatory authority;they don't have to be a primary dealer and buy and sell securitieswith the Fed.3/27/90VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Technically, I don't think we havelegal authority. I think it grows out of--MR. JOHNSON. Is there any legal issue about the terms andconditions we might set for a dealer to do business with us? Legally,could we say we don't like the rest of your business and we're notgoing to do business with you?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Oh, sure.MR. HOSKINS. Have we done that? Have we pulled a primarydealer?MR. JOHNSON. I don't know if we ever have. I'm just saying,as Peter pointed out, that as far as our business relationship withthe dealer goes, I think we could probably set any conditions wewanted to.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's right; that's because it's notstatutory.MR. JOHNSON. But of course they don't have to do thebusiness.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's a very fine line. We agonizedin the period after Drexel had pleaded guilty under what the U.S.attorney [unintelligible] and had entered into this agreement with theSEC. There was just no question that the government securities entityitself had nothing to do with all these problems. And we agonizedabout the kind of point that Governor Johnson is making: Should we, onthe basis of general fit-and-proper standards, terminate in a publicway our relationship with the firm? As I said, we talked about it atgreat length and finally decided that doing that in a public way,given all that was going on, probably in and of itself would haveproduced the immediate demise of the firm as a whole. So what we did,in effect, was put them on a formal probation. We put them on noticethat if they failed to live up to all of the commitments they had madeto the U.S. attorney and to the SEC, we would publicly stop doingbusiness with them. But it was one of those very tough calls on anissue; I think in retrospect our instincts were right. Had we justovertly, publicly, stopped doing business with them instead ofprivately putting them on notice and putting them on probation, it'snow very clear to me that that action, had we taken it, would havecaused the demise of the firm; it was that tender. Now, it happenedanyway. I must say I would rather that it happened the way it didthan as a result of some overt action on our part.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there any new evidence as to whetheror not, when the firm is fully liquidated, there will be any capitalleft?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's still hard to tell.MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't really have a final answer on that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I recall one of the major subs, which isthe public side of the SEC regulation, has a note to the parentcompany that presumably would be the vehicle by which any excess3/27/90capital up in the regulated sub would go through the parent and backdown. But if there are other obligations of the parent, does thatline stand in any securer position, do you know? I'm talkingspecifically about the commodity stuff.MR. PATRIKIS. The holding company you're referring to iscalled the Trading Corporation, which did foreign exchange, oil, andcommodities [trading]. We can use as an example theCentral Bank, which dealt with the Trading Corporation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's exactly the issue I wanted toraise.MR. PATRIKIS. Say there's a $125 billion loan, either goldor bonds. If the Trading Corporation is a general creditor of theparent because it [unintelligible] funds to finance the parent'sholding of bridge loans and junk bonds, that sub would share with allother creditors of the parent equally. So, if there are tradecreditors, whatever creditors [unintelligible] with the parent allcome before the shareholders of the parent. The have anadvantage over the in that they got a guaranteefrom the holding company. They have legally to collect two[unintelligible] for distribution with the sub and themselves and ifthe sub had distribution. At least from what the lawyers of thesay, they are hoping to get at least 70 cents on thedollar. Now, if they get that, that means that the shells of theholding company don't get anything. All these central bank creditorsof the Trading Company will all have to collect before theshareholders will collect, unless someone says that this subsidiaryought to be subordinated--that it's unfair for the other creditors ofthe holding company--in which case all of those who did business withthat subsidiary will come in second. And that's what the fighting isgoing to be about in the bankruptcy court: who is going to stand firstin the line of creditors. Then we may just see what's going to beleft for the shareholders, if there's any equity left at all.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. One of the problems, too, in termsof what may be left is that you have to take the common things liketheir leasehold obligations. Their leasehold obligations, believe itor not, are in the area of $11 million a month.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And there are a lot of leases.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. And there are a lot of leases.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions of Mr. Sternlight?MR. FORRESTAL. Peter, are the market participants that youtalk to expressing any concern about the Comptroller's examinations invarious parts of the country? Are they talking to you about thepossibilities of a credit crunch?MR. STERNLIGHT. In our calls with some of the major moneycenter banks we do hear some reference to that. But I think they'retalking more just about what they hear generally. I don't get thesense that they're talking about their own situations having beenimpacted that severely, although some of them do tell us that theyhave been taking a more conservative view in their lending. It's a3/27/90mixed sense that I get. It's not so much because of regulatorsbearing down but more just that in light of general conditions in thelast year or two they have wanted to take a more restrained view abouttheir lending programs.MR. FORRESTAL. But the nonbankers are not focusing on itvery much?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, there have been some articles in thepress talking about the whole subject and some of the marketparticipants--nonbanks as well--will refer to that. Some of them seeit as a factor in shaping their economic outlook to some degree.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Peter, is there any evidence that whereAmerican banks are pulling back on this issue the Japanese are movingin?MR. STERNLIGHT. I have not encountered that, Mr. Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, you do hear it in real estate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I know of one instance having--MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I know of two or three instances inBoston where foreign loan production officers, foreign representationofficers, have come in and taken over real estate deals withestablished developments in two cases and with a new development inanother case.MR. JOHNSON. I was just looking at those credit datayesterday. What's interesting is that everybody talks about thecontraction going on in real estate financing, but in fact from whatthe data show that hasn't slowed down at all. It's really just thebusiness credit that is slowing down, which is quite disturbing. Thatis the source of the credit slowdown; it's not in the real estatearea.MR. HOSKINS. One of the arguments bankers use on that isthat they have commitments and that once you're in, you're in--youhave no way to get out. So they keep putting new money in, and wewon't see the real impacts of this tightening--MR. JOHNSON. Until they're all drawn?MR. HOSKINS. Yes, until what's in the pipeline dries up.John might--MR. PARRY. Manley, were you talking about total real estate[financing] or real estate [financing] provided by commercial banks?MR. JOHNSON. I think I was looking at both, but it was thetotal that I was talking about.MR. PARRY. There has been some switching, of course, in thecommercial banking industry.MR. JOHNSON. I know. I looked at both of them. But I wasthinking of the most aggregate numbers. If I remember, those numbers3/27/90were still clicking along at 15 to 25 percent annualized growth and itwas business credit that was really slowing down.MR. KOHN. Business credit at commercial banks slowed downaround the turn of the year. Some of that was the slowness to [moveto] lower primes, so commercial paper surged at the same time. And alot of it was merger-related financing. If you take out the merger-related financing and add back in the commercial paper, you get a verysluggish picture in short-term business credit. But it's a picturethat's been present since at least the beginning of 1989.MR. JOHNSON. Right. What's real estate doing there?MR. KOHN. Well, I just have the bank real estate data.We're estimating for March, on a very preliminary basis, about a 10percent increase. That follows increases of 13 percent in Februaryand 7 percent in January. The January number, however, was probablyaffected by writedowns. Last year we were running in the 10 to 12percent area and that seems to be continuing pretty much.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I was wrong; it's about 10 to 12 percentannualized.MR. PARRY. But there has to be a big FIRREA effect there.MR. JOHNSON. Yes, it could be. That doesn't show any signof deceleration, to me at least. There is that weak January relativeto trend but February is as strong as ever in there.MR. KOHN. And March is close to February; it's just a little[less].MR. JOHNSON. Okay.MR. SYRON. Manley, I think what's happening--if the evidencefrom our small neck of the woods has any relevance to this--is thatsome of the larger and pretty much creditworthy developers are findingalternative sources of credit and they really haven't slowed down agreat deal. The smaller and medium-size firms in the C&I loan areaare suffering somewhat as a fallout of this experience. They find itdifficult to get working capital; [their access earlier] had existedon a relationship basis with institutions that now have difficultiesbecause of the real estate problems.MR. JOHNSON. Yes.MR. SYRON. There's a change in the composition because theforeign banks are not coming in and picking up that financing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mr.Sternlight? If not, first can I have a motion to ratify transactionsby the Desk since the February meeting?MR. KELLEY. Moved.MS. SEGER. Second.3/27/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Secondly, can I havea motion to approve the leeway request of Mr. Sternlight?MR. SYRON. Move it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We now move on tothe staff reports on the economic situation with Messrs. Prell andTruman.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for either gentleman?MR. PARRY. Ted, I have two questions. You mentioned theassumption about the path of the dollar. Is that the declining[unintelligible]? Could you give me some numbers? I can't rememberwhat you were assuming before.MR. TRUMAN. We're assuming from now on, [after] the firstquarter, that the dollar will decline on average about 3 percent.MR. PARRY. This year.MR. TRUMAN. For the rest of the forecast period--takingaccount of the adjustment through the first quarter, which still isnegative. And that compares with 5 percent in the last forecast.Then you adjust for the higher inflation abroad and that's where Isort of got the 1/2 percent.MR. PARRY. You pointed to some areas of strength that mayshow up in Eastern Europe other than in East Germany. The secondquestion is: Isn't there another side that perhaps doesn't get as muchattention, and that is that there could be some very important sourcesof weakness as well? One gets the impression that in places likeHungary and Czechoslovakia orders from the the Soviet Union havedeclined very substantially in the steel industry and other areas aswell. Isn't it conceivable that in 1990 growth in those areas mayactually turn out to be less than was anticipated before the--MR. TRUMAN. I think so. The major focus of our analysis hasbeen on the German situation.MR. PARRY. Right.MR. TRUMAN. Basically, as far as the rest of Eastern Europeis concerned, we took the general level of exports of those countrieswith the United States and added on $1 billion or something like thatby the end of the forecast period just to get some sense of where onewould be going in the future. But I agree with you that in the shortrun we could have some negative impacts. It's a little hard to factorall these things in because each country is moving at a different[pace.] In Poland, on the one hand, although things seem to have gonedownhill in terms of domestic production, they have gotten, as a-10-3/27/90consequence of the changes there, a great amount of increased accessto foreign exchange. How that nets out in terms of their hardcurrency current account position and potentially demand from us andother countries is a little harder to estimate. And, of course, theoil question, which is in fact a negative impact in the forecast[unintelligible] oil price. It's one manifestation of[unintelligible].MR. PARRY. It's even exaggerated in those countries becauseprices were being subsidized. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. I have two questions. One is: In looking at themost recent CPI number, how much weight are you inclined to give topossible changes because of weather-related factors and seasonals inapparel, with much warmer weather early in the year? Will thingspotentially even out with the spring season earlier on? Is there apossibility that the seasonals were affected, perhaps biasing up theCPI excluding energy compared to the CPI?MR. PRELL. Well, we've anticipated seasonally adjusteddeclines over the next couple of months in apparel prices, which wouldnot have been the pattern with the customary introduction of seasonalapparel over the past couple of years. So, in effect, the answer isthat we are taking this as something of a special factor that shouldunwind over the next couple of months to some degree. Indeed, we'velowered our forecast of the ex food and energy CPI increase for thesecond quarter from what we previously had. But the cumulative effectof the last few months of data in this overall category--even thoughthere are special things like transit charges and other items thatseem to be one-time events--has been that the trend is a littlehigher. It just seems to fit with the general circumstances ofoverall spending being stronger--knowing that that profit marginpressure was there, which businesses presumably would like to relieveto some degree. [Unintelligible] the context of import prices turningupward, thus relieving a bit of the competitive pressure. So it allseems to fit together in this direction. We've raised [our forecastof] prices ex food and energy this year; they change Q4 to Q4 by .2percent, a fairly modest change.MR. SYRON. The second question I have is that I'm ratherstruck by the change in the [unintelligible] of the Greenbook. Overthe next two years where you come out at the [end] is not terriblydifferent from what you had last month.MR. PRELL. That's by design of course. I hope everyone--MR. SYRON. But what is different is this assumption forquite a substantial increase in short-term rates. What I'm wonderingis--you can answer this question either way--where we would come outat the end of this period in terms of the growth of inflation and alsocapacity utilization if we didn't have that increase in rates that'sbuilt into your forecast. What would your answer be? Conversely, ifwe wanted to have significantly more meaningful progress on prices--and I'll let you give the magnitude--how much higher would yourassumption be for an increase [in interest rates]?-11-3/27/90MR. PRELL. Let me say first of all that in terms of thechange in rate assumptions from last time, as you may recall, what weindicated at the February meeting was that we didn't anticipate anysignificant change but in terms of what we had written down inquantitative terms there was a modest upward drift in rates. So therate increase in this projection is not quite the 1 point and 1/2point that I referred to. It comes more quickly. We had had ratesjust drifting up through the projection [period] pretty easily.Whether or not one would characterize this as substantial could bedebated. Certainly, in terms of cyclical movements in interest ratesthat in the past have caused major changes in the direction of theeconomy, a 1 point change in the funds rate really wouldn't look allthat dramatic. Using our quarterly model and holding the funds rateat the current level throughout the forecast period, we would end upwith a higher level of real GNP at the end of 1991 by about .7percent. And because of the long lag in the price effects, weprobably would see an inflation rate next year only .1 or so higherthan what we have in the forecast. As we've emphasized many times, ittakes some time for those inflation changes to reemerge. One could--MR. SYRON. What kind of unemployment rate would you have atthe end?MR. PRELL. We would have an unemploymnent rate about 1/4 ofa point lower. That's really not a very big difference, and I guessthat's consistent with what I've said about the kind of shock that a 1percentage point interest rate change at the short end imposes on theeconomy. Clearly, if one wanted to move the inflation rate down,these can be applied in reverse. You'd need a substantial rise ininterest rates to make significant progress within 1991 to bring theunemployment rate up much more quickly and reduce capacityutilization. The trajectory going into 1992, however, is analtogether different story. If the unemployment rate were to go inexcess of 6 percent next year, presumably we would begin to see somesignificant deceleration in prices in 1992, all other things equal.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I guess this is directed to Ted. I still have ahard time accepting your idea that the dollar will depreciate, eventhough you're saying you expect it to depreciate less than you hadexpected a month or so ago. I really can't go through this wholescenario and get a depreciating dollar to be consistent with a tightermonetary policy and rising interest rates. I just can't seem to getthat into my mind as something reasonable. I hope you're rightbecause, as you know, I have concerns about our ability to export--little things like that! I don't have a problem with the outcome; Ijust am worried about the likelihood of getting it.MR. TRUMAN. I'm not sure what I hope, actually, at thisstage! I think there are three points. One, which is the basicstory, is that we had some improvement--and I'm excluding capitalgains and losses--in the current account in the last quarter of lastyear. That was $1 billion at an annual rate and some furtherimprovement is projected there. We had the view that although thisexternal adjustment problem is shrinking that the general adjustmentproblem would tend to weigh on the dollar. And we have essentiallyadjusted in light of the stronger [interest] rates. We moved from a-12-3/27/90modest weight to 60 percent of the weight or something like that. Idon't think there's any magic in this; it certainly is possible thatthe dollar could be unchanged over this period. It wouldn't make muchdifference in terms of the immediate forecast because most of theeffect of the exchange rates, at least in the context of the forecastand how we put these things together, is the adjustment from themiddle of last year--that part moving through the pipeline. So, onewould take maybe .3 off the growth of GNP over this period if thedollar were unchanged from the first-quarter average levels and maybe$3 or $4 billion off the current account level, if you believe the waythis black box works on these things. The one point I should mentionis that to the extent that the dollar's nominal strength wereassociated with [higher] inflation abroad, then in real terms youwould be in about the same place. If inflation went to 6 percent inthe major industrial countries on average and the dollar wasunchanged, or if it [depreciate] by 3 percent relative to where weare now, in terms of the way things worked out that would be about thesame. The [depreciation] essentially would offset the inflationabroad. So, one needs to set that partly aside. That's the best Ican do. We've been wrong before and no doubt we'll be wrong again--which way I'm not sure.MS. SEGER. I'm just nervous about the 7 percent advance inthe dollar vis-a-vis the yen since our last meeting. It reminds mehow difficult it is to get these estimates right even over a shortperiod of time.MR. TRUMAN. Well, we don't even try to do it over a shortperiod of time. One factor that hasn't been focused on very much isthat the current account adjustment in Japan has been quite impressivein dollar terms. A piece of that is the J-curve. But they've hadabout a $30 billion adjustment over 3 years in that current accountposition. So that's 40 percent, essentially--on the same order ofmagnitude that we've had, if you want to put it that way. Part of itis the J-curve; part of ours last year also was the J-curve effect.Some of that is going on but there are some questions about how that'sgoing to play out. You could even tell yourself a story that thecurrent account adjustment is going more rapidly in size in Japanoverall--MS. SEGER. Thank you.MR. TRUMAN. --and that it continues here overall and,therefore, the expected level of the yen/dollar rate in the future is[unintelligible]. Now, that certainly is possible. There are anumber of people who worry about the fact that we could get ourselvesin a situation in which the U.S. current account position is inbalance, however one wants to define that, and the Japanese currentaccount position is in balance and we would be stuck with this largecontinuing imbalance in the [bilateral] trade balance. And that, Ithink, bothers some people for a variety of reasons. But it issomething that can't be ruled out.MR. PARRY. Another point is that in the first quarter thetrade-weighted dollar was down at a double-digit [rate] in spite ofwhat happened to the yen. So we have a very substantial decline inthe trade-weighted---13-3/27/90MS. SEGER. Yes, but actual trade decisions usually are notbased on the weighted average; they're based on movements in specificcurrencies and the arrangements between specific countries.MR. PARRY. But they are weighted according to the amount oftrade that's done.MS. SEGER. Well, the weights are based on ancient history.I think if you look through how they--MR. PARRY. Well, that would give more to Japan if they didit on [ancient] history because Japan had a higher weight.MS. SEGER. All I'm saying, though, is that when you lookforward I believe you have to think in terms of a very micro analysisof the foreign exchange markets if you're going to think about whatthe impact is going to be on our country and our economy.MR. PARRY. Well, you'd use a lesser weight for Japan.MR. TRUMAN. [Unintelligible] uses lesser or bigger weights.In fact we use two weighting systems. On the import side we tend touse import weights and on the export side we tend to use multilateralweights. We have looked at multilateral weights in the models interms of whether changes in the weighting system give you muchdifference and the answer is "no," even though Governor Seger iscorrect that they are ancient weights that haven't changed that muchover time. Obviously, the weakness of the yen is affecting theoutcome and we tried to take that into account. On the other hand,the strength until very recently of the DM and other Europeancurrencies, and the Canadian dollar for that matter, is on the otherside. We have a lot of trade with Canada and they have a huge currentaccount deficit at the moment. They do even up. Whether we havegotten the balance right in terms of these aggregates is obviously anopen question.MS. SEGER. Also, Bob, I think you'll notice that more of ourtrade is with countries such as Taiwan and Hong Kong, etc. And thelast I checked, their currencies were not picked up in the weightedaverage at all.MR. TRUMAN. It is in the forecasting process.MR. PARRY. Yes.MS. SEGER. No, I'm talking about that series we run on theweighted average; I didn't think they were in there. Anyway, onefinal question for Mike: With tighter monetary conditions assumed andrising interest rates and the FIRREA effect, how are we likely to gethousing starts this year of about the same magnitude as last year?MR. PRELL. Well, last year was somewhat erratic; the coursewas generally in a downward direction even though interest rates camedown in the latter half of the year. I would say that we have had avery hard time getting the base level from recent months, given allthe weather effects, so there is clearly a bit of guesswork there.We've looked at the permits for the last couple of months, though, andthey likely are not as affected by weather--particularly in the-14-3/27/90single-family area where we haven't had the HUD effect. Using that assome benchmark, we thought that something that had an underlying levelroughly consistent with that pace would be appropriate for the comingmonths. I don't expect some little payback for the faster starts ofhouses in January and February, but basically that's what guided us.And we don't have very much interest rate movement this year. Sowe're just assuming starts are going to be in that area. This is thearea where some of the other forecasters--mortgage bankers, thehomebuilders, and others--are putting housing starts, so we have somecompany. But, obviously, because of the construction loan issue,there's considerable uncertainty about these figures.MS. SEGER. Thank you very much.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. I just want to follow up on some of thecomments on the international side. First of all, responding to whatBob Parry said, I agree that the trade-weighted dollar is still--Idon't know if it's down but it may be down slightly. It depends onwhat point you're talking about but--MR. PARRY. I'll tell you: it's the fourth quarter of '89.If you compare that to the estimate of the first quarter of this yearis it down, Ted?MR. TRUMAN. 17 percent at an annual rate.MR. PARRY. 17 percent on the weighted average.MR. JOHNSON. From when?MR. TRUMAN. The average of the fourth quarter of '89, whichwas 97 plus, to the average of the first quarter which is [93 on ourindex].MR. PARRY. [Unintelligible].MR. JOHNSON. Okay. You're right; one can play those basegames. But what struck me was the trade-weighted dollar going back tothe end of this huge swing in the dollar. When I pull out that chartand look at the long-term trend in the dollar in the last three years,since 1987, it looks like noise. It just looks like littlefluctuations around a flat or maybe gradually upward drifting pattern.Pull out a long-term chart of the trade-weighted dollar sometime andyou'll be struck by what you see; in the last three years it lookslike just a little fluctuation. And it looks a little soft, too. Ican't believe that anything can result from those kinds offluctuations one way or the other. But going forward, I think thereis a shift, at least in the atmosphere, along the lines of what TedTruman indicated. At least it seems so to me. But what that tellsme--and I'd like a response on this--is that there is a trend ofupward pressure on the dollar, and maybe it won't materialize, for thefollowing reasons. But as you said, Ted, there's serious doubt nowabout the deutschemark being the anchor for the EMS. They seem to bewilling to accommodate the unification in Germany at the expense ofsome inflation. I don't know how much, but the fact that they haven'tmoved rates relative to expectations already is raising some serious-15-3/27/90doubts. And the DM has even weakened; the dollar was at 1.64 and nowit's around 1.71 from the low point. If you look at the Japanesesituation, obviously, there's a lot of turmoil going on. There are alot of expected inflationary pressures, financial market problems,governmental weakness--all those kinds of things. When I look at thatsetting, it's really hard for me to see the trade-weighted dollardepreciating in that scenario. Even if rates rise there, as youpointed out yourself, there's a good chance that those will be nominalrate moves that aren't even keeping up with inflationary pressures.And we've already seen that nominal rate differentials have narroweddramatically against the dollar and the dollar hasn't weakened. Therehas been a rise recently in the trade-weighted dollar, but that'smainly because of the DM. The fact is that the dollar has come downagainst the DM over the period [since] last fall, but other EMScurrencies have been tied into that to some extent. Looking forward,as long as we maintain our anti-inflationary policies, I can't seeanything but upward pressure on the dollar. Explain to me how thedollar is going to depreciate in this environment.MR. PARRY. Well, if you look at Germany, Ted did explain itin the sense that if there's going to be greater economic activity ineastern Germany, it's going to affect western Germany in that thereturn on capital is likely to rise. If the real rate of return oncapital in Germany rises, I would assume that investors would makeportfolio shifts into--MR. JOHNSON. Yes, but I would argue that that effect hasalready taken place. That's why the dollar is down about 15 percentor so against the DM, from 1.9 to 1.7. But going forward, if they'regoing to have an inflationary experience out of this, then--MR. TRUMAN. But there clearly is room for a differentscenario, a more rapid inflation scenario, and that's why I put thatforward as a risk. As the staff usually does on these things, we sortof bend part way in that direction in putting together the overallforecast, but not all the way. To the extent that we get both moreinflation and more economic activity than we've built in, we are goingto get more corrections on the current account. In addition to thereal versus nominal split, we would get more in terms of just theadjustment process and the dollar could well appreciate. This is nota very finely-tuned point [estimate of the] deficit. There is anotherpoint, which your first comment illustrates, that I think should beemphasized. Again, it can be viewed in two directions. Given thefact that the dollar has been in this channel--a wide channel, but achannel--for three years now, one might argue that the current accountperformance has been remarkably good. Indeed, in the last year or soit has been much better than most models would have predicted.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Than what?MR. ANGELL. Models.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're talking about the adjustmentprocess?MR. TRUMAN. Yes. The U.S. current account position is doingmuch better than [predicted]. We were saying a year ago that with thedollar staying where it was the current account was going to-16-3/27/90deteriorate and it has not. Now, you were saying that indeed aprocess is going on here which is outside of the exchange rate,however you want to weigh the process; or you could say that we havethe [weights] all wrong and somehow the past will catch up with us.It is an area of uncertainty in terms of the whole outlook.MR. JOHNSON. I can see it's definitely uncertain. I wouldsay that's one plausible scenario; what seems to me equally plausibleis that the dollar becomes strong from this point on.MR. TRUMAN. But if it's on the inflation side, I don't thinkit will affect the basic forecast very much.MR. JOHNSON. I certainly agree with that in the short run.MR. TRUMAN. Okay. And if it's because of prospects foreconomic activity, then presumably that will help us. And onequestion is: To what extent is this featured appropriately in the 18-month forecast?MR. JOHNSON. Just trying to create a little noise.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mike, one of the interesting parts of monetarypolicy is that we have options of being sometimes correct andsometimes incorrect on the forecast, but we also can be sometimes boldand sometimes timid. I'm wondering why it is that in your forecastyou have us being so timid. That is, you're saying 100 basis pointshigher on short-term interest rates toward the end of the year. Well,if you're correct in your forecast, why not bring that interest rateincrease by and large into the second quarter? Wouldn't that producea better achievement of Federal Reserve objectives? That would, ofcourse, make Ted's forecast wrong. But wouldn't that be the boldthing to do, Mike?MR. PRELL. I couldn't do that if it would make Ted'sforecast wrong! I'd never hear the end of it! This is something wehave to deal with every time we put together a forecast. Essentially,we're trying to give some indication of how we think monetary policyprobably will have to move in order to bring about what we discern tobe your objectives. One element in terms of how forceful an action webuild in here is our assessment of whether the outcome we have wouldseem to be consistent with your objectives. Obviously, you all havesomewhat different objective functions to some degree; and I think thekey feature of this is that as we get toward the end of 1991 we don'thave a discernibly different inflation trend than we did in the priorforecast. It's one where we feel the peak has been reached and thingsare turning toward a lower trend of inflation, but only very slowly.Indeed, one might debate whether that is the proper objective andwhether we caught that right.In terms of the timing of the interest rate increase, Isuppose in this instance I've indulged in some effort to temper thissomewhat with uncertainties that I've noted. I've reached thejudgment that, given that the real boost to domestic production isforecast not to occur until 1991, there was an interval here in whichone could await some clarification of some of these uncertainties-17-3/27/90before moving what I characterized as a fairly moderate amount. Ifone felt you had to move 2 percentage points or 3 percentage points inorder to rein things in, then whether it would make sense to have thisall happening in about 3 or 4 months' time or to spread it out over alonger interval would have presented us with a different issue. Butin effect, we've tempered this in terms of timing on the basis of themany uncertainties that we think exist right now.MR. ANGELL. So--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So to interpret Mike, what he's sayingis that he's not worried about Ted's forecast; he's worried that if weraise rates right now it will affect his forecast!MR. PRELL. We've always recognized that possibility. I wantto emphasize that matters of timing, given these small amounts, wouldnot make a great difference in our projections. That's maybe oneargument for why we should always do something smoothly. But we alsotry to capture the uncertainties and the policy realities that exist.MR. ANGELL. Well, I'm reading into your answer that you'resuggesting we be timid because you think you may be wrong. That'salways the wise thing to do: to be timid if you think you may bewrong. But clearly what you've shown on the path in regard to theemployment gap that you believe is necessary for price level stabilityis not occurring as rapidly in the 1990 forecast as you hadanticipated previously. And I guess one [unintelligible] your lack ofboldness in wanting to create that kind of employment gap so as toachieve the proper price level improvement for 1991, because clearlythe 1991 price level forecast is unacceptable.MR. PRELL. Some of my colleagues would argue that we've beenbold, in a sense, in not raising our wage forecast more than we have.In that sense we have taken the lower unemployment rate and said it'snot going to have a significant effect on the wage outlook becausewe've taken a fairly optimistic view of the incoming information. AndI suggested that that was a risk. It's in essence saying we may beable to get by with a somewhat lower unemployment rate in the shortrun than we thought previously. I tried to highlight that risk. Wementioned it explicitly in the Greenbook. And that's one reason whywe didn't feel the compulsion to put in a more aggressive move interms of timing on the--MR. ANGELL. Well, I may have done you a disservice becauseyou may have been forecasting that we wouldn't be bold rather than--MR. PRELL. We're always in this tough position and we try tobe as neutral as possible, not injecting ourselves into the short-runtactical decisions.MR. SYRON. I think that has something to do with thecharacterization of what kind of time period and whether [an interestrate move of] 100 basis points is significant or not significant.There's a difference between whether it's significant or notsignificant in terms of the real economy and whether it's significantor not significant in terms of how much the Committee moves in arelatively short time.-18-3/27/90MR. PRELL. Well, I think we can look back to 1988-89 and seethat the Committee really has moved significantly at times.MR. SYRON. Come back to--MR. PARRY. But you never incorporated change in policy inthe intermeeting period just immediately ahead, right?MR. PRELL. Sometimes we have when it looked like you had tomove a considerable amount within a short period of time in order tohead things off. Normally, we don't build things in immediately.MR. PARRY. Sure.MR. PRELL. But there have been times when we have.MR. ANGELL. No further questions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You were finding this meeting very dulland you're finding a way to stir it up! President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. My question has already been answered, or atleast commented on.MR. BLACK. You got reckless there for a minute!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, I have a much narrower and less provocativequestion. It has to do with profits. We have seen this pressure onprofits for quite some time now. Is that pretty widely distributedacross the economy or is it concentrated in a few sectors ofmanufacturing or where?MR. PRELL. There are some sectors in manufacturing that onecan identify as having suffered relatively more than others. But itisn't only manufacturing where the profits have turned down. One cansee utilities and transportation, for example, as sectors whereprofits have turned down. Within manufacturing it's a mixed bag, andwe only have figures through the third quarter of last year. Some ofthe areas that stick out are in the machinery and equipment area and,obviously, motor vehicles. Chemicals seem to have peaked out.Surprisingly, primary metals and fabricated metals held up fairly welllast year. So, there are many industries in which profits have beensqueezed, but it's somewhat uneven.MR. STERN. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. One last point, just following up on what Ithink Governor Angell was suggesting--I'm not sure if it's in the[vein] of stirring things up again--on what might be the way to goabout this since everybody, I think, is frustrated with the pricenumbers they keep seeing in your scenario. Why not take an improvedprice scenario and tell us what kind of interest rates and economicperformance go with it? And then let us make a decision about whetherthat's an acceptable risk or not.-19-3/27/90MR. PRELL. Well, we certainly have presented on severaloccasions specific alternative scenarios that will do more [onprices]. We had the lengthy presentation in December about longer-range disinflation paths. I think you--MR. JOHNSON. [Unintelligible] that people want to see someimprovement in this period of '90, '91, and '92 and they don't see it.And the fact is that they want to know what the cost is of achievingit. They basically are saying: "Look, this is what goes with noprogress. What goes with the progress?"MR. PRELL. Frankly, what we try to do is listen and hit asclose to the middle of the Committee's expressed desires here inshaping our scenarios. I certainly will listen to what I hear todayand we will adjust accordingly. As I said, my sense is that there arevarying degrees of aggressiveness around the table with regard togoing all out to bring down the inflation rate within the next year orso. And I guess we felt that the highest priority was on establishinga trend, and that's simply what we've done. But we can be more--MR. JOHNSON. I agree with that, but the problem is--MR. BLACK. Well, it's in the wrong direction.MR. KOHN. You were presented alternatives in February andwill be again in July.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I'll ask Mike a timid question. We've had apretty big surprise in terms of increases in the inflation rate--afull percentage point since the last meeting on the CPI as well as thefixed-weight. If we were to look at a simple forecasting model, notnecessarily a judgmental one, wouldn't a surprise like that tend to bebuilt into longer-term inflation rates? I'm just wondering--well, I'masking that question of you. But secondly, I'd like your judgmentabout the issue that Wayne has raised. Even though you haven't donean alternative forecast, there may be some expectational effects frommoving early and small as opposed to moving later and large. I thinkthat kind of gets at Wayne's question. I'd just like to hear yourobservations on the latter and also your comments on what simpleforecast models would do, given a surprise with respect to long-terminflation.MR. PRELL. On the latter question, to the extent that yousurprise people with your aggressiveness in responding to what mightappear to be a stronger inflationary risk, then I think credibility isenhanced and maybe it does not take a large move but merely one thatcomes sooner than the market had expected. So, I would certainlygrant that point. In terms of the surprise and what it would implyfor prospective inflation, one aspect of the models would be that tothe extent they have backward-looking expectations or lagged prices intheir wage equations, that would tend to build the momentum inprospectively through markup models of prices. In effect, in our casewe didn't feed this through to wages. Partly, it's quite conceivablethat inflation expectations [unintelligible] a forward-lookingexpectations model in wage formation and that they really will notreflect the food and energy price bulges that presumably will unwind,-20-3/27/90and we may not have as big a price expectation problem. In terms oferrors and so on, it isn't necessarily inherent in the models as tohow one should translate that. That's at the discretion of the modeloperator to decide whether to have negative or positive adjustments infuture [unintelligible] to a surprise. But as I suggested, we havetaken a somewhat more optimistic view than models would of the recentexperience. And with [unintelligible] to prospects.MR. HOSKINS. Well, I'd just like to compliment you on theboldness of your answer to the previous question, which I think wasappropriate. That is, if you look at this Committee and try to deducewhat it's going to do, I don't find anything wrong with your Greenbookprojection.MR. PRELL. You're not making my life easier! I badly feel[unintelligible] consensus here.MR. BLACK. What does that say about your thoughts on theevaluation of the Committee?MR. ANGELL. [Unintelligible].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I only want to saythat since Mike has said that he builds his forecast upon what hethinks to be the center of the sentiment of the Committee, I'd like tobe counted on the side that has been set forth by Governors Angell andJohnson, and perhaps Lee Hoskins, for the period ahead. I think thenumbers we are looking at with respect to inflation are discouragingover the horizon. As a result, if indeed it's going to take somesnugging up, the sooner we do it the better. That's a little into thenext part of the meeting, but I just wanted to be counted in the groupso that this center comes a little closer to what I'd like.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for eithergentleman? If not, I think it's time for us to do our tour de table.Who would like to start off? Ed.MR. BOEHNE. I think our District is moving at odds with thenation, because various sectors are weakening and weakening relativeto the nation as a whole. Manufacturing is quite weak and taking onsome of the characteristics of previous recessionary periods formanufacturing. Housing is down and I don't see much happening there.Nonresidential construction is still growing but I think that's moreof a pipeline effect of finishing the projects that already have beenstarted. Out beyond that I think one sees a fair amount of excesscapacity. Financial services, which have been leading the Mid-Atlantic region for some years, are characterized by layoffs. Retailsales are flat. Job growth is essentially nil and unemployment isrising; it now is about where the nation is as a whole and I wouldguess 5 or 6 of our various cities and towns are seeing unemploymentrates of around 7 percent or exceeding 7 percent.I think there is some basis to this bank lending phenomenonthat we were talking about; it's more than smoke. I have talked withjust about every major bank in our District in recent weeks andparticularly in those that are examined by the Comptroller there is a-21-3/27/90definite scaling back. Part of it is that people who are running thebanks as well as the lending officers do not have that long a trackrecord. Most of their top-level experience is in times of expansionand they're not quite sure how to react [now]. The other part is thatthe Comptroller's examiners really haven't done a very good job ofexamining banks lately. They are coming on like gangbusters. I haveheard more than once the comment "They're scaring the heck out of us."Some of that I think is useful and constructive, but the risk ofoverreaction is there. I ask myself where some of these small andmedium-sized businesses are going to go for their money. We have hadabout 40 or so new banks start up and many of them are state banks. Isuspect that in their eagerness we will see some of those loans shiftover there and they probably will not do as good a job indistinguishing between the good and the bad.So, I think the District is out of phase with the nation.Inflation has begun to moderate and come down. As I look at thenation, clearly the inflation outlook has worsened; it'sdisappointing. We're not getting what we want; there's no questionabout that. When I look at the risk of recession, I would have to saythat, yes, the risk is down. I think Mike did a nice job ofsummarizing the various national sectors in the Greenbook. But eventaking his own analysis, except for personal consumption, one does notsee much of a forward thrust. You don't see it in housing; you don'tsee it in [non]residential construction; you don't see it in exports.The only area in which you see fairly modest growth is consumption.While that is the biggest chunk of the economy by far, I would like tosee a little more support than that one sector for me to say thatwe're out of the woods as far as the economy moving ahead. So, Ithink we find ourselves in a bad box: The inflation situation isworsening; and while I for one think the odds of a recession are down,I'm not willing to say we're out of the woods. I think we need somecaution in making that assumption as far as policy goes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the Twelfth District is also out ofphase with the rest of the nation. The economy remains strong,although the sources of strength have changed. The growth ofemployment in the past year in the entire Twelfth District has been3.4 percent, which is an extraordinarily large gain relative to the 2percent for the rest of the nation. Economic growth in most parts ofthe region remains very high. As an example, over that period thereare three states--Washington, Idaho, and Oregon--where growth rates ofemployment were 6 to 10 percent in the past year. Looking at all 9states, even Arizona, which had a very respectable 3.5 percent growthrate, exceeded the average in the entire District. Constructionemployment is very strong; it was up 8.1 percent in the past year.And manufacturing [employment] rose .9 percent in the past year,compared to a fall of 1.4 percent nationally. There has been someshift, however, away from California to other parts of the District.Employment growth in California is getting much closer to that of therest of the nation. Whereas in 1988 California accounted for 63percent of all the employment growth in our District, last year it wasonly 44 percent. Also, similar to Arizona, we have seen someweakening of housing prices in some California markets.-22-3/27/90If I may turn to the national economy: As we've all discussedso far this morning, real growth, inflation, and interest pressurescertainly seem to be stronger than they were at the time of the lastmeeting. Even with some restraint from higher interest rates, whichis in both the Greenbook forecast and in our own, we would expect realGNP growth of at least 2 percent this year. I think some of thatstrength is going to come from consumption spending, reflecting thepast strength in disposable income. I would also anticipate thatstronger foreign GNP growth will lead to greater strength in netexports than previously had seemed likely. We're expecting the GNPfixed-weight index to average something very similar to that shown inthe Greenbook, around 4-1/2 percent both this year and next.Admittedly, part of this worsening is due to firmer oil prices and theeffects of past weakness in the trade-weighted dollar. Of course, ifthese factors were to reverse themselves, then we could get a break onthe inflation front. Moreover, the fact that wages have beenperforming well probably does limit the size of the inflation problem.However, it's our view that the best way to insure that inflationbegins to subside--and that certainly is not something that we see inour forecast--is to maintain moderate economic growth. Thank you, Mr.Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, [unintelligible] the advent ofspring weather, but within a District context I sense that the levelof economic activity has improved at least modestly both in tone andin fact. January and February were really very weak, of course,mainly because of the auto business, and that has persisted. I thinkthere has been some improvement. For example, the steel business ismuch better. Orders are coming in from a fairly broad spectrum ofindustries, backlogs are up, and in some cases shipments are beingdeferred. Those I talk to are continuing to forecast shipments thisyear of, say, 81 to 82 million tons, and if there are any revisions,they are more likely to be up rather than down. Construction activityin the District continues to be strong, indeed above the nationalnumbers. There continue to be just an awful lot of commercialprojects coming along in Chicago. Vacancy rates are still in line butI hope we're not beginning to replicate the New England experience.Downtown Indianapolis, the different part of the District, apparentlyis going through a very substantial commercial real estate growthphase. Home sales are ahead of last year and permits continue to behigh, which is indicative of a continuing good level of housing.Machinery business is quite good, with agricultural equipment forexample at very high levels. The outlook is good for that industry;production schedules would suggest an 8 percent increase over lastyear.The big uncertainty continues to be the automobile sector.Certainly, the incentives of January are lame. The first 20-day salesof March were very much on the weak side. Unsold inventory is up abit but not out of line for this time of year. Second-quarterproduction schedules look to be about 25 percent higher than the firstquarter but still would be lower than the second quarter of last year.And in the case of one manufacturer, it's a substantial reduction fromlast year. The industry continues to forecast [sales of] cars andlight trucks together of [14-1/2 million]. That number happens to be-23-3/27/90a little higher than our number but they are anticipating a prettygood second half to come up to that higher number.In the agricultural sector, there has been a very significantimprovement over the last few weeks. At the last meeting I reportedthat the moisture issue was a significant concern. We've had verygood rains over the last three or four weeks and at the meeting of ouragricultural advisory council last week we heard that the plantingconditions are the best they've seen in quite a number of years. Forlivestock, the outlook continues to be very good. Land values arecontinuing to move up fairly slowly, which I think is constructive.On the credit side, I've talked to a number of banks withinthe last few weeks and, despite the numbers to the contrary, I thinkthere's a difference in opinion on commercial real estate. I sensesome shutdown on that. Also, I will say that I've heard of oneproject in Chicago in which a Japanese bank was going to participateand within the last few days it has backed out. Our small businessadvisory council last week reported that they do sense some tighteningof credit conditions and attitudes on the part of lenders. Morepaperwork is required, more detail, more this and that; therefore,it's making it harder for the smaller companies to get credit.On the inflation side, our outlook is perhaps a bit betterthan the staff forecast. Competitive conditions continue to be prettyintense. Price increases just aren't sticking, at least in the fullsense. There has been enough new capacity in some industries--and Ithink paper is a good example of that--that the [competitive] pricepressures will continue. Wage settlements seem favorable and are notin any way getting out of line. Offsetting that, though, just as acouple of negative items, I keep hearing about huge percentageincreases in health care costs that are going through. Also, as adifferent item, we're starting to hear from some companies about theincrease in transportation costs that they're beginning to experience.We have had a somewhat more positive view on the economy thanthe staff and, therefore, we think the upward revision that Mike hasgone through is appropriate. We continue to think that the outlookfor inflation is perhaps a bit better than the staff forecast, but I'dhave to admit that our worry level on the inflation side is certainlyhigher at this meeting than was the case at the last meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. In the Sixth District, Mr. Chairman, thingsreally have not changed appreciably since the last meeting, but I havethe sense that they're getting a little better. Certainly, there's abit more optimism among people that I talk to. A lot of our contactsare reporting that business is not only better in the early part of1990 in actual terms, but much better than they had expected. Buthaving said that, there is still a continuing concern about recession,and there's a lot of caution in the marketplace. The weak spots, ofcourse, continue to be autos and related products. I think we alsowould have weakness in textile manufacturing, aluminum, and timberwere it not for pretty strong export demand that is keeping themgoing. If that export demand were to subside, given the state of thehousing market, I think those sectors also would be in trouble.Energy continues to get better. In fact, we have reports now that-24-3/27/90some of the companies are finding it difficult to get skilled platformworkers. I don't know where they've gone, but they've gone to otherplaces and to other industries and they're not coming back. We alsohave had reports, which I found interesting, of some foreign interestin buying U.S. refineries. Retail sales seem to be fairly good--notgreat, but not bad either. We're not detecting any particular wagepressures or price pressures, although I put that in the context ofwhat the expectation is. I think business people are building in a4-1/2 to 5 percent inflation level in their contracts.The big item, and it has been alluded to before in ourdiscussion, is this fear among business people and bankers of a creditcrunch. I find it a little difficult to evaluate whether there reallyhas been substantial credit rationing. On the one hand, the banks inthe Southeast that already have been examined are clearly increasingtheir provisions for loan losses and there will be some pulling backthere. And I think the banks that are next on the list [to beexamined] are apprehensive and perhaps are taking some defensivemeasures by pulling back. But the general sense I have is that thegood loans are being made and the marginal ones perhaps are not. Thegood bankable loans still are going forward, as far as I can tell.On the national economy, we agree with the Greenbookforecast. Our forecast had been stronger earlier on than theGreenbook's, so we're in agreement with them. There is still the riskof a downturn but I think the risk has shifted a little more towardinflation. I'm really very disappointed, as I'm sure most of us are,about the projection for inflation. Like some others, I find it veryhard in the forecast horizon to see much of a depreciation of thedollar. We've talked about some of the economic factors involved inthat. But what is uppermost in my mind are the political activitiesthat are going on around the world that I think are affecting thedollar substantially. We not only have the situations in Japan andGermany, but the situation in the United Kingdom is very uncertain atthe moment. And I must say that events in Eastern Europe are notturning out the way people had expected. This Lithuanian developmentcould turn the whole situation around a great deal. With that kind ofpolitical uncertainty in the world, I think the dollar is still thesafe haven and the place for investment. So, a depreciation of thedollar is not in the cards as far as I can see--in the near term, inany event.With respect to inflation, not only are the people that I'mtalking to complacent about inflation but I think that complacency isnow turning into an antagonism toward Fed policy. More and more I'mhearing: "Why are you guys so concerned about inflation? You'rereally doing a lot more harm than good." So, while the risk of somerecession may be there, as I said, the real danger is increasinginflation. And I think we have a difficult job not only in containinginflation and bringing it down but also in persuading the country thatthis is the right road and the one we should be on.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the changes in the staffprojections are clearly in the right direction. As a lot of peoplehave indicated, there is a great deal of uncertainty, but I do thinkwe have enough hard information now to know that the inventory swing-25-3/27/90from the fourth quarter of last year to the first quarter of this yearwas [more] than we thought. Consequently, it looks as if the rate ofgrowth in real GNP in the first quarter is going to be correspondinglyhigher. One of the key points looking ahead, of course, is that thestaff has projected that there will be some rise in interest ratesover this period of time in order to get roughly the same rate ofgrowth in GNP and more or less the same sort of inflation figures. Ithink that change in policy assumptions is quite correct. We've had asustained growth in M2 for about 9 months now and this may wellstrengthen aggregate demand considerably. In addition, events inEastern Europe have moved much more rapidly than anybody felt theyprobably would. So it seems to me that the transformation of theseeconomies is necessarily going to lead to higher real interest ratesthroughout the industrial world. Given this assumed upward adjustmentin rates that the staff has incorporated in its forecast, I think therisk is about evenly split between up and down. If they had notraised these rates, I would have placed the risk on the up side intheir forecast. I don't think it will surprise anybody to know thatmy chief concern is that which was voiced first by Governor Angell:that there's no improvement in inflation over this projection period.Someone mentioned an absence of trend, but actually if you look at thefourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter figures on the fixed-weight deflatorand the CPI, they both are higher for '90 and '91 than they were inthe last Greenbook. The CPI ends up in the fourth quarter of '91 atabout 4-1/2 percent, and I think we have to do a good deal better thanthat. Someone--I guess that was Governor Angell too--used the term"unacceptable." If we want to maintain our credibility, I think wehave to do better than that. I sense that despite our best efforts wehave lost some of that credibility recently; we ought to think aboutthat very carefully as we formulate our policy later on in thismeeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. With regard to the District economy, as been thecase for quite some time now, there is very little new to report.It's pretty much the same as the national economy: that is, continuedmodest expansion is under way. It seems likely to me to continue.The major concerns of the District at the moment are the continuationof drought in some areas and prospective problems in the commercialreal estate area. But the latter is probably at least a year or twooff just because of the level of activity that's currently under way.With regard to the national economy, I largely agree with theGreenbook forecast. And as many people have already commented, as faras inflation is concerned that's unfortunate. It confirms my viewthat we're simply stuck at around this 4-1/2 percent rate of inflationthat we've had for quite some time. With regard to the real economy,I don't disagree much with the Greenbook forecast. I think we have tobe careful not to overreact to the latest month or two worth ofnumbers. We might find ourselves whipsawing policy and markets and soforth. On the other hand, as the Greenbook observes and as our ownexercise confirms, if one takes the January and February payrollemployment number seriously we can easily get 3 percent real growth inthe first quarter; and there is some possibility that those numbersare right. If they are, and if that's telling us something not onlyabout the immediate status of the economy but about its prospects, wemight be looking at even more growth than the Greenbook suggests. I-26-3/27/90would fear in those circumstances that there may be even moreinflation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. To deal with the District first, the New Englandeconomy is not in phase with the rest of the nation. Just thisafternoon we were talking about regions and this perhaps is a goodprecedent for it because we're seeing a lot of difference by region.The New England economy is relatively sluggish and in my way ofthinking probably will be that way for the next year or so. There hadbeen some thought, by myself and others, that expectations were worsethan reality; but unfortunately reality is doing a good job of comingup to expectations.MS. SEGER. Coming up or going down?MR. SYRON. Well, going down; that's right. There's somequestion about how much relevance it has to national policy because Ithink a lot of this has to do with a sort of classic bubble,particularly in the real estate area, and some problems that we had inmanufacturing. And the accompanying financial situation, with theconversion of mutual savings banks to stock institutions, just put inplace [unintelligible] in credit over a short period of time.We just had the data for regional employment benchmarked and,unfortunately, they show that for the region as a whole employmentactually declined about 1 percent in 1989. It declined dramaticallyin some states such as New Hampshire where it dropped 3-1/2 percent.Construction employment in that state dropped 25 percent. Now, that'sobviously a small state; but still, those are meaningful numbers. Inthe short run we expect a continuation of this rather negative trendin the business outlook.On this credit crunch issue, given the problems withdepository institutions that everyone knows about, just any superregional in New England is very, very wary of extending further creditfor real estate loans. I think that's going to be advantageous overthe long run because we did have a bubble, but it means thatconstruction, and to a lesser degree manufacturing, are going to actas drags on the economy in the period immediately ahead. Inmanufacturing, the outlook tends to mirror more the national scene.Firms tied to the aircraft industry account for a fair amount [ofmanufacturing activity] and are doing quite well. Firms tied to theauto industry, which we also have, are doing quite poorly. We have asectoral problem in the [unintelligible] those in Bob Parry's Districtare doing, and I think it's going to take a while for that to turnaround. Overseas sales by manufacturers have been stronger thandomestic sales and that has still held up despite what has happenedwith the dollar; people are very optimistic there. Retail sales havesoftened but people are beginning to think that they are seeing somebottoming out in the softening, and there really aren't seriousproblems with inventories. It could be a degree of concern that keptpeople from building up inventories too much. Overall, there's afeeling of greater cautiousness among our manufacturers; I wouldexpect that to be reflected in less vigorous orders for durable goodson their part in the coming year. One sees this particularly in thepaper industry where capacity [use] is actually still high but they-27-3/27/90are just very cautious in going ahead. Price reports, as you mightexpect in these circumstances, are quite good, with absolute declinesin prices in residential and commercial real estate. Labor marketsare much better behaved, with people being able to find work wherethey couldn't before. You don't see many $6.25 an hour signs up inthe McDonalds' windows anymore, and you don't even find as manycrowded McDonalds' stores.Nationally. we find our own forecast for the economy to bevery similar to that of the Greenbook, with some slight difference intiming quarter to quarter. But as many people have pointed out, anexactitude of this process in timing really doesn't mean that much.We are concerned, though we don't disagree with it, about the outlookfor inflation. As has been pointed out by Governors Angell andJohnson and others, this is really quite a cause for concern. I wouldsay that in the absence of concerns about the international scene orin the absence of concerns about financial fragility and some of thesecredit crunch stories that we're hearing--not two negligible factors,though--I would be inclined to feel that it's time to be reallyserious about progress on inflation and to move more vigorously. Evenwith these considerations, I think on balance the risks nationally arefor more inflation rather than the other way around. And I think thatour token [move] should be in that direction.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. The picture in the Eighth District is one ofcontinuing improvement. In January, for example, we had very strongemployment in comparison to December. Even if you take away stronggrowth in construction and in retail and wholesale trade sectors,which I think benefitted from the mild weather, other sectors grew atleast modestly. In manufacturing, for example, employment was up 5.2percent and that included declines of almost 10,000 jobs in theautomobile industry. So, virtually all major industries had moderateto strong employment growth. In both residential and nonresidentialconstruction we continued to have strong growth in the most recentthree-month period ending in January. In the area of anecdotalevidence, we recently had a group of chief financial officers of majorcorporations in the St. Louis area to lunch and the things that camethrough from that discussion were: (1) scarcity of qualified labor;(2) a sense of growing pressure on wages; (3) a margin squeeze--thefeeling that any easy productivity gains have long since beenrealized; and (4) the feeling that the recent increases in the dollarhave not really presented a problem in terms of export activity.Finally, and this is somewhat in contrast to what Bob [Forrestal]mentioned but I don't think either one of the views would beconclusive, I didn't pick up any sense of dissatisfaction with policy.In fact, some people expressed a preference for a diligently slow,stable situation in economic growth. So, nobody really is squealingabout monetary policy being on an inappropriate course. I think it'sright to question, though, whether people really would support theprice of bringing down the rate of inflation significantly fromcurrent levels.A final thought in terms of the general picture nationally:I have felt that policy has been erring on the side of ease for sometime and that we are in the process of giving up some ground in termsof our progress toward long-term price stability, however defined.-28-3/27/90So, I would agree with what the Greenbook says in terms of the needfor some additional tightening. I'm somewhat ambivalent about whetherthat needs to be right away. I take some heart from the Bluebookforecast of a slowing in M2 growth. I have some questions about whatthe impact is going to be in terms of the profit margin squeeze, thegeneral pressures of leverage on the economy, and the credit crunchwe've heard about, and how that all may [affect] consumer confidence.So, while I think we need to move, I could be persuaded that itdoesn't need to be right now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, the economy in the DallasDistrict continues to mend. Slowly but surely economic conditions areshowing mixed signs of improvement. Finally, we even see Louisianabeing able to reflect slightly better conditions. However, withregard to the improvements that we're seeing, while they're prettymuch across the board, the extent of the gains is highly variable.Energy and construction continue to show modest improvement. The rigcount in Texas has shown some significant gains. A lot of this isattributable to the horizontal drilling that's going on. Themanufacturing picture has been somewhat mixed. On the constructionside, while we have seen gains, they are possibly a little tenuous asconstruction values have fallen lately. On the other hand, thisappears to be a correction related to potential overexpansion inpetro-chemical capacity down along the Gulf Coast. The weakest sectorof our economy is agriculture; that continues to be hurt by droughtand other weather-related conditions. On the so-called credit crunchissue, we also hear some anecdotal evidence; but it's not all thatdifferent from what we have heard for quite some time with respect toour small businesses. And given where we've been in our District,we've been hearing this for quite some time. On a little broaderissue, if the rationing really is going on and it seems to beprimarily related to real estate concerns, I would question whether aslight change in interest rates one way or the other really wouldaddress that particular problem.On the national picture, I feel pretty good about the staff'scurrent forecast. It seems a little more in line at least with whatwe've been thinking and we would not take issue with it. I wouldassociate myself with those who are expressing concern about the long-term prospects for inflation. I think that maybe something ought tobe done about that.MR. BLACK. Anybody you want to suggest to do it?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Tenth Districtcontinues to improve [unintelligible], but nonetheless is showingimprovement with some mixed performance in the various sectors. Forexample, in the agricultural sector there has been a turnaround in themoisture; there has been good moisture across virtually all of theTenth District and particularly through the wheat region both fromrain as well as snow. That has a diverse impact, however, on wheatprices. So in terms of net farm income it may wash out. But theprospects for the wheat crop, which will start to be harvested inabout six weeks, look very good. On the other hand, there is some-29-3/27/90weakness in cattle prices, as a result of a surge in the feed cattleproduction. There are some projections that cattle prices will fallabout midyear. With the lower wheat price and lower cattle price, theoutlook for net farm income may not be quite as good as some mightexpect. Nonetheless, the outlook is quite likely going to be verygood in the agricultural sector.In the energy sector, the rig counts have fallen again mostrecently. That is, in the Tenth District the rig count has actuallyfallen in roughly three [unintelligible] from 298 to 255 in number,although it is still higher than the count a year ago. So, there issome year-over-year improvement; it's better than it was before. Themanufacturing sector is still fairly slow, particularly with respectto automobile assemblies. There have been some cutbacks in productionin the plants in the District. In one in Kansas City they actuallyhave laid off 700 people and cut [production] from roughly 800 cars aday down to 600 for the second-line adjustment. But the 700 layoff isalready significant. On the other hand, aircraft manufacturing in theDistrict continues to be strong and vigorous. As a matter of fact,Beech just received a new contract for $1-1/2 billion to supplybusiness-type aircraft to the Air Force for training purposes. That,of course, will stretch over time, but it is a new order ofsignificance for that area. There is some improvement and strength inboth residential and nonresidential construction in the District,which continues to amaze me given some overhang in the commercial[side] at least. But it may have been affected by the warm Januarytemperatures. Nonetheless, there are those contracts out there and[work] will be performed in the period ahead. So overall, theDistrict continues to improve--slowly to be sure, with disparateresults depending upon what area of the economy you look at.As for the Greenbook forecast, we really have no quarrel withit. It's a bit stronger maybe than we originally had thought,particularly in view of the fact that we ran these numbers and gotabout the same result but without any interest rate increase. So bybuilding in an interest rate increase, maybe the Board staff'sforecast is a little stronger than ours. But given the timing--as Iunderstand it, maybe a 1/4 point late in the third quarter and maybeanother 1/4 point in the fourth--it won't have a lot of impact in1990. As a result, we're fairly close together; I have no problem[with the staff's forecast].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. In the Fourth District, the pace of economicactivity is continuing to improve in almost all sectors.Manufacturing employment now is back at its highs of mid-1989. A lotof that--about half of it--is auto-related, which had a pretty nicebounceback. In terms of auto production, everybody who has been onlayoff has now been recalled, essentially.MS. SEGER. Did you say auto employment is at a high in yourDistrict?MR. HOSKINS. No, I said manufacturing. It has come back toits 1989 highs and about half of the rebound that we got recently wasdue to auto-related manufacturing.-30-3/27/90MS. SEGER. Thank you.MR. HOSKINS. My infamous stainless strip measure, which haspredictive values slightly worse than the leading indicators--thedirection is right--also has slowed fairly sharply. It had beenreported at 20 percent below its seasonally adjusted levels in termsof new orders and now it's running about 5 percent above that. Priceincreases in that industry are likely to be forthcoming, given demandand the potential for some backlog. In terms of anecdotalinformation, the only good news I could dig out was that [BP] andMarathon think that inventories are going to be high and that goinginto the second quarter we will see some price reductions in petroleumproducts.With respect to the Greenbook, as I said before, given theimplicit policy assumptions I wouldn't have much disagreement with it.I have trouble with the policy assumptions that are in there. Myconcerns stem from the issues of inflation and inflation expectations.If people do begin to build this kind of inflation expectation intotheir decision-making, then we will pay a price in terms of lostoutput when we finally have to bring the inflation rate down. So,that's something that I certainly would want to consider in settingpolicy this time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think the tone of the businesssituation is better, judged at least by the decibel [level] currentlyof people who in preceding months were concerned that the economy wasreally going to go off the edge. I think part of that simply is areflection of the view that, at least statistically, both the fourthquarter and the first quarter are probably going to turn out betterthan a lot of people expected. If you recall, it wasn't that long agowhen it was quite possible to find a lot of people who were expectinga negative real GNP number in either the fourth or the first quarteror both. And that is no longer the case.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's even a possibility that we willsee the .9 in the fourth quarter revised up.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, I know.MS. SEGER. You had a sneak preview?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, it's just that we have a lot [ofindications].VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Looking at the components, I thinkpart of the improvement in the tone of the business situation that Idetect is rightly characterized as the collective breathing of a sighof relief. Now, how much better the situation is in underlying termsis a little tougher to tell. But my sense is that it probably isbetter in underlying terms as well. Some of the comments around thetable are consistent with that. For example, Si Keehn talks aboutsales of 14-1/2 million trucks and cars, and that's not a bad year.That's a lot. Even before the meeting today I thought there were twosectors of the economy that at the margin could make quite adifference and those are agriculture and energy. I find it-31-3/27/90interesting that Roger and Si and Bob Forrestal and Bob Boykin aresuggesting that conditions in those two industries, even outside ofthe Southwest in the energy area, show a little snip of a pickup inactivity. And at the margin, those two sectors of the economy canmake a distinct difference. So in terms of the business outlook, thestaff forecast is probably a reasonable depiction of the situation.It's very similar to our forecast; the difference probably is that onemay have a little more confidence in it than was the case severalmonths ago.Now, on this credit crunch issue, I think there is somethingto it but I'm not sure it's as pervasive and fundamental as perhapssome think. I get a sense of it, for example, with banks in northernNew Jersey and Long Island where we've had some excesses in realestate lending as well. On the other hand, I don't get much of asense of it at all from the money center banks; the money center banksare simply complaining about a lack of business--period. There'sanother thing that we have to keep in mind about this silent creditcrunch. During much of the second half of the 1980s we had asituation in the country when private credit demands were growingvery, very rapidly and private credit growth was way out of line withhistorical relationships relative to GNP. And now what we are seeingis that a lot of that credit growth was bad credit. We're seeing itin chargeoffs in the banking industry, in the thrift industry, and inmarkdowns of prices of junk bonds. So, I'm not so sure that somemargin of greater discipline in the credit origination process issomething we should be terribly concerned about. It's probably a goodthing. In terms of the small business side of it, again, I don't getthe sense from our small business advisory groups and others thatwell-run small businesses are having any particular problem withcredit availability. That doesn't mean there aren't some who arehaving trouble, but I don't think it's a general phenomenon.On inflation, in underlying terms, I come out where GaryStern does. We've been stuck at 4-1/2 percent or something like thatfor a long time. I think what is different right now is that if oneexpected that we were going to do better than that, what the recentinformation suggests, of course, is that that's not going to comeabout very easily. But I myself don't think that the inflationsituation has deteriorated in any significant way; it just refuses toget better, which is a problem in its own right.The biggest area of uncertainty in my mind continues to bethe external side of the economy. Ted has one scenario built into theforecast; he described another. The fact of the matter is that youprobably could put together three or four external scenarios, each ofwhich would be strikingly different from the others and none of whichcould automatically be ruled out of hand. There is a range ofuncertainties not just because of exchange rates but because ofpolitical developments, economic developments--the whole spectrum.So, I think the range of possible outcomes in the external sector outover the next six to eight quarters is really very wide indeed.The only other point I would make, Mr. Chairman--I don't haveto make it but maybe you do--is that the renewed discussion here aboutthe budgetary situation is possibly interesting. Rostenkowski'spronouncement, of course, has gotten shot down, as I'm sure he thoughtit would. Nevertheless, I still find it rather surprising, and maybe-32-3/27/90even a bit encouraging, that somebody like Rostenkowski was willing toput his cards on the table in the budget arena. I don't know whetherthat's just ceremonial or if there are some straws in the wind thatwould suggest that something constructive might happen on the budgetfront. As I said, I don't know if you want to comment on that lateror not.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'll comment now. I think that there issomething going on. The question is: How far will it get? I thinkthat the failure of Rostenkowski to get shot down immediately, whichhe did not, is suggestive of a willingness to take another look. Ithink that process is going on, but it's much too premature to arguethat anything is going to come of it. But you're quite right: there'ssomething stirring that had not been stirring before. Anybody else?MR. JOHNSON. I'll comment. Actually, I've been impressedtoo that the economy hasn't shown signs of slowing to the degree thatpeople had forecast earlier. It's still a little hard for me to tellat this stage how much of that can be attributed to our luck with theweather and how much is really a pickup after smoothing through thosekinds of seasonal--unseasonal I should say--developments.Nevertheless, when you do smooth through it, you still have a picturethat looks like sustained growth at a lower rate that doesn't lookparticularly scary.I also hear these stories--as a matter of fact, I'm bombardedby such stories--of a credit crunch. I have hosted at least three orfour different state bankers associations here over the last couple ofweeks and have been besieged by people saying that that is going on.But it's very hard to find evidence in the data that that is in factthe case. You hear a lot of anecdotes about it and that's what theybring to the table, but you don't see any kind of general creditcrunch going on. I agree with others that there is clearly acommercial real estate overhang. It's all over the country; acontraction is going on there. I'm sure because of the S&Ls thatthere is a lack of availability of credit from the S&L industry todevelopers; you hear that everywhere. But actually, that's healthy;that's not something to be afraid of. That consolidation really hasto take place. There still may be something in the pipeline on thiscredit crunch; it's just not obvious in any data that we see. Ourquality spreads surely don't show it on interest rates. In fact, youwould expect, if there were some sort of pullback in banks'willingness to lend, to see upward pressure on bank rates. If demandwere still there and the supply was being restricted, why wouldn'tshort-term market rates come under upward pressure? It certainlydoesn't look like there's any dramatic upward pressure relative to thefunds rate. On the other hand, you don't see a tendency for demand tobe that weak either because you don't see these short-term ratesfalling against the funds rate either. Things actually look fairlystable around the short end and quality spreads actually look verygood--unless you're trying to find some junk bonds that aren't quotedin the market. Compare those to AAA corporates and I'm sure theydon't look good.So, I think the economy is doing okay, at least in the periodthat we can see ahead. I don't have any disagreement with theGreenbook; I think it's about right, although I wouldn't want toproject anything beyond six or eight months from now just because it's-33-3/27/90too uncertain. On the inflation front, as I said, it's a littledisappointing that there hasn't been more progress, although I doattribute most of the short-run pressure that we have had to seasonaldevelopments. I think the effect that the cold weather had on foodand energy costs in the December period is the primary factor on thetotal CPI and PPI numbers. If you actually look at the producer priceindex excluding food and energy, you do see some progress. In fact,the 12-month rate for the PPI excluding energy is now down to 3.7percent, which is better than previous 12-month rates in the PPI.What is disappointing is the consumer price index, which doesn't showany signs of easing off; even excluding the food and energy componentsthat still seems to be strong. As a matter of fact the [increases forthe] last two months, at .6 and .7 percent, are very troubling. Youcan always find some special factor like apparel or something elsethat has had a major impact, but there's always something. I can livewith separating out the food and energy components because those arevolatile elements that are somewhat beyond our control in the shorterrun. But as for these other factors, you have to draw the linesomewhere. The fact is that the CPI doesn't look all that good. Itmakes me wonder, though, since the PPI seems to be improving, if thereis just a lag before it eventually shows up in the CPI; I don't know.The economy looks stable, although there's this atmosphere ofconcern about debt, a credit crunch, and things like that. Butinternational events are developing, it seems to me, in a positiveway. You can question how slowly or how fast [the changes in] Europewill develop, but unless the political climate changes dramatically--say, the Soviet Union gets tremendously tougher--in the longer run andmaybe in the most immediate short run, that has to be positive. Idon't know. But I'm convinced that East Germany is going to boombecause West Germany is going to make it boom; they're going to throwmoney at it. So I think that is a positive in terms of externalsources of economic pressure. Japan doesn't seem to be weak from aproductivity point of view and I think their major problems are thatthey have been pushing the edge of capacity constraints and they havehad a speculative bubble and all that is sort of fermenting over therealong with the weak government. But I don't see external evidence ofsources of depression coming from outside of the United States. Sothat should be positive. And the inflation picture seems to me to besomewhat stable but not improving. I don't know what that says forthe immediate term for policy, but I think it does say that if we wantto make progress in the upcoming period, we're going to have to have atough look at that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I'm persuaded that the Greenbookforecast is a very reasonable one, given the underlying assumptions;the interest rate construct, which is part of that, is certainlyreasonable. I'm dismayed at the lack of progress that it reflectswith regard to inflation. But my underlying concern at the moment--and this may sound like a disbeliever in the omnipotence of monetarypolicy--is that we may have witnessed here a transfer of at least partof the control of the growth of the economy as a result of thisextraordinarily stringent application of examination standards to thebanks. I'm concerned that that will, in fact, cause a contraction ofcredit that may deal a greater blow to inflation than our currentpolicy. I think that in that kind of environment the supplying of-34-3/27/90reserves and reducing of rates will not necessarily encourageexpansion. I guess I'd end by paraphrasing an old saw and say "Youcan offer a banker wider spreads, but you can't make him lend."MR. SYRON. That's not true of the thrift industry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Try to top that, Governor Kelley!MR. KELLEY. I would never, particularly coming from somebodywho [was a banker] for 35 years! Mr. Chairman, we always are lookingfor one more piece of data; that goes on forever. But I am struckthis time more than usual by the tentativeness of the data that we'relooking at and the tentativeness of the forecast that we're able tomake. I hear it from the staff and I hear it going around the tablehere this morning in both the area of the real economy and ininflation expectations. What's going on in the economy now is to somedegree--and we don't know to what degree--the snapback from strikesand from storms and from the whipsawing in the auto industry. Some ofthe industries that are showing some strength, like housing, have bigseasonals at this time of the year. And it's just really hard to tellhow much of what is going on is sustainable and is real underlyingstrength. I also share John's and others' concerns about what we maybe in for in terms of the extent of the credit crunch and what theresults of that could be.On the inflation front, the forecast is that what we haveseen in the last several months is going to unwind to some degree.I've been very disappointed, as I think everybody else has, in thenumbers we've seen the last several months. The expectation is thatthat's going to unwind to some degree, but by how much? We're goingto have to see about that. Meanwhile, as Governor Johnson pointedout, the PPI really is not validating that bad result that we've seenin the CPI and in the deflators. So, I go back to what Bob Parry saida little earlier in the morning: that what we need to do is tomaintain moderate growth. I agree with that. I'm not sure what it'sgoing to take to do that, on balance, with the other objectives thatwe have. And like Gary Stern, I'm a little concerned that we notoverreact to two or three months' worth of numbers and wind upwhipsawing the economy. I certainly share the disappointment that Ihear everyone expressing; I agree 100 percent about the last fewmonths and I share the impatience that goes along with that. Butgiven all that we cannot be sure of at this moment, I'm prettycautious about what policy ought to do.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. Well, as I think I hinted with my questionsearlier, I feel uncertain about the outlook and I hope that what's onthese pages from the staff turns out to be right because I believe inhaving moderate growth. I think it's important in many ways to havethat happen. But I would just like to tick off some concerns I havethat I think are going to put these possible outcomes at risk. Imentioned the first concern I have: the dollar and the issue ofwhether or not it actually will decline in value relative to the othermajor currencies. If it doesn't, I'm old fashioned enough to believethat that will have an impact on our trade situation on both sides ofthe equation. And that, indeed, concerns me since we are counting ontrade to help us, particularly in 1991. Also, despite the fact that-35-3/27/90Russian tanks rolled into Lithuania, I think that we are still goingto have some defense cutbacks and some actual cuts in the defensebudget. I personally don't know how that will play out; I don't knowwhich contracts will be cut back or which bases will be closed, etc.But I suspect that when that happens it will show up in somebody'sDistrict around the table here and also will impact the aggregateseventually.Also, there's the question of state and local governmentfinance. I hear more and more comments about the deterioration instate budgets from the Northeast to the Southwest--all over. I metwith a legislator from Michigan very recently and they're having toredo their estimates because they were too optimistic about therevenue forecast. So, instead of having a comfortable situation, itnow doesn't look comfortable. I would think that ultimately thatwould impact either on spending by state and local governments or ontheir need to raise taxes, neither of which would be supportive ofeconomic activity. On the U.S. budget situation, I heard theRostenkowski name come up, but if we do get a tax hike I don't seethat [unintelligible]. Is that the correct assumption: that you havenot built in a tax hike in [your forecast]?MR. PRELL. We have only a few billion dollars of the--MS. SEGER. Well, if by some miracle it happens, I wouldassume it would have some sort of impact. Also, I'm extremelyconcerned about the profit margin squeeze and what it will do; it'salready going on and I think it will get worse. In my judgment thatwill have a significant impact on plant and equipment spending of allsorts.Finally, with regard to the credit crunch matter, which we'veheard about from a number of people, I think it is going on. AsManley said, we talk to a lot of these banker groups that come throughand we hear those comments; I also hear them from many businesspeople. I've observed recently that banks were even tightening termson their home equity lines, which of course they have been practicallyshoveling out the door. Now they're using a smaller shovel anyway.Certainly, we are all hearing about the commercial lending tightness.For auto loans, there's less enthusiasm for the [unintelligible]6-year or the 5-year loan and the idea is surfacing that maybe youshouldn't make a loan that's longer than the life of the car. Sothere's some tendency, at least among some lenders, to cut that back.In the small business arena--I have a lot of friends who are smallbusiness people, including my brother--I'm not sure that what's goingon is going to show up in the numbers we're looking at because so fara lot of the changes involve the terms or the fact that lenders expectpersonal guarantees. If you have a small corporation they want yourpersonal backing on a loan; there's this desire for extra security toprotect the lender. It is certainly making business people feel a lotmore conservative and I would suggest in some cases rather nervous.On the S&L side there's the FIRREA effect in the case of small andmedium-size homebuilders and developers--I'm not talking aboutdevelopers of big projects or major strip shopping centers but abouthomebuilders. And I thought we had a housing shortage, at least insome parts of the country. I think it's important to allow builderswho have an active market to build those homes. Yet these are theones who are feeling the impact of this single-borrower limit that has-36-3/27/90been imposed on the S&Ls to match the limit on national banks.Frankly, I don't think we have much of that built into our housingforecast here. And finally, in the case of the captive auto financecompanies, they too have been tightening some of their terms andstandards; and some of these marginal auto buyers are not going to beable to buy a car because they don't qualify under the new standardswhereas they might have under the old, more generous, ones.Frankly, I don't know how all this will play out, but it'sjust a long enough list of concerns and question marks that I amuncertain and I wouldn't feel comfortable with a 90 degree swing inpolicy from where we are now. I might [not] even feel comfortablewith a 5 degree swing, even though I certainly am concerned about theinflation situation. But I don't know how to pull out from thesereported numbers what is transitory and what is really a fundamentalchange. I'm really impressed with the degree of competitiveness outthere in the real world. I just don't think we can sit here andassume that every business can say: "Well, my costs are going up sotomorrow I'll just mark up all the prices of everything I sell." Theyjust don't think that the market conditions would [allow] that.MR. PRELL. Governor Seger, a clarification: We have $8billion of various tax [increases] in our '91 deficit reductionpackage.MS. SEGER. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I don't have anything to say atthis time. I'll listen carefully to your recommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You can't wait to hear what I have tosay! Do we have coffee out there? We're a little late for coffee,but--[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Kohn.MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Lee.MR. HOSKINS. Don, to link your story up with Mike's: We havean increase in inflation even in terms of the Greenbook forecast, andmy question revolves around the issue of how much of that increase ininterest rates of 1/4 point or so over the last quarter you wouldattribute to inflation expectations versus real. What I'm reallywondering is: If it is expectations about inflation, to keep policyneutral wouldn't we have to raise interest rates 25 basis points?MR. KOHN. Yes. My sense is that in terms of long-termrates, we have a couple of things working here. One is, of course,that the fed funds rate hasn't moved since December 22 or whenever itwas we last changed policy. Long-term rates have moved substantiallyhigher. Inflation expectations may be an element there, but I wouldput them as a fairly small element. I think the response came-37-3/27/90primarily in terms of a stronger economy here at home [plus] some ofthe pull from the European situation. We never did have good data butwe have even less information on inflation expectations than we hadbefore now that Mr. Hoey is between jobs, but my guess is that they'lldo a survey in April.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the real damage from the [Drexel]failure! [Laughter.]MR. KOHN. My guess is that people probably are holding offin revising upward their long-run inflation expections on the basis ofthe last couple of months' data. Now, I'm sure there might be someshort-run [effect]. So, I think most of this is a sense that realrates need to be higher just to keep inflation somewhat in checkrather than an increase in inflation expectations. But it's certainlyanyone's guess.MR. HOSKINS. If you answered the question "Yes, it's allinflation expectations," then how would you answer the second part ofthe question? To keep policy neutral, what do we need to do?MR. KOHN. If you thought that most of the increase--particularly in long-term rates or even the short-term rates--wasinflation expectations, then indeed you would need to raise rates.MR. PARRY. Just continuing along that line a little: If asignificant proportion of the increase is due to increases in realrates, what would be the implication in moving the funds rate [up]?How would you see the market responding?MR. KOHN. Oh, I think the market would see that as a tighterpolicy and long-term rates would rise a bit. That's what we have inthe Bluebook. The response might be fairly damped but I really wouldexpect, if you surprised the market by tightening policy at this time,that bond yields would rise at least initially.MR. PARRY. But that's the only rate that hasn't had anincrease in real terms over this period--MR. KOHN. But it's not as if raising the funds rate would bedoing what the market expects you to be doing and, therefore, simplymoving out along a yield curve. I think what happened before was thatthe market expected policy to ease. Now they don't, and they're doingwhat the yield curve says. So you would be surprising the market withan increase in the funds rate. It may be appropriate, but it would bea surprise.MR. PARRY. Would you say the chance of such a move notaffecting long-term rates or having them decline slightly is very,very remote?MR. KOHN. Those odds are always there and, particularly ifit strengthened the dollar, I think you'd get a feedback through thedollar. If you tightened policy and the dollar went up quite strongly--just ignoring what the reactions might be overseas for now--youcould have a very substantial feedback on bond yields and bond rates.They might not rise very much at all and could even decline,depending.-38-3/27/90MR. PARRY. Okay.MR. SYRON. Could I ask Ted just what he expects the impactwould be in the exchange market if the funds rate were to rise 25basis points?MR. TRUMAN. Oh, I think you'd get some considerable--MR. SYRON. How much is considerable? I'm not going to askyou for a point estimate, but what do you think [the effect would be]on the yen and the DM generally?MR. TRUMAN. It would depend a bit on the timeframe of allthis and what kind of music went along with it, if I may put it thatway, and as Don has already said on what the reaction was abroad. Butif you take what policies are abroad [now], my feeling is that youcould get 3 or 4 percent, anyhow, on the dollar in the short run.Then, as other things came into play that might be sustained or movethe other way. It would be affected by what goes on later. But Ithink you could get quite a lot of movement at this juncture, if thefunds rate went up that much in the short run.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think [the yen is at] 157-1/2.MR. JOHNSON. Today?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Now, or just below it. Since the marketdoesn't expect anything, if we were to do that, I think it probablywould go right through 160 or better.MR. JOHNSON. Yes; that's why I was curious.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The market would be fooled. Any furtherquestions? If not, why don't I start the discussion. There's noquestion that the underlying business cycle numbers have improved.Not only the current numbers coming in but the actual revisions ofrecent history suggest that the current state of activity is betterthan we would have expected, certainly at the last FOMC meeting,though it's too soon to get a sense that this is anything more than amodest rebound from the end of deterioration. We're not sure at thisstage exactly how to read all the various weather seasonals. If wewere getting a stronger order pattern in the manufacturing area, wecould presume that the pressure here was accelerating. But from thesurveys we take and from looking at the various sets of orderpatterns, orders seem to have stabilized at a relatively flat level,which is consistent with very little change in manufacturing activity.The continued deterioration of profit margins has not yet turned,although I suspect that the improvement in raw materials prices thathas come in recent weeks and that Governor Angell has been followingmay be suggestive of a first sign that the deterioration in marginsmay be ending. But as of now, from what anyone can see on the profitsside we are right at the bottom of this pattern and it has not turned.What history does tell us is that the capital goods markets do respondto margins. And in that sense, to carry this thing forward in theusual business cycle recovery pattern I think is premature. It mayturn out that way. In fact, I suspect that the most likely forecastis precisely that.-39-3/27/90But we do have in the context of what is unquestionably animproving business cycle balance of forces--in a sense the cash flowpart of the economy with the exception of profit margins--a lack ofimprovement in the balance sheets. That is, there is still thedeterioration and the [erosion] in the balance sheet; in the overallbalance sheet we're seeing leverage still growing. Don, I don't knowwhether or not the improvement in the liquidation of equity that youhave in these flow of funds [projections] is going to occur that way.I'm really sort of asking why you still have -60 or something likethat; I don't know why it's not going to zero myself. But the pointat issue is that the leverage is still increasing and we're stilldealing with a fragility in the balance sheet that is not improving.And when that overhangs the business cycle pattern, I think we have tobe cautious in projecting any form of acceleration in the underlyingdemand forces.I, like everyone else, am not sure whether the credit crunchis real. It has to be partly real unless human nature has beenrepealed because there has to be a fundamental response to what hasoccurred. I think the issue is how bad it is. As Jerry points out,some of that is probably good, or not bad, especially if you look atcredit that has been extended inappropriately. The inflation issue isobviously the most disturbing part of the outlook. I don't think ithas gotten any worse since the last time. The Social Security taxincrease and the minimum wage hike are coming at exactly the wrongtime. If one had to go back and look at this whole thing inretrospect, that's not helping. Probably it does mean that if we getpast it without an acceleration, the compensation patterns will beginto fall off. I don't know whether I'm encouraged or not, but whateverdata we see on the wage side do not appear to be accelerating. Butthen again, it's not improving in any material way that I can seeeither. I'm encouraged somewhat by this slowing down of M2; I wasgetting concerned that it was going to break outside of our 3 to 7percent range; it seems to be constrained. Part of that, obviously,is the extraordinary pattern of the bill rate vis-a-vis the fundsrate. And in that sense one can argue that the markets have indeedtightened--that there probably is some modest tightening in themarkets if you look at the bill rate, other short-term rates, and themoney supply. But it's probably a very modest amount because it makes[no] significant difference one way or the other.My own impression, having said all of this, is that it'sprobably too soon for us to be moving rates up. The exchange rateeffect, I think, would really be quite a destabilizing force. Even atthis stage I suspect that it's probably premature to go asymmetrictoward tightness in the directive, although I must say that I suspectthe next move we're going to make is indeed going to be up, not down,and probably should be. At the moment I frankly would prefer that westay symmetric but be very conscious of any evidence of inflationarypressures picking up, specifically in the price area, importantly inthe money supply area, but most of all any evidence of acceleration inthe business outlook. While it is very early in this turn from theweakness that we saw in the fourth quarter, and in my judgment far toopremature to assume that we're looking at any acceleration, we arenonetheless at 5.3 percent unemployment. And that's a tight market.If we get acceleration in demand at this point, I think the pricepressures will begin to move rather quickly. We have to be veryconscious of that threat. But my own judgment is that it's much too-40-3/27/90early to assume that. The order structure and the profit structureremain somewhat weak and at this point I would say that calling formore than leaving the directive unchanged and symmetric probably ispremature. However, if it were the Committee's desire to move toasymmetric language, I feel that's not altogether an inappropriatemove--certainly at the next meeting, if not sooner. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your assessment. Iwould just as soon have "B" symmetric, with our watching it verycarefully during the intermeeting period and being particularly tunedto any developments in any of the leading indicators that would helpus to know [more] in regard to timing. It does seem to me that thetransmission mechanism of monetary policy is increasingly through theforeign exchange rate and that having a somewhat higher foreignexchange value of the dollar does get us somewhat closer to theeffects that we would have had with a somewhat lower dollar and with a25 basis point increase in [interest rates]. It just seems to me, Mr.Chairman, that foreign exchange markets at this point would bedestabilized by an unexpected move on our part; that would buy us moreproblems rather than less.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Well, we're in a very difficult situation,obviously, and when one is treading on eggs it's best to treadlightly. In that regard, there is much to be said for yourrecommendation in terms of it being premature to make any move interms of absolute [unintelligible]. But I am concerned that theGreenbook shows what I think most of us consider an unacceptableinflation performance with an implicit assumption--whether it'ssignificant or not you can debate--of a 100 basis point increase [inthe funds rate] over the year. So, I would say that on balance,because I think this issue of maintaining our credibility is veryimportant, I would want to give the markets some signal that we wereworried about inflation and I would have a slight bias toward goingwith an asymmetric directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, you might have detected from someearlier comments that I made that with respect to this particularmeeting I started out leaning a bit toward "C" or something in theneighborhood of a "B-C" directive simply because of the lack ofevidence that we have made any progress on inflation--nor will we inthe next two years. Nor indeed is there clear evidence that we havecapped inflation as some people would like to believe. As a result,it seems to me that making some sort of preemptive strike, if youwill, by moving rates up at the the present time would have somebeneficial effect. But given a couple of things that will occur inthe future, it seems to me that that probably is inappropriate. Giventhe closeness of the G-7 meeting, I think you might have some realdifficulty during that period of time. Also, there will be anemployment report that comes out April 6th, just before your G-7meeting that will give some better information with respect to whathappened in January and February; it will either confirm or notconfirm those numbers, it seems to me. Therefore, I would like topropose that we have "B" with an asymmetric directive so that if we doget information in the intermeeting period that suggests that we have-41-3/27/90a much stronger economy than we think we have, then we could move.Secondly, and perhaps more importantly, is that this would be aleading bit of information to the market as they see this directivefollowing the next meeting. They would know which way the wind isblowing and what the next move could be. It has informationalcontent, if you will, whether we move or not in the intermeetingperiod; an asymmetric directive seems to me to have some advantage.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, if I were the all powerful czarof monetary policy I would do exactly what you've prescribed. I'mbasically content with where we are. I share the frustration aboutour lack of ability to move against inflation. But I think we have tohave patience; that's the key point in my mind. For the reasons thatyou've mentioned, I think we have a potential for instability in themarket. We have fragility, we have this possibility of the creditcrunch, and [we have the possibility of a problem in the] foreignexchange markets. All of those things suggest to me very stronglythat it is premature to move at this time. It's a natural reaction onthe part of human beings to want to take action when frustrated bysomething like this inflation rate. But sometimes inaction is thebetter course of action, and I think that's the situation that we'rein now. So for that reason I would heartily endorse yourprescription, and I feel that it should be a symmetric directive aswell.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I agree with you that there is someuncertainty about both the strength of the economy and also the extentof the inflation problems. However, I would prefer a small move inthe direction of tightness somewhere between Bluebook alternatives "B"and "C." It seems to me that if the Greenbook is correct--andcertainly our work would suggest that it is--there will be a need forsome fairly significant, or at least eyecatching, tightening in thesecond half of the year. It might be easier to do some of that at thepresent time and have to do a little less in the second half of theyear. If that's not in the cards, to me a fallback position is tosupport asymmetric language in favor of a tighter policy. Thatapproach would ensure that policy could be tightened promptly if wehad indications that indeed the economy is strengthening and ifinflationary pressures look like they're even more of a concern in theseven weeks until our next meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I would lean somewhere between "B"and "C" but I'm certainly willing to accept the arguments of what thepossible effects might be on foreign exchange rates. That being thecase, though, I would feel pretty strongly about going asymmetric onthe directive. Roger pretty well made that speech. It does seem tome that it positions us, if later events call for an actual upwardmovement in the fed funds rate. If that became necessary, we couldmove; or if that were delayed and had to come even after the nextmeeting it seems to me that that would tend to minimize a bit thesurprise element that seems to be a matter of concern. If laterinformation indicates that the economy and other factors are not what-42-3/27/90I at least anticipate--if policy doesn't actually change over theintermeeting period--the markets would be able to read that; andfollowing the next meeting, if nothing happens, they could tell thatpretty quickly. So, I don't see any significant risk in goingasymmetric, but I think there are a lot of good arguments for goingthat way.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, at the least we obviously have a difficulttiming problem here. But I find that I come out where you do. Wehave seen that inflation is at least as stubborn, and maybe morestubborn, than many of us had expected; and that may require atightening move. But at the moment, at least, I don't have a sense ofurgency about it. I think, as Tom Melzer said earlier, it's probablylow cost to wait until the next meeting; and indeed, if we get a lotof confirming evidence earlier than that, we always do have theopportunity to act if that would seem to be appropriate. I don't wantto whipsaw the economy or policy by moving now and then finding outthrough a series of data revisions and incoming information and so onand so forth that we overestimated some of the improvement. Lookingat inflation from a longer-run perspective, I don't know what it willtake to start to bring it down. Obviously, the scenario in theGreenbook doesn't suggest any progress in the next year or two. But Ithink the best thing we can do under all these circumstances, as I'vesaid before, is probably to see to it that M2 growth remains modest.And I am encouraged at least about the near-term prospects therealthough unfortunately, as Don mentioned, it may be a little hard toread M2 as the quarter unfolds just because of the tax payment issue.Assuming we get something like [the staff estimate], then we're on arather sensible course and I prefer to wait a while longer and letsome more evidence accumulate. I have a mild preference for retaininga symmetric directive just because I think that maximizes flexibility.I'm almost always in favor of that. But for now it's a mildpreference.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I think you summed the situation upvery well; I happen to agree with your conclusions. As I saidearlier, I think the risks on the inflation side may have shiftedupward a bit, but I'm really still hopeful that as we get further intothe year the numbers will show some improvement without ournecessarily having tightened policy. Therefore, at this point I'd bein favor of maintaining our policy and would have a preference forsymmetric language. I would only add that I don't in any way viewsymmetric language as limiting action on our part during the interimperiod if something should develop that would call for that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS, Well, our long-term goal publicly stated isprice stability. For 1990 the nominal GNP we're looking at is about6.2 percent, I think: we're looking at a monetary growth rate of 6-1/2to 7 percent. It seems to me that that implies no movement toward ourlong-term goal, at least in terms of our policy position. If you lookat P*, I find no pressure from the P* model for moving toward pricestability.3/27/90Moving toward more current kinds of considerations, it seemsto me that we can always find a risk in the economy; we have done thatconsistently, at least over the last 2-1/2 years that I've beensitting here. If we're always going to weigh our decisions towardrisk to the economic expansion, then we're always going to biasourselves toward inflation. It seems to me we have a one-weightedrisk scheme in here. We weigh only toward the economy until inflationis in some sense beyond our control [rather] than taking veryaggressive policy action. I think it's very important to maintaincredibility. I think what we've learned from the last 20 years isthat the credibility of policymakers is probably the key element insuccessful policy. Given the lack of movement toward our goal, muchless the increase in rates of inflation that we've seen, I don't thinkthat we're providing any kind of credibility at all. I don't think weneed a major move at this time. We may need a major move if we followmarket interest rates up; if we are wrong and the economy is stronger,we will have to move more aggressively. So, I would favor a 25 basispoint move now and let the markets sort that one out. I suppose as afallback I could go for an asymmetric directive toward tightening ifin it we expressed our concerns about the inflationary trends.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, when we've been faced with thisdegree of uncertainty about the business outlook I don't think we'veever tightened before. And yet when I look back through the historyof the System, I think this is where we've made most of our mistakes.If we could take the Bluebook at face value and assume that we wouldget a growth of M2 of 6 percent for April through June, I think thatwould be an adequate slowing, given the rate at which the aggregateshave been growing. But I'm a little suspicious that it might be alittle stronger than that. So, I favor a bit of a preemptive strike--somewhere between "B" and "C," a "B-" or "C+." But that clearly isn'tgoing to happen. So, I would be prepared, if I were voting, to votefor a directive with asymmetry to the [tighter] side. I think weought to do at least that much. If subsequent economic informationsuggested that that was the wrong way to have leaned, I don't see thatwe really would lose anything since that would not be released untilafter the next meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Johnson.MR. JOHNSON. Well, my preference was for something along thelines of "B" asymmetric for some of the same reasons that already havebeen mentioned by Roger Guffey and others. But I can certainly goalong with the Chairman's suggestion for symmetry. I don't feel thatstrongly; I have a mild preference for asymmetry. There are a coupleof things on my mind along the lines of what Lee said. If we didn'thave to worry [unintelligible] quite so much, then I think it would bea great opportunity to gain some credibility by shocking the foreignexchange markets. But in fact, I can see a lot of difficulties withthat; I can see that that would be a difficult problem that we need tobe more sensitive to. Along with what Don Kohn said earlier, Iinterpret what has happened to long-term rates as mostly real rate-44-3/27/90pressures from some pickup in the economy, although in my opinion itcould be because of some of the events that have taken place worldwideand not just domestically. It could be improvement in potentialoutput and something like an increase in the net real return oncapital. And if that is the case, the current funds rate would be arelative easing of policy. Although if it's an increase in potential,that wouldn't necessarily create a long-run inflationary problem. Butit's impossible to sort all that out. It's just theoreticalreasoning. We have to look for the data as they come in. I wish wedid have a political setting in which to enjoy the advantage of havinga strengthening dollar here and be able to get more bang per buck atthis stage with some firmness. But I agree that it's not in thecards. We do live in a political economy, not a simple abstractsituation. So, I can go along with "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. "B" asymmetric. I could live with "B"symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I certainly support yourrecommendation. I think that it would be premature, based on thetentativeness of the data, for us to move as yet. The decision isobviously between moving a bit in the direction of tightness orstaying where we are. And I would suggest that we're getting a littletightening through whatever degree of credit crunch is going on outthere, and I think there's at least some. Also, unless the G-7 doessomething to turn it around, my personal bet would be that for awhileat least we're going to see a rising dollar. We certainly have it inthe yen and I would bet that on balance we're going to get it in thetrade-weighted calculation generally. So, I would enthusiasticallysupport your recommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. To move now on policy would be premature ondomestic grounds and counterproductive on international grounds, Ithink. So I prefer a continuation of current policy. On the issue ofsymmetrical or asymmetrical, I prefer symmetrical. It turns on thequestion of what kind of burden of proof we want in order to make apolicy change. I think a policy change over the next several weekswould be a major move, and there ought to be some burden of proof tomake such a move; and that leads me in the direction of symmetrical.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I would support your position of keeping policyat "B" with symmetrical language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I have no stomach at all forchanging policy right now either, but I came here with a very, verymild preference for asymmetric language. My preference is probably abit stronger for asymmetric language, but operationally I don't thinkit matters a lot. We can react to incoming data as needed in either-45-3/27/90case. I think the only real argument that can be made for asymmetrichas been made; as I say, I can be reasonably comfortable with "B"[symmetric].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What I hear is that there is someconcentration for alternative B symmetric. The Secretary will readthe directive encompassing that and we'll put that to a vote.MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. Taking account of progress towardprice stability, the strength of the business expansion, the behaviorof the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange anddomestic financial markets, slightly greater reserve restraint orslightly lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in theintermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expectedto be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from Marchthrough June at annual rates of about 6 and 4 percent respectively.The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to theManager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during theperiod before the next meeting are likely to be associated with afederal funds rate persistently outside a range of 6 to 10 percent."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin NoPresident Hoskins NoGovernor Johnson YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Seger YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. We still have a large element ofour agenda in front of us, so why don't we break for lunch, come backquickly, and get started as soon as we can.[Lunch break]SPEAKER(?). [Unintelligible.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. With that information, let's go aheadand get started.MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for either gentleman?MR. BOEHNE. Well, I just can't let this pass. First of all,I think you are to be complimented for putting together in one place areview of this complex issue. Even if not much change occurs, I thinkthe study is worthwhile and it is a well-done record. I've neverapproached this [issue] from a particularly ideological point of view.-46-3/27/90I've always tended to be fairly pragmatic in terms of the politics aswell as the economics about whether we ought to [intervene] or not.However, I must say that over the past year just the sheer amount ofthe transactions has struck me as being well beyond what is areasonable number. I feel that we have just sort of slipped into thisfor good reason or bad reason. The number is something like $20billion. It goes well beyond a narrow, or even a moderate,interpretation of disorderly markets; it goes well into trying tomanipulate exchange rates. And it's difficult to see what we havegotten out of it. I personally don't think we can continue foranother year with that kind of volume. It might be helpful as theCommittee looks at this to try to draw a distinction betweenintervention to counter disorderly markets--as ambiguous as that is--and intervention aimed at manipulating the level of exchange rates.I, for example, would think that intervening to counter disorderlymarkets is a fairly routine, even technical, kind of thing over whichthe Desk, the Chairman, and the Foreign Currency Subcommittee ought tohave fairly wide discretion. But when we get into the issue ofwhether we're going to intervene to manipulate the level of exchangerates and we commit the magnitude of dollars that we have, it seems tome that that kind of decision ought to be laid on the table asexplicitly as when we change domestic policy rather than just come tothe point where we ratify transactions. So, what I get out of this isthat we ought to try to draw this distinction. If we're talking aboutanything that comes close to what we've been through, we ought to havea procedure in the Committee where that policy decision is aired anddiscussed and we either ought to go on record as favoring it or notfavoring it.MR. PARRY. Ed, are you saying that those are both validreasons for intervention?MR. BOEHNE. I'm not prepared to make a decision for all timeand in all circumstances that says what is or isn't. It seems to methat the case for this narrow definition of intervention to counterdisorderly markets is well within the bounds of what a central bankought to do. I think it's fairly routine business [for a centralbank]. On the broader issue, I think one would have to look at thecircumstances in which we were trying to do it. It's more thaneconomics involved here. When we start to commit billions andbillions of dollars, as we have this past year, for the clear purposeof trying to manipulate exchange rates, I think that is a decisionthat ought to be made consciously. Maybe we would do it and maybe wewouldn't. I would just have to wait and discuss whether I would befor it or not for it depending on the circumstances. And I wouldn'tmake any [prior] judgment.MR. PARRY. Implicit in your comment is that you think it'seffective.MR. BOEHNE. I think in some circumstances it might makesense for us to do it. And those circumstances may go beyondeconomics. I'm just not prepared to close the door on its potentialeffectiveness for a broad range of reasons. We ought to face up tothat head on when the time comes.MR. PARRY. Is your concern about the $20 billion a foreignexchange risk concern?-47-3/27/90SPEAKER(?). It's a political concern.MR. BOEHNE. Well, first of all, $20 billion is a lot ofmoney to spend even for a central bank. Second, I think that thereare some political accountability issues here, one of which we'regoing to run into on this currency [collateral] business, I wouldthink, some time this year. We at least ought to have thought throughwhat we're doing and why we're doing it before we commit to that kindof money.MR. HOSKINS. Is the agenda here to go through Ted's fourpolicy questions, which I thought were quite good?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the first thing we [normally]would do is to ask questions, but they didn't say anything to ask aquestion about. So, if you want to comment on the substance of theissues, please go ahead.MR. HOSKINS. Well, let me just start where I think Ed wasgoing. There are a number of points that could be raised around theissues that Ted put down; we probably ought to discuss those because Ithink they're fair and to the point. I suppose one response to Ed'sstatement is that we did approve those limits regularly, and there wassome protesting along the way occasionally. But sooner or later wefound ourselves in a situation of [spending] $20 billion. And I'muncomfortable with it, as Ed is, for some reasons that are political.I think it attracts attention. And I think we ought to ask thequestion: Does it allow influence by the Treasury on us because ofthat relationship? I don't know the answer to that but that seems tome one question that we ought to deal with. Ted started off with the[question as to whether] we should be doing it for our own account.It's one thing to execute [transactions] as agent [for the Treasury];it's another to give tacit [permission] to manipulating or trying tomaintain exchange rates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just say one thing now. To theextent that we at the Board raised concerns to the Treasury, I thinkwe were more heard than not. In effect, I would say that in this mostrecent endeavor to suppress the decrease in the yen against the dollarabout which we raised very strong [objections] and had extendeddiscussions as to why that was desirable or appropriate, it actuallypaid off. In other words, the Treasury did pull back. As best I canjudge, that was largely the result of our reluctance to go along andof the arguments we were making. So, even though in a legal sense wehave to interpret ourselves as junior partners, it has been myimpression that we do have a significant effect on the overallTreasury decision. Were we to pull away and be strictly [theTreasury's] agent, I think by that very nature we lose completely allof our capability of influencing decisions that could affect ourmonetary policies. My impression is that, if we were to poll thisCommittee, the extent of belief that there is any really significantbenefit coming from [intervention] would be extremely mild tononexistent. The question that we have before us is not whether itworks in any substantial way; I don't think you'll find many peoplearound here who believe that. Therefore, leaving aside the issue ofintervention where it seems appropriate to curb disorderly markets andraising the much broader issues of pegging-type intervention,including G-7 coordinated intervention to drive the dollar down, for-48-3/27/90example, the question is whether or not we lose our ability toinfluence those decisions if we pull away. And I must tell you myimpression is that we do. Sam, is that your impression?MR. CROSS. Well, there's no question that our discussionswith the Treasury at all levels are very much influential on theirviews both because they do want to have the Federal Reserve involvedin there with them and also because we can bring to the discussionssome [insights regarding] the point of view of the markets and thepoint of view of the issues that the Federal Reserve is interested in,which have an influence on them. So, my assessment would be verysimilar to yours. There are a lot of times, of course, when we startoff agreeing anyhow. But there are many, many occasions when we doinfluence their views. I think this recent experience is a case inpoint. But as in any arrangement of this sort, it's not going tohappen every time. Looking back over a longer period of time, I thinkwe have been very influential and quite helpful in influencing them inthe directions that we have.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I think we've succeeded in shuttingoff some of the extreme elements of policy that they tried toimplement.MR. CROSS. I think that's right. We mentioned in [the TaskForce report] that the Federal Reserve frequently seems to be somewhatof a balancing wheel; sometimes Administrations tend to go off alittle in excess in one direction or another. I think over the yearsthat certainly has been the case.MR. HOSKINS. I don't disagree with what you said, but thebalancing wheel this time seems to me to be in order of magnitudecompletely out of proportion to what we've done in the past. It'sroughly four times the level relative to our portfolio that we'veexperienced.MR. CROSS. Well, certainly, the $20 billion we did last yearis the largest we've done in one year. But if you [compare it with]periods in the latter 1970s [relative to] the size of the foreignexchange markets at that time, for example, the $20 billion was notbig. If you look back at the size of the current account deficits inthat period, there were periods of intervention when relative to thoseconditions the intervention figures were high, though they certainlydid not approach the $20 billion total.MR. JOHNSON. [Unintelligible] the current account deficitswill make it work the other way? [Unintelligible] selling dollarswith a large current account deficit.MR. CROSS. Well, that's right. I was trying to give acomparison of the [conditions] within which--MR. HOSKINS. But you can only relate it to our portfoliobecause if you're looking at channels of influence, it's true we caninfluence the Treasury. But the other side of that coin, it seems tome, is that Treasury can have some influence on us. One of thoseinfluences might have been that it had to get very large before we gotour backs up.-49-3/27/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there any question that we can'ttotally sterilize our activities in exchange markets? Are you raisingthe question of whether or not they can influence us because we can'tsterilize or what?MR. HOSKINS. No, they can influence us in the size of ourforeign currency holdings.SPEAKER(?). That's a separate issue.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a separate issue. Sure.MR. HOSKINS. It's not clear to me in what other ways, oncewe have a position of that size. Could we be influenced by apotential loss in that and would we adjust policy in order to avoid apotential loss? It's just a number.MR. JOHNSON. I think in fact it can complicate thesterilization process. Technically, we can definitely do it, but wealready have found that we had some collateral pressures. Now, I knowwe could suspend that and reinterpret our collateral, but thatcomplicates the process. Also, in my opinion, at times it can createa significant amount of uncertainty about policy in the open marketbecause if the market doesn't know the degree to which we haveundertaken exchange rate intervention then it can confuse the market'sunderstanding of what the reserve need is on any given day. That canadd volatility in the market and it can confuse the market at least inthe very short run.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're referring to intra-week I assume?MR. JOHNSON. Yes, absolutely; because it comes outeventually in the reports. But I think it could have a substantiveeffect if we ran into serious collateral problems. If we try tochange our definition of collateral and expand what we considercollateral, we could open up a whole Pandora's box of questions aboutthe substance of our policy.MR. TRUMAN. Just to come back to the collateral issue, sinceit has been raised twice now: It was a self-denying ordinance that theBoard imposed on itself, given the circumstances as they existed inthe early 1980s. And I suspect that the proposition that you--MR. JOHNSON. Well, I'm saying we still have to change it[even if] it was self-imposed.MR. TRUMAN. You'd have to change your policy. The questionis whether you--MR. JOHNSON. You could raise a lot of questions about that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But the issue shouldn't swing onthat question.MR. JOHNSON. I couldn't agree more. All I'm saying is thatit can complicate the sterilization process. Tentatively, that'strue.-50-3/27/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I just ask a factual question? Hasthere been a significant or meaningful political change since weinitiated that on the basis of the concern that we shouldn't back thedollar with foreign currencies? Is that spoken of politically as anissue? Does anybody have a sense of that?MR. TRUMAN. It tends to be associated with one or two peoplein Congress at least one of whom, Ron Paul, is not there anymore. Itwas also associated with concern and confusion in the outbreak of thedebt crisis and the misuse of that power to bail out Brazil, Mexico,or any of your favorite or nonfavorite LDCs. It is not currently anissue. I'm not saying that it wouldn't be noted--MR. JOHNSON. It could quickly become an issue if it lookedas if we were bailing out the currencies of other countries.MR. TRUMAN. If the circumstances were such that the Congressfelt that the dollar should go up and we were excessively buyingforeign exchange--which I think is what you're talking about--it wouldbecome an issue. That is correct. Generally the bias in Congress hasbeen the other way, however.MR. SYRON. It's very easily demagogued; that's the reallydangerous thing from our perspective.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Look, the truth of the matter is thereason we built up at least part of that $20 billion is that in theearly stages it just did not seem credible that the dollar would firmas much as it has. And the early accumulation of both yen anddeutschemark balances was considered to be a good speculativeinvestment that we would get rid of relatively quickly. Part of theproblem is that the markets have behaved in a way that turned out notto have been expected. I think that has gone against us.MR. JOHNSON. Mr. Chairman, that raises a very importantpoint along the lines of what Ed Boehne was talking about initially.It seems that there ought to be some understanding in the Committeeabout where we cross over the line from just providing intervention toresist disorderly conditions and at what point we decide that it hasgotten out of control and the fundamentals are really working againstus. It seems to me that if we accumulate $20 billion in foreignexchange reserves over a relatively short period of time, that's asignal that we've crossed over the line.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I wouldn't disagree with that; infact, that's precisely the reason we increasingly fought the Treasuryas these sums began to rise. In other words, as soon as they began toget into double-digits it was a signal that we were doing preciselythat. My own judgment is that if we were not there, the total, whichis now what--$45 billion?MR. CROSS. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would bet you that the total would be$60 billion at this stage.3/27/90MR. JOHNSON. I guess the question is: What do we do, if theykeep doing this? We have $20 billion of a $45 billion total. What ifthey keep wanting to sell dollars?MR. ANGELL. There's no problem because they are out of moneyin their Exchange Stabilization Fund.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, they could warehouse anywhere, ifthey wanted to. However, the political exposure of the Treasury tolosses in that fund go directly, dollar-for-dollar, into the budgetdeficit, and I think there's sensitivity on that issue.MR. BLACK. Well, losses on our books could go directly inthere too.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What I'm trying to say is it's an issueboth ways.MR. SYRON. In that regard, Mr. Chairman, how big is thebreadbox in the sense of the $20 billion that we're talking about nowrelative to the position that we've had in the past vis-a-vis theamount of trading that's going on in the market? Sam started to talkabout that and that's what I wanted to ask him. Is this just anextraordinary buildup?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, if you adjust for the size of themarket--MR. HOSKINS. But it is extraordinary relative to ourportfolio.SPEAKER(?). To our portfolio.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's right, that's where thedifference is; but it's not relative to the size of the market.MR. CROSS. That's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One of the issues that we have toconfront is that there is a globalization going on; there is noquestion that the amount of cross border transactions of every type isrising secularly against the nominal GNPs of the countries. And thisis an irreversible process. So I think the issue is that were we tokeep the proportion of intervention relative to the transactionsconstant, I would suspect that consumer and commercial banks are notgoing anywhere. But the ratio of our holdings relative to our totalassets also would be rising secularly, and that's the problem.MR. HOSKINS. If we continue to intervene, that's true.MR. TRUMAN. May I come back to one point that Mr. Johnsonraised? We did look at this question of volatility, which is relatedto the sterilization; it's the very last three or four pages in thebook. In fact, much to my surprise, we did not find a correlationbetween interest rate volatility and the scale of our interventionwhether we were in the market in a moderate way or a big way. Thevolatility of interest rates, whether long or short, seems to be thesame. I was surprised because in some sense it was a biased test. I-52-3/27/90would have suspected that [unintelligible] in the market because therewere certain other things going on. It's not a strong test, but thereisn't [a correlation].MR. JOHNSON. Okay.MR. TRUMAN. There seems to have been less confusion than Iwould have thought.MR. JOHNSON. Well, that may be true as an empirical matter;but the potential is certainly there for it to create mysteriousvolatility problems, especially if we're intervening in large amounts.I concede that empirically that may not have been the case so far, butpotentially it clearly could be. And that's something we should takeinto account. But I think we ought to go back to what Bob Parry wassaying. I wouldn't worry so much about this whole thing if I thoughtit was totally ineffective. I think generally sterilized interventionis grossly ineffective. But there are times--and I think even thisresearch shows that--when it can be effective at least in the short tointermediate term. The time that it is effective, at leasttemporarily if not even into the intermediate term, is when there isconcerted multilateral intervention, which basically gives a signal tothe market that there's a coordinated effort by all the majorindustrial countries to achieve some exchange rate level. Now,whether they ultimately achieve it or not, it creates in my opinionpotential turmoil in the market in the short to intermediate term.And it can even change the psychology of the fundamentals in myopinion.MR. PARRY. But it seems that we all agree with this. Ithink the issue is: How can we be effective in getting that viewpointacross--by playing the game or by picking up our mitt and going home?MR. JOHNSON. Well, I can cite you an example that I havecited before. You can argue both sides of that. I think there havebeen times when we have been effective playing the game and there havebeen times when we have been totally ineffective. A good example isfrom my experience when I was at the Treasury. I have mentioned thisto Ted and others before. When I was at the Treasury, Beryl Sprinkelwas Undersecretary and there was a policy of non-intervention. Yes,there was some modest intervention at times when the Treasury decidedthat it was useful, but only when they decided it was useful. TheFed's views during the whole period were completely shut out. From myexperience, I don't remember any cooperation or any plea by the Fedduring that period having any effect whatsoever.MR. PARRY. But you agree that there are times when it doeshave an effect?MR. JOHNSON. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, there's a crucial difference.Beryl Sprinkel is different from all others. I was going to use aneconometric term on how one can apply that but I decided not to.MR. JOHNSON. Sure. What I'm saying, though, is that youprobably could cite other times in the past where playing the game hasnot gotten us anywhere. And there are times where you have to draw-53-3/27/90the line and say you're going to make a stand. I would completelyagree that playing the game up to a point is a practical thing to do.The question is: What are the guidelines as to where we draw the lineand when we decide to make a stand?SPEAKER(?). Can you know a priori?MR. JOHNSON. I think we can have some guidelines to say ingeneral what kind of intervention we find acceptable. No, I wouldn'ttie anyone's hands. It ought to come to this table and there ought tobe a discussion once we cross over some threshold we consider to beoutside the frontier of what we thought was reasonable. We ought todecide it, though.MR. PARRY. Would you sketch out what the environment will belike after that point? In other words, what would be our role whenwe've reached that point where we say we're not going to intervene?What influence would we have? How would that be preferable?MR. JOHNSON. Well, I'll be honest. My view is that we'vehad considerable influence standing firm. The fear at the Treasury ofthe Fed pulling out of this process in my opinion has been as strong adisciplinary force as anything else.MR. PARRY. I don't disagree with that, but you say we willpull out at some point. After we've pulled out what kind ofdiscipline can we exert?MR. JOHNSON. Well, there are several things we can do. I'mnot saying I would prescribe these, but we have a lot of tools. Oneis that we don't approve any further intervention limits or interveneon our account. We say, okay, Treasury, you have independentauthority to intervene as a matter of Treasury policy and you can doit for your account. But the other point is that we also have theauthority to approve their warehousing of foreign currencies. Now,they can warehouse, as the Chairman says, in other places possibly.I'm not sure where.MR. ANGELL. Where?MR. JOHNSON. Other central banks?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The BIS.MR. JOHNSON. But I can't conceive of the BIS doing that.MR. ANGELL. Yes, that would be risky for them.MR. JOHNSON. But the point is there are tools. First ofall, we don't have to do it for our account and that becomes clear tothe market. We don't have to warehouse their foreign exchangereserves. Those are basically the disciplinary tools we have. And Ithink before the Treasury would risk confronting that, they wouldlisten to us. But we've got to be willing to use those tools or we'renot going to get them to listen. The Chairman has been very effectivein my opinion in getting them to listen at times, but I think youwould concede that they have been pretty stubborn.3/27/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, Mr. Mulford has been.MR. JOHNSON. Messrs. Mulford and Sprinkel fall in the samecategory.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No they don't. We have to distinguish.I happen to agree more with Mr. Sprinkel's view on how this shouldwork; I don't have any trouble with Mr. Sprinkel. But most Treasurieshave been heavy interventionists. The reason I want to say leave theRegan/Sprinkel [period] out is that it's a real outlier; it's reallybeside the point. There have been occasions when we've butted ourheads to little avail, but I must tell you that the vast, vastmajority of occasions we not only argued but I think to a large extentprevailed. There have been two or three occasions when we objected toheavy intervention largely directed at beating down the dollar. Wewere bypassed for a few days. But after they got the point that itwasn't making any difference, they dropped it.MR. JOHNSON. But I feel that it was the fear of our pullingout of the process that scared them more than anything else.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't think so, Manley. I don't thinkwe ever even remotely suggested that we would pull away. Basicallywhen Sam, for example, or some of us from here argue with theSecretary, I think it does have an effect. It has not been 100percent effective in the sense that we are not fully in control.Frankly, I would be quite fearful of what they might do if we weren'tthere to harass them toward some degree of sensibleness.MR. JOHNSON. But then I think it would become clear to themarket if we got to that point. If I were a market participant and Iwere sitting out there seeing the Federal Reserve talking about pricestability and yet selling massive amounts of dollars, I thinkeventually I'd decide that was a joke as a policy. It seems to methat our policies have to be reasonably complementary and that we haveto make some stand ultimately if the amount gets beyond the point ofreason. I'm not saying that within a range we should not participateand act in a practical way on disorderly markets, as Ed Boehne said.But what do you do when you build up $50-$60 billion of foreignexchange reserves?MR. BLACK. There are at least two dangers. One is that wecan lose our credibility and the market will assume we're going toease policy in order not to take the losses. The other is thatmembers of Congress become concerned about the losses and try to exertpolitical pressure on us so that we don't have to take those losses,which would mean pressure to ease policy.MR. HOSKINS. There's another issue here it seems--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Listen, I have this old piece of paperthat says on it Wayne Angell [wants to speak].MR. ANGELL. It seems to me first of all that the very firstprinciple is that the Treasury, with its official foreign exchangecapability, and the Federal Reserve are inevitably linked in anendeavor. Even if we did not engage in foreign exchange operations,we could still have the possibility of a conflict between Treasury's3/27/90official foreign exchange position and basic monetary policy; and itcould become a conflict at the Congressional level if we decided thatmonetary policy was going to be for a strong dollar and if theTreasury said they wanted a weak dollar. So, I don't think we canback away and say somehow or other let's wash our hands of it. Thatwon't work. I think it is important that the Federal Reserve continueits educational process. Now, I'm very happy with what has happened.I'm happy on two scores. In the first place I'm happy because theFederal Reserve is now, it seems to me, at a consensus positionregarding the dollar. The problem that I had for so long was that wehad so many in the Federal Reserve who saw a foreign exchangedepreciation as a technique to resolve the foreign trade balance,which was in conflict with our price level stability goals. And I'mdelighted, Mr. Chairman, that today this organization now seems to betogether for the first time, which says that depreciation is not goingto be used as a device to solve the trade balance problem. We'regoing to solve that problem some other way. So, it seems to me we'vemade tremendous progress.Now, when the Treasury wishes to engage in dollardepreciation in order to satisfy a short-term political objective,that's very dangerous and we ought not to participate in it. We oughtto be willing to join in when we believe that the purposes arereasonable and give them some allowance in that regard. But when itcomes to the point of having it appear to the nations and the capitalmarkets of the world that the Treasury and the Federal Reserve want adepreciation of the dollar, that invites catastrophe and we can't be apart of that. Now, it seems to me we've made progress on that score.We no longer have that high risk. Selling dollars to drive the dollardown is a process that a central bank can engage in without a limit.We can create all the dollars we want to create and there's nostopping it. Frankly, when it is published that the Federal Reservedid not participate, I think that's going to give the Treasury a greatdeal of pause; I think they're going to be more careful and are goingto listen to us more carefully than they did before. The fact of thematter is, Mr. Chairman, that in 1989 they continued to the point ofbuilding up balances that are unprecedented and those balances subjectthem to foreign exchange speculative risk and they subject us to thatrisk. And sooner or later, if you stake those kinds of positions,you're going to have a Congressional inquiry and the whole operationis going to be tarred. I think it's very [unintelligible] that we'resetting out to do. When we first did the Plaza Accord that seemed tobe somewhat well understood. When we first did the Louvre Accord thatseemed to be somewhat well understood in regard to broad ranges. Butwe've been asked to engage in the selling of dollars at a time inwhich no one knew what the down side was in regard to the deutschemarkmarket as we were selling yen, and in this [untenable] position thatthe Treasury was in I think we had no choice but to separate ourselvesfrom that risk. Mr. Chairman, I'm delighted we have. But I will bemore delighted when we get some kind of reasonable plan to deal withthe large balances that we now have and some notion as to how they canbe worked back down. There are uncertainties that really areimpacting this market. No one understands what's happening to the yenat this point. At one time we had some reasonable understanding as towhy [exchange rates] were moving. But we are now in a period of risk.And I think it's just extraordinary that we've made this kind ofstatement; it's going to be significant when it's announced. I thinkit is going to have an impact when it is published that the Federal-56-3/27/90Reserve stepped back from it. Now, I believe in doing this that weought to be careful not to do it and turn out to be wrong.[Unintelligible] then, of course, we would lose credibility. But Ithink we've protected ourselves. But I would like to see the nextplan, which is: Where do we go from here? What is to be done with thebalances? When are we ever to sell currencies? That's what I thinkwould be helpful to have your comments on.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Before I comment, the ViceChairman wanted to [speak].VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. First of all, I very much agree withEd Boehne. I think we have to be pragmatic about these matters. It'squite clear that every central banker that is worth his salt,regardless of country of origin, is going to want a strong currency.And that covers even [unintelligible]. But against that backdrop andthe immediately past history, I would go even a step further, Ed, inthe distinctions that you made. There are intervention activitiesthat are aimed at countering disorderly markets in the historicalcontext of that word. There are intervention activities that may aimat trying to check what seems to be an unsustainable rise in currencyx. But then there are also intervention activities that are at leastperceived as seeking to beat down your own currency. I think in theimmediate past a lot of the tension, not just between the FederalReserve and the Treasury but between nations--including both centralbanks and finance ministries--really has focused on that point.Indeed, I think much of the dissatisfaction around this table has beentargeted at that point: i.e., intervention tactics or strategies thatseem to have as their sole purpose stomping on our own currency. So,that is a third distinction that I think is useful in trying to putthese issues in perspective.MR. HOSKINS. May I ask a question? You asked me beforeabout policy and how we could be impacted by this. When you read thenewspapers or listen to the discussion this morning, there is anexpectation that the Fed won't tighten because of dollar concerns--that is, that the dollar is getting too strong. We heard it at thetable to some extent just this morning. Suppose we have an increasein the inflation rate like we've had and we continue to haveadditional increases and we continue to say that we're supporting theTreasury in terms of intervention? It seems to me that we'll have nocredibility at all. At what point do we decide to fight inflationhere? The yen may continue to fall even if our inflation rate rises,even if they raise their interest rates 100 basis points. We don'tknow what's going to happen there. And I think Wayne's point is rightabout separating ourselves to some extent from the process becausethen the expectation is that we run monetary policy--that the Treasurymay intervene, but the Fed will fight inflation when necessary.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I was going to get to that issue ina minute.MR. HOSKINS. I'm sorry to interrupt.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Given the kind of institutionalbackground that we operate in, it seems to me that with respect to thedistinction I tried to draw as to the motivation for intervention inthe first place, the first kind of troublesome threshold we all come-57-3/27/90up against is this debate as to whether intervention works. Indeed,there are very sharp differences of opinion even around this table.Some people are against intervention because they say it doesn't workand other people are against it because they say it does work. Idon't see quite how you square that circle. Then, you look at thegreat body of empirical analysis, some of which was summarized inPaper 11. That paper seems to say that it's pretty hard to findevidence that it does work. I have to say that I'm a little agnosticon that point. And I want to try to make the point that myagnosticism does not grow out of my place of origin, Liberty Street.I've asked my people to look at this question for me in some detailand I was very scrupulous: I asked some of the old timers like DickDavis to look at it knowing their institutional biases; but I askedsome people whose roots actually are here, like Bonnie Loopesko, tolook at it. And they both tell me the same thing. What they say,basically, is that while maybe you can't draw a clear conclusion thatintervention works, you can't draw one that it doesn't work.Moreover, they make the point that there is also a non-empiricalfoundation that tells us what determines exchange rates in the firstplace--whether intervention does or doesn't [work] or whether anythingdoes or doesn't [work]. So, I think one has to have at least ahealthy element of skepticism or agnosticism in terms of drawingsweeping conclusions on that threshold point.My own view is not unlike Governor Johnson's in thatintuitively I think it can work at least in the short run. Andbecause it can work I think we should treat it as though it does work.Now, in that setting, the questions about profits and losses,opportunity costs, size of portfolio, and amount of balances in somesense are secondary. We can find ways, I think, to deal with those.But it does seem to me that the threshold questions are: What roleshould this institution play in the process, if any? And inaddressing that question, it's important to keep in mind that for mostof this decade we essentially have been operating with a currency thathas been strong rather than weak. But it wasn't that long ago--thelatter part of the previous decade--when things were distinctly theother way around. And we went hat in hand to the rest of the worldasking them to help defend our currency. Now, whether that worked ornot, whether it was an expedient or not, or whether we were short-sighted or not as a nation, is beside the point. That's what we did.And there is no guarantee that we might not have to face thosecircumstances again at some point in the future. So, I think that initself is a reason not to throw the proverbial baby out with the bathwater.As I see it, the biggest danger with intervention--whetherit's done by the Federal Reserve or the Treasury or both--is thedanger that it can ultimately co-opt monetary policy. That, I think,is the ultimate risk. And that has a bearing on this question ofwhether we should be a part of the process or not. To me, the dangerof co-opting monetary policy in some underlying sense is greater whenwe're out of the picture than when we're in the picture. I think ittranscends the question of whether the Chairman with his considerablepersuasive powers, or Mr. Cross and Mr. Truman with their persuasivepowers, can browbeat the Undersecretary or the Secretary of theTreasury into a more sensible position day-by-day. It's much morefundamental than that. And I think that alone is more than asufficient reason why the Federal Reserve should maintain a-58-3/27/90continuing, active, involved posture and presence in these matters. Ialso think that our international relationships lead to the sameconclusion. We may think we'll scare the heck out of the Treasury bytelling them we aren't going to play, but if the world at large--including our sister central banks--felt that that was our attitude,it would scare the heck out of them too. That in itself might produceprecisely the problem that we're most interested in avoiding, and thatis a weak currency rather than a strong currency.MR. HOSKINS. I don't understand that, Jerry.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If the international community ofcentral banks thought that the Federal Reserve was throwing in thetowel and leaving this whole business to the Treasury, I don't thinkthey'd be very happy. As a matter of fact, I don't think theinternational financial community would be very happy.MR. JOHNSON. The Bundesbank would be happy.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. For now they might be, but I don'tthink that the perception that the Federal Reserve was jumping ship onthe process would be well received.MR. JOHNSON. No, I agree with you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible] he could be quitedisturbed.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I think he probably would.MR. ANGELL. But by and large, Jerry, if the Federal Reservehad pursued a rigorously tight monetary policy in 1978 we would nothave had to go out with our hat in our hand.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I concede that we--MR. ANGELL. If we pursue a rigorous monetary policy towardprice level stability, the fear of a weak dollar is gone.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I concede that, especially in thecase of 1978 policies in general, we probably were short-sighted. ButI don't think things are quite that one dimensional. Again, in theimmediate circumstance, would it be a good thing, unambiguously good,if the yen [fell] from 157 to 200? It's not at all clear to me thatthat is unambiguously good.MR. ANGELL. Oh, I agree with you.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. And with those circumstances, itseems to me that we have a constructive role to play in terms of--MR. ANGELL. But that's why we shouldn't add to our stock ofyen at 138 and 142, because then we lose the ability to do it when weneed to do it to stop an overshoot.MR. JOHNSON. But, Jerry, there is still the question: Saythat that was the trend, that the dollar was rising toward 200---59-3/27/90VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, let me just finish here. I'llcome back to that. The point I was making was on the thresholdquestion of whether we as an institution should maintain a meaningfulpresence in this arena. I'm suggesting that we should. And the lastreason I cited as to why I thought we should was not just for fear ofloss of monetary policy autonomy in a domestic context, but that itwould not be well received by the world at large if they literallyfelt that we had jumped ship on the process. Indeed, I for one couldnot [imagine] asking the Chairman of the Federal Reserve to go off toa G-7 meeting next Saturday with his hands tied squarely behind hisback. I don't think that's in the interest of the Federal Reserve; Idon't think it's in the interest of the United States of America; andI don't think it's in the interest of the well being of the worldeconomy. So, the threshold question I'm trying to address is: Are wein or are we out? And in my judgment we're far better off in.MR. JOHNSON. Let me pose this question to you. Look, Idon't disagree with that, but I think the question is: What are we infor? Let's say that the yen was weak for whatever reason--I couldname half a dozen reasons why the Japanese may have continuingproblems--and the dollar does continue to strengthen against the yen.It could turn around tomorrow. But say it [weakens] and we alreadyhave $8 billion of yen reserves.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The threshold question is: Are we inor out? You know where I come out on that. Then we get to thequestion of procedures, the question of tactics, the question ofportfolios and so on. Now, as far as I'm concerned, I have somesympathy with what Ed Boehne said: that there probably is room forsome more systematic procedures at the Committee level to try and helpmembers' comfort levels with what we're doing. But even there, at theend of the day I think the Chairman in particular has to have anappropriate degree of flexibility. And I'm not quite sure, Ed, howyou square the circle in terms of what I interpreted your suggestionto be. Now, whether it means there should be a more systematic reviewor reports after the fact of G-7 meetings and other things like thator whether--and I personally hope not--we have to go so far as havinga directive that mirrors the domestic directive, I'm not sure. But ifyou're saying, Manley, that we ought to have some better mousetrapswithin a context along the broad lines that I think we're all talkingabout, I don't have any problem with that.MR. JOHNSON. All I'm saying is that the Chairman should beable to go into a meeting like that with some demonstration to theTreasury and the G-7 of where we [unintelligible] acceptable path.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The problem with that is none of uscan anticipate what the Chairman is going to run into at one of thosemeetings.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's right.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You cannot anticipate that.MR. JOHNSON. I still want to finish this example just as anillustration of what we might be faced with. Let's just assume thatthe yen continues to weaken against the dollar and we already have $8billion or more of yen reserves. And let's just say that the reasons-60-3/27/90the yen is weak are internal to the Japanese market: they're notconfronting inflationary pressures; they have a weak government,without much credibility; their stock market is overvalued. I couldname off a few others. Let's just say they have all those problemsand yet they don't want to confront those problems. They want us tohelp them on the foreign exchange markets. What do we say if, let'ssay, the Treasury wants to go along with that?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In those circumstances, you'repainting a picture not unlike what was true in the United States herein the late 1970s. We were unable or unwilling to face up to ourproblems. Now, that's going to break at some point. But in thoseprecise circumstances that you described, if you asked me whether Iwould be willing to support modest intervention in the context inwhich the dollar is rising in a major way, I'd say "Sure." I wouldn'thave any trouble with that. I would have no illusions about what itwas doing but if it was doing nothing more than keeping us in theballgame in terms of having some influence on the fundamental waysthat these problems ultimately were to kick out, I'd say that's asmall price to pay.MR. JOHNSON. All right, you've answered that. But what ifthe G-7 wants a multilateral concerted effort to drive the dollar tolower levels?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would not support that.MR. JOHNSON. You've answered my questions. There's whereyou draw the lines.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The G-7 in this respect is not therelevant vehicle. The relevant vehicle is the Treasury. In otherwords, to the extent that we get confronted with that issue it's notthe Federal Reserve in the G-7 fighting this issue. We ought to beable to turn the Treasury on this because if we can't, then it'sdubious what it is that we have, basically. As far as I'm concerned,our crucial issue is to try to affect what the Treasury's position is.The question that was raised before about what it is they are doing Ithink we ought to discuss in a minute. But I do have two names, whichhave been sitting on this piece of paper, who deserve to get calledupon: Dick Syron and Tom Melzer. So, after you gentlemen--andGovernor LaWare. After the three of you--MR. LAWARE. I withdraw.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, after the two of you get through,I would like to call on our colleagues to define as best they can whatthe Treasury's position is, and then let's confront that specificquestion because I think that's where the real issue lies.MR. SYRON. Following my esteemed colleague fromMassachusetts, I withdraw.MR. MELZER. I don't have a colleague from Missouri.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You have Roger [Guffey].MR. GUFFEY. You can withdraw now, Tom!-61-3/27/90MR. MELZER. Before I make some comments, I had a questionfor you, Jerry. Could you explain what you meant by the Treasury co-opting monetary policy if we weren't involved? How would that work?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I think the danger of theTreasury getting us into entangling alliances through G-7 typemechanisms escalates in a circumstance in which the rest of the worldthinks we're on the sidelines. So, there's that danger first of all.Second, I do agree with the Chairman that any form of intervention canbe sterilized. But I think Governor Johnson's problem and LeeHoskins' problem--about the markets interpreting what the policy ofthe United States government is--gets greatly heightened in thosecircumstances. Even now, quite apart from the dollar situation,there's this drift in newspapers and elsewhere about theAdministration wanting the Fed to ease. Now, that's enough of aproblem in and of itself. But if that same problem surfaced in acontext in which the markets knew that we had gone on vacation insofaras exchange rate policy is concerned and in effect had abdicated tothe Treasury, I think those concerns would be amplified in a verysignificant way both internationally and domestically. So, while Iagree that even the Treasury's intervention can be sterilized by us, Ithink the psychology of the marketplace changes in a way that is verydetrimental to the interest of good monetary policy in a context inwhich we simply decide we're going on vacation.MR. MELZER. I see it as an uncertainty risk, but we stillhave all the cards, I think. But they're--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, no. Remember that the people whoown the decks, the Congress of the United States--MR. MELZER. No, I understand.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. --will [use them] if we don't use them.MR. JOHNSON. You're talking about monetary policy cards,though.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But even there the Congress stillholds the deck.MR. MELZER. Yes, I think that's a good point.MR. JOHNSON. The historical work shows that it wasn't until1962 that we even got involved in intervention.MR. CROSS. Neither one of us was involved [before 1962].MR. MELZER. [Unintelligible] for us to ease or tighten if wedon't want to in the short run, but the uncertainty would be damaging.Let me just make my point. I don't disagree with the general ideathat we ought to be involved in this and we can bring a constructiveinfluence to the table. But I think we have to recognize that we havea finite institution here in terms of the resources and that there isa responsibility for these resources in a sense that goes beyond thisroom in terms of [Reserve Bank] boards of directors and--I don't want-62-3/27/90to make this a government [unintelligible]--but there's a basicinstitutional question in terms of how we commit our assets and whatthe risks are associated with those assets. Clearly, I hope we neverget to the point where we have to draw that line in the sand. Butthere is, I think, a line in terms of what is reasonable with respectto an ultimate commitment of the Federal Reserve and its resources toforeign assets.Now, I think there's another area where we ought to have abetter understanding of some of the rationale for this and that is:What is a prudent war chest to have on hand if we need some foreigncurrencies on hand? But that's a much smaller issue, in my mind. Andfinally, I don't know what the implications would be if the Treasurywent elsewhere to finance [their currency holdings] and how it wouldbe handled in a government accounting sense. But I'm a littletroubled about the issue that some other people have mentioned--thatif there is a large exchange loss and all of a sudden Congress andother people wake up to it then they will look to see how it happened.And if it happened not only because we intervened for our own accountbut--under this somewhat questionable authority on the theory thatit's an open market purchase--we also warehoused roughly an equalamount for the Treasury in what could be painted as sort of a secrettransaction, I think there's a--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They set the exchange rate.MR. TRUMAN. That's their loss.MR. MELZER. No, I understand that, but--MR. CROSS. It's the Treasury's loss.MR. MELZER. If somebody wanted to do a job on the Fed theywould say that we really, through some sort of a subterfuge, financedthis behind the back of the Congress and the taxpayers.SPEAKER(?). Absolutely.MR. MELZER. And that puts us in a position now where theAmerican people [could] have this huge exchange loss.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Tom, I think you're reaching. I doubtthat very much. Should there be a major problem with respect to lossin the budget from the exchange rate operations, the Treasury will getit all. I don't think we'll get anything on that because it's veryclear where we have stood on this question. In fact, I think the bestchance that we have to cap de facto some of this is to really raisethis specter. I raised it early on when the numbers were $10 billionand didn't make very much progress because essentially we were makingmoney. And so long as we're making money it's very difficult for usto get anybody's attention. I tell you: At these levels a 10 percentmove in favor of the dollar is $4-1/2 billion and that's direct budgetmoney. That is a program, a child care program or something likethat. I know [unintelligible] and I said the only tool that I thinkwe have at this stage that effectively could operate at this point isthis issue. I don't think that existed back at $10 billion. Itexists now and, frankly, I think that's an issue that we should getre-surfaced as soon as we can.3/27/90MR. ANGELL. But, Alan, you don't think the Treasury wants tobe out there floating in the wind by themselves on this issue. Theyreally want us in, don't you think?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They want us in, but they don't want usin because of this.MR. ANGELL. All right.MR. JOHNSON. Why do they want us in?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I was about to ask my twocolleagues down at the end [of the table] about the motives of theTreasury Department.MR. MELZER. Could I just get in one final thought, which issimply that I don't view it as either we're in or we're out at thispoint. I don't think it's reasonable to say: "That's it; we're notgoing to warehouse anymore." But I think we really have to try todraw some ultimate line in the sand and then work very hard to get adifferent understanding with the Treasury. I know you've been tryingto do that but I think with that ultimate [unintelligible] power thatManley and Wayne were referring to. To me it's not a theologicalissue. We're charged with running this institution prudently. I knowvolumes in the foreign exchange markets have gone up. But the fact ofthe matter is there are not enough resources in this central bank orall of them combined to stand in the way of those markets for verylong, whether you think [intervention] works or doesn't work. And wehave to understand what those limits are. In my opinion that's a verydefensible position and one we have to take. In order to leaveourselves enough room and time to get it done, [we need] to get abetter understanding with the Treasury on how this can be used and howit can't be used because I could very easily, on the course we've beenon, see this going to $60 billion, $80 billion. Who knows?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, unfortunately, we are missingTreasury representatives. So, I think we'll use the two proxies.MR. CROSS. Well, let me say one thing. Obviously, we havehad difficulties from time to time with the Treasury, which have beenreferred to, and we have been absolutely unable to reach agreement ina particular situation. But in my view that has been an occasionalthing and certainly not a continuous thing. It would not be right forus to think that the Treasury is totally unreasonable in theirapproach to these matters. In the circumstances that we were talkingabout here a few minutes ago, I don't think that they would have aninterest in pouring billions into a yen operation when it was totallya Japanese domestic problem. I don't think they have any reason to doit and I don't think they would argue it. That's quite apart from allof the points that we would be making on it. In fact, if you lookback over these past several weeks, Japanese intervention as Imentioned earlier was about which is a very substantialamount for that period. Our intervention was $1-1/2 billion, abouthalf when we were involved and about half when the [Desk] hadsuspended [its participation for the Federal Reserve]. But even withregard to the Treasury's own views it seems to me that they havebecome much more diffident in terms of the quickness with which they-64-3/27/90want to jump in and participate in an intervention operation in theyen when they are beginning to wonder themselves about some of thesequestions that you've mentioned--and which are becoming more apparentas time goes by--that there is a big domestic element. It's just aquestion about the political structure of the country and the problemsthat they're running into. We've had in the past two or three weekstwo meetings with the Japanese--one by the President with Mr. Kaifuand one by Secretary Brady with Mr. Hashimoto. They didn't come backafter those meetings and say "Let's go in and bash the market." Quitethe contrary. We did a modest amount after the Kaifu meetings, and Ican understand the need to show some cooperation, given everythingthat had happened. But it was certainly not a major push or anything.After the Hashimoto meetings, we did none. We did zero, absolutezero. And so--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And this I might add was [at theinitiation] of the Treasury because Mr. Brady asked me basically: Whatshould we do? I said the ideal thing to do is zero; however, if youfeel for political reasons that some token amounts are required, wewill be supportive of that but we would prefer zero. And he came offwith zero.MR. HOSKINS. But maybe the evidence is that by our being[reluctant]--MR. ANGELL. Made a difference.MR. HOSKINS. --that Treasury won't do it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't think so; I disagree with that.MR. CROSS. I don't think it was based on a feeling of ourbeing in or out. I don't think that he had an interest in doing itfor some other reasons.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me raise one thing. Before Mr.Brady went off to see Mr. Hashimoto, I spent about 20 minutes with himhere on the way to the airport. And I went through what I thought wasweakening the yen: namely, the effect of the stock market and theportfolio adjustment process that was pouring yen into theinternational financial markets--an activity we could scarcely stop nomatter how hard we tried. I said that the problem was essentially aJapanese problem, that we would in a sense be [spitting into] the windtrying to stop any of this and that we would be perceived asineffectual in endeavoring to stop any really major move. As best Ican judge, he went off to Los Angeles and took that position becausewhen he came back everything he told me was perfectly consistent withthat. While it may well be that the lower echelon technical peopleare aware of what we're doing with respect to participating or not,during that 20 minute or half-hour meeting Brady didn't mention itonce. And he has not mentioned it to me since then. I will tell youthat he is not disinclined to scream and yell at us when he doesn'tlike what we're doing. So what I will tell you is that it's not inhis consciousness. And unless I'm mistaken, unless Sam tells me I'mwrong on this issue, I'd say that essentially Sam's views and my viewsdid penetrate--or maybe more importantly the real world penetrated--because they got the message. And that's---65-3/27/90MR. TRUMAN. Just to give my answer to your question, I thinkone thing that needs to be recognized is--and I don't think thesituation in 1989 was any different, quite frankly, from the situationin 1978 in this regard--that there is a desire if you're sitting wherethe Treasury is to think that you have another instrument, a verystrong instrument. And in the more recent period that has beencomplemented by the sense that they have an additional dimension ofthat instrument that's associated with something called the G-7process. They see that as an instrument of dealing with a tradeproblem, which could be viewed either in terms of short-run policy orin protectionist terms or a longer-run build up of liabilities[unintelligible] of the United States that will bankrupt our childrenor grandchildren.MR. ANGELL. You believe that?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's what they say.MR. TRUMAN. In fact, the Chairman recently asked Charles[Dallara] why he was concerned and that was the answer he gave.MR. JOHNSON. No. That's what scares me.MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. TRUMAN. They see it as a device, I would argue, thatgives them another degree of freedom. I don't want to get into adebate with President Corrigan about what the technical literaturesays on this matter, but the Treasury officials certainly are on theside that says that intervention is and has been and can be and shouldbe--certainly should be--effective. And if it is over the longerterm, then they have a tool to deal with the problem that they see,the perceived problem. I don't think it's any more complicated thanthat. We were in exactly the same situation in the 1978-79 period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me finish. I'll follow up onwhat Ted is saying. In all fairness, early on in the process when wehad a current account deficit we also were concerned about theaccumulation of assets, which ultimately would kill the value of thedollar. It turned out that the willingness on the part of the worldto absorb claims against the United States without disgorging them wasmuch larger than we had anticipated, which meant that we did not haveto view the trade imbalance as the indispensable number one adjustmentprocess that a number of us thought--not that we chose to but we wouldhave thought that a couple of years ago.MR. ANGELL. But proper monetary policy is behind the world'swillingness to take our claims. If the Federal Reserve had nottightened and grown our money stock at a 4 percent rate for two years,the world would not have taken those claims.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that may be true; we don't knowthat for sure. But what we do know is that the original view that alot of us, in fact almost all of us, had early on was not[unintelligible] to the most recent view of the Treasury. Now, we maysay that the Treasury is behind the times in understanding the facts,and frankly I think they are; but they probably are changing at thisstage. And our recognizing that, while the current account deficit is-66-3/27/90not something particularly desirable, we do have a little more time toadjust it and hopefully adjust it in nonexchange rate terms is a newview. It's a view that I don't think we have any reasonableexpectation to be able to hold. We've all misjudged the propensity--MR. ANGELL. Not all.MR. HOSKINS. No, there were some--MR. ANGELL. Right. Some of us said that was not to be--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I alter my statement to "most." I wouldsay the most general view was that that was something we had noalternative to and, therefore, that the Treasury held that view upuntil recently is not something that's utterly bizarre. Now, we maythink they are wrong; we may think they are late in adjusting that--MR. JOHNSON. It's one thing to hold that view, which I thinkis an acceptable view in terms of the theory, but it's another thingto try and force it to happen with exchange rate intervention. If youbelieve in theory that it's going to happen, not--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, no. If you believe it's going tohappen, you try to cut it off at $500 billion net debt exposure beforeit gets to a trillion and a half; that's the theory. The theory maybe right or it may be wrong, but the [presumption] is what theargument essentially is all about.MR. JOHNSON. But if you believe that that equilibriumadjustment has to take place, you wouldn't believe that interventioncan change that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, no. If you believe--and there area lot of reputable economists who do--MR. JOHNSON. I agree that there are. But reconcile for methis notion of the belief that the current account deficit requiressome equilibrium adjustment and that intervention matters.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, suppose the equilibrium adjustmentcomes into exchange rates--and that's a debatable question--and theintervention works?MR. JOHNSON. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And intervention drives the dollar down,closes the current account deficit, and chokes off the growth in netclaims against the United States. It may be right and it may bewrong; I think it's wrong, but it's not a crazy idea.MR. JOHNSON. But I'm saying: If you believe it's got tohappen why would you intervene? Why don't--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You'd intervene because if you believeit's going to happen and you want it to, you believe that if there'sless net debt out there, the adjustment process is less disruptive.-67-3/27/90MR. JOHNSON. Maybe I'm missing something. Is there somesimple mathematics on the size of the debt that you're talking about?MR. TRUMAN. If it's a problem, it's a smaller problem. Ithink that's all the Chairman is saying.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's right.MR. TRUMAN. If it's going to be a problem, it's either a$500 billion problem or a trillion dollar problem.MR. ANGELL. But the foreign exchange intervention worksbecause it has monetary policy behind it.MR. HOSKINS. It's not sterilized.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the other question.MR. ANGELL. The possibility that you're gaining time by theTreasury [intervening] without us is a paper floating in the wind.They can accomplish nothing.MR. JOHNSON. But, Ted, I still want my question answeredabout why the Treasury wants us involved.MR. TRUMAN. That's a different question.MR. JOHNSON. Well, but that's the question. Why do theywant us involved?MR. TRUMAN. I would agree with what I think Sam said hereimplicitly and what President Corrigan said earlier. The Treasuryrecognizes--all Treasuries, if I may put it that way, have recognized--that they need the stature of the Federal Reserve or the centralbank behind them and that it is not in their interest to go tointernational meetings, whether it's G-7 or G-10 or G-22, atloggerheads with the central bank. The Japanese are proving thattoday.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's right.MR. TRUMAN. So, therefore, they feel that they're better offkeeping peace in the family; it's not any more complicated than that.MR. JOHNSON. But that just tells me that that's the reasonwe should be worried. They want us involved because they want us tobe partners in this crime.MR. TRUMAN. Was it a crime, to use your word, in the 1960swhen we were partners with the Treasury in protecting our gold stockby getting back into this business and creating the swap network?Now, some people will read history and will say that it was a mistakeof policy to--MR. JOHNSON. Protect the gold stock.MR. ANGELL. The mistake was that they did not use monetarypolicy consistent with that.-68-3/27/90MR. TRUMAN. The world was very different.MR. BLACK. We didn't do that.MR. TRUMAN. But I don't think that the motivations of theTreasury and ourselves [yesterday] in terms of working together todeal with what was perceived as a common problem or common threat areany different than their motivations to work with us today. I don'tthink they have any ulterior motives. It's not in their interest todo so.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I try something? I think we havethe sense of where everyone stands. Let me make a specific proposaland let's discuss that particular proposal. I think that we're all inagreement that we should stay involved. Well, let's say that's thesentiment of the vast majority; I don't want to speak for everybody.The vast majority think it's probably better that we stay involvedthan not. There is considerable discomfort on the part of this groupabout the policies and the policy orientations of the Treasury. Weall are concerned about the accumulation of the System's [foreigncurrency balances]. I would suggest that in order to limit the sizethat the Treasury continuously endeavors to get involved in, in largepart because they are driven by our counterparties on the other side--in Japan to a much lesser extent than Germany--that we endeavor toresurface in some detail the potential risks that are involved inholding this much in the way of foreign currency assets. I will takea position and try to [unintelligible]: First, the extent that itaffects our balance sheet and our technical capabilities offunctioning, including the issues that Ed was raising; second, and Ithink far more conclusively, the risks that both we and the Treasuryare taking with respect to potential backlashes should significantlosses occur as a consequence of the holdings. I don't know withabsolute certainty that those arguments will prevail. I think theyare already beginning to prevail but I cannot know for certain.Ultimately, the Treasury has the constitutional authority to runinternational exchange rate policy. If we endeavor to confront themon that issue in an immediate confrontational way, we will lose in theCongress. We almost have to lose in the Congress because any billthat the Treasury offers that moves to the Hill almost has to pass. Idon't see how that can be avoided even amongst those on the Hill whoare very sympathetic to us. So, we cannot win that battle in any waywith which I am familiar. All I can suggest to you is that I will putmy best efforts forward, including communication of the notunimportant content of the discussion of this group today, which Iwill convey in some detail to them. Having said that, I would likefor us to agree in principle: (1) to respond favorably to a requestfor an expansion, say, up to $15 billion, in the warehousing facility;and (2) to raise the limit on the System's overall [open] position to$25 billion and agree that the System's participation with theTreasury is discretionary, but with the strong presumption that theSystem will join the Treasury as long as there is reasonable two-waycommunication about U.S. policy objectives and tactics in this area.If we can agree on that, I think we will find ourselves in the bestposition that the System can be in. So, I'd like to put that on thetable as a recommendation.MR. JOHNSON. May I ask one question, though?-69-3/27/90[CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.] Sure.MR. JOHNSON. I would feel a lot more comfortable with thatproposal if it had one extra provision, which would be related to whatJerry was saying about where we draw the [line]. What do we say ifthere were an effort for concerted intervention to put the dollar atlower levels? I'm not saying that would happen, but what do we say?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd say we say "no."MR. JOHNSON. Okay. I'm for it.MR. MELZER. Could I just ask another question? What doesthe Treasury think we're doing at this meeting? Do they think wewithdrew for technical reasons or do they know at this stage howfundamental these concerns are?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Nothing has been communicated to me fromTreasury. So as far as I'm concerned we have gotten no response.Sam, do you know?MR. CROSS. Well, they know that we are having this meeting.They know, obviously, that we suspended our participation as of March2nd and they know that we are looking at these issues because of someof the concerns we have.MR. TRUMAN. But I think it's fair to say that the Treasurydoes not know--and no one else, I think, outside this room essentiallyknows--that we have gone through this exercise and that the timing wasof a nature that these two practically came together. We did notthink it was in the System's interest to communicate with the Treasurythat we have planned all along to have a big pow-wow on all this and,therefore, we're holding up [our participation]. So, in that sense itwas technical; it seemed appropriate under the circumstances,including the uncomfortableness that has been building over the lastsix months, to say that we would pull out and re-examine this andwould come back and tell them where we [stand] after the meeting. Atleast that's my--MR. CROSS. Yes, they certainly don't think that there's anyconsideration being given to a drastic change in the--MR. MELZER. In view of that and of the fact that these arefairly substantial increases in the limits, it might help us--and Idon't know whether you'd be prepared to do this or not--if you were toindicate that though we never say never this is pretty much an outsidelimit at this stage and that to go beyond this really would requiresome very careful consideration.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN(?). Tom, I think it would be[unintelligible] because the one thing we don't want to do, if we wantto maintain continued presence, is to threaten them. And that couldbe perceived as an ultimatum or a threat.MR. MELZER. My point--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Remember, that if push comes to shove,we will never prevail on this.-70-3/27/90MR. MELZER. Well, I didn't mean it to come across as athreat. But on the other hand, they may well view this as just thatwe had these limits and an FOMC meeting was coming up, so as atechnical matter we approved new limits.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh no, no.MR. TRUMAN. I think that's what the Chairman--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's what I'm going to communicate.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There's no danger of that happening.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [I'm going to communicate that] theabsolute size of what we're beginning to deal with is now getting tovery dangerous levels. It's beginning to have potential systemiceffects in the Federal Reserve balance sheet; it's beginning to havepotential political effects in the--MR. MELZER. Yes. And I'm not saying that you should saythat's an outside limit. But to the extent you were comfortable withit, you could say something to the effect that you're really not surewhat kind of a reaction you would get going back to [the Committee formore]. That's--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh, I can say that.MR. MELZER. That might be helpful.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I can raise it in a somewhat uncertainway.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, could we vote on these separately?The Exchange Stabilization Fund, it seems to me, is a somewhatdifferent question than the $25 billion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have to vote on these separately.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In terms of Tom Melzer's question,just based on discussions that I know you've had and one that I'vehad, the Treasury--or at least the Secretary of the Treasury--knowsfull well about both the policy and philosophical views that are atthis table. Now, they may not know that we have this big fat book infront of us. There's no danger--zero--that they would misconstruewhat the Chairman would be saying to them; no danger of that at all.MR. MELZER. It might be very helpful in influencing theirbehavior if they thought in terms of having this much left and ofoperating within that limit. Having managed traders, I know how thatworks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but you were managing them. Andthe question is that some part of the law reads [unintelligible] youhave a problem. Are there any other comments?MR. BOEHNE. Well, just to comment on your overall proposal:I think it's a reasonable proposal, given the realities of the world-71-3/27/90that we live in. It may not be as easy for everybody around the tableto digest as they would like, but I think it's reasonable and I'msupportive of it.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman? I too would support yourproposal. When I look at the alternatives, it's the only way to go.But a point of clarification: Governor Johnson posed a question aboutour response to concerted intervention and you said you would say "no"at some point. I didn't quite understand.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No concerted intervention to drive thedollar down. In other words--MR. HOSKINS. As opposed to holding it down?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's getting too subtle. They don'tsay that; they just say drive it down.MR. FORRESTAL. What I'm really looking for, Mr. Chairman, iswhat are the consequences of saying "no"? What does the Treasury dothen?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I would say at that particularstage I think we would have a confrontation.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, I would just make the point that--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't think they'd push it atthat.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's probably right.MR. ANGELL. I don't see why that needs confrontation.MR. FORRESTAL. They probably wouldn't push it, but before weget to that point I think it's very important to think through theimplications for this institution. I think you were implicitlysaying, Mr. Chairman, what a confrontation can mean in terms of whatthey do on the Hill. We have enough trouble with people--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. On that particular issue they would notbring it to the Hill because trashing your own currency is somethingyou never want to go up to the Hill to get--MR. JOHNSON. Well, I agree.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That happens to be the one--MR. JOHNSON. We could win that. Exactly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the one issue that would notbother me.MR. FORRESTAL. But in the broader context, what I'm gettingat is that I think for the good of this institution we need to avoid aconfrontation, as you said, that we probably can't win. There arepeople who want to put the Secretary of the Treasury on this Board, ordid. You're going to have that throughout. And if we have that kind-72-3/27/90of problem with domestic policy, I think we can throw the foreignexchange thing in as well if we're in a no-win situation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, when I say we'll have aconfrontation I don't mean a big one. We'll have a big dispute and Ithink the highly likely occurrence is that they would be unhappy butthey would back down.MR. FORRESTAL. Could I make just one other comment? This ismore of a suggestion. We have been participants in these discussionsabout intervention but I don't remember that we've ever had anydiscussion like we've had today, which takes into account theTreasury's feelings about intervention or what's going on at the G-7.I raise the question: W6uld it be possible for us to have somesystematic discussion at our meetings about the attitude of theTreasury and maybe some debriefings about G-7 [discussions] to theextent that that's appropriate?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't see why not.MR. FORRESTAL. I think it would be helpful to get theflavor--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The debriefing about the G-7 [meetings]I can promise you; the systematic [unintelligible] sensible list fromthe Treasury--MR. JOHNSON. But I can tell you we'll have hearings. Therewere hearings over this G-7 exercise last September when the foreignexchange reserves had built up after that. I had to testify rightafter David Mulford and Mulford was roasted in both houses of Congressover that very issue. So I can tell you on the political front, theChairman is right: Taking the position of [not] debauching ourcurrency is something that we can win every time.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I certainly don't want to put youin a position of in a sense not having the authority you need to go tothe G-7 or to the Treasury to work [unintelligible]. From the verybeginning on this I've wanted to take actions that strengthen yourhand, not those that cause you to be disempowered. I think that'svery important. I do believe there's another alternative. I believethe first question we need to face is the Exchange Stabilization Fund.That was created by an act of Congress. Is that true, Virgil?[MR. MATTINGLY(?)]. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's true, in 1934.MR. ANGELL. All right. And in a sense there was anappropriation of money, maybe out of another fund?MR. TRUMAN. No, they used the profits from gold sales.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible] $4 billion orsomething?MR. TRUMAN. Yes.-73-3/27/90MR. ANGELL. Nevertheless, it was an act of Congress thatmade the funds available. But it's also true is it not, Virgil, thatthere is some question in regard [to the warehousing]? That is, ourengaging in foreign exchange operations is, we believe, something thatwe have sound grounds on. As our attorney you can say we can go withthat one. But you don't know whether we have sound grounds in regardto the warehousing, do you? You don't know in a court that we couldwin on that one, do you?MR. MATTINGLY. Hopefully, it'll never get to a court. But--MR. ANGELL. But I want to understand what the constitutionalprinciples involved here are, or the law.MR. MATTINGLY. As you know, Governor Angell, the Board'sGeneral Counsel in 1962 issued an opinion with respect to the System'sauthority to resume foreign exchange operations.MR. ANGELL. No, I'm not talking about operations.SPEAKER(?). All three.MR. MATTINGLY. It was all three. Warehousing was part ofthat opinion; there's no question about that. That opinion justifiesthe warehousing of open market purchases of foreign exchange from theTreasury. For that purpose the Treasury is in the--MR. ANGELL. No, I wasn't asking about the history. I'masking you as our General Counsel. I don't know the answer to thisquestion. I'm asking you as General Counsel: Is there a reasonableprospect that if it came to court, that we would win in court? Or isthere some doubt on the warehousing?MR. MATTINGLY. I don't think so. Again, that's been theBoard's position for 28 years and the Congress has passed a statutewhich, in effect--I don't want to put too much emphasis on this--sanctions the System's practice. The statute authorizes the FederalReserve to invest the proceeds of its foreign exchange operations inforeign government bonds and obligations. It specifically enacted[this legislation at the] request the Federal Reserve for thatpurpose. And it seems to me that that act by the Congress very much[strengthens] the System's position on this--MR. ANGELL. But it has never been tested before?MR. MATTINGLY. It has never been tested, no.MR. ANGELL. Well,--MR. TRUMAN. A lot of things that we do have never beentested before.MR. ANGELL. But my view goes beyond that to say that Ibelieve the Constitution gives the Congress of the United States thepower to appropriate. I believe for us to do warehousing, which in asense removes from Congress this appropriation power, is at best a[legally] risky proposition. I know that I've voted in the past forincreasing the warehousing authority, but I didn't know what I was-74-3/27/90doing in voting for such a proposition. But now that I know that indoing that it eliminates the necessity for the Treasury to go to theCongress to get an appropriation, I can't do that as a matter ofprinciple until the courts tell me that we can. Now, the courts toldme on another issue that I thought was an issue but--MR. TRUMAN. I don't want to play lawyer here but it doesstrike me that there was one act of Congress that created the ExchangeStabilization Fund and gave it some capital. Okay? And [that was] 50some years ago and since then there have been no appropriations. Infact, the appropriations in the meantime have taken some of thatcapital away and given it to the IMF. It was used to pay for our IMFsubscription. Subsequently, [Congress] did give it capital in thesense that they assigned the holdings of SDRs to the ExchangeStabilization Fund and at the same time, after a big tussle with theFederal Reserve, authorized the Exchange Stabilization Fund to be ableto sell us SDR certificates. So, they already created one area inwhich they can expand the balance sheet of the Exchange StabilizationFund.MR. ANGELL. On the SDR certificates?MR. CROSS. And gold certificates.MR. TRUMAN. And the gold certificates.MR. ANGELL. But, you see, I'm worried that the Shadow OpenMarket Committee and others are waiting to pounce because when youhold currencies in the size that we hold them, at some point in timeyou're going to have some losses.MR. TRUMAN. Yes, but that seems to me--MR. ANGELL. And I believe that in that atmosphere at somepoint in time this is apt to become a political issue. And if itbecomes a political issue, I believe it is incumbent upon us toprotect the Federal Reserve's position, which is not to go around theCongressional appropriation that other warehousing would tend to do.MR. TRUMAN. Yes, but the warehousing is public, the ShadowOpen Market Committee notwithstanding. It was public at the time thatthey passed the Monetary Control Act. Just because the Shadow OpenMarket Committee can't look up in the policy record and see when the[amounts] have been changed, they have been changed. It's part of thepolicy actions of the Committee. In fact, it dates back 28 years. Itstrikes me that the notion that the warehousing is a flimsy legal reedjust doesn't [wash]. A different question, which I think the Chairmanhas addressed, is the risk to the United States of these largebalances; that is a separate issue. It certainly is one that theTreasury Secretary as the chief financial officer of the United Statesought to address in that capacity. And indeed, the Chairman has saidthat he plans to raise that even more forcefully than he has in thepast.MR. ANGELL. But I do not believe that members of theAppropriations Committee understand this issue. I do not think thatthey know their appropriations power is being subverted by ourwarehousing arrangement. And I for one choose to stand in the more-75-3/27/90pure position which is to say if in doubt, let's ask the Treasury togo to the Congress. And when the Treasury goes to Congress and theCongress appropriates the funds or if the Congress passes a law saying[it is appropriate] for us to be warehousing them, then the FederalReserve's risk is gone.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know what the law will state:[unintelligible] the Treasury has full unquestioned authority toexecute exchange rate decisions period.MR. ANGELL. Well, but I don't see that the presentarrangement really has proved superior to that. We either make somegain here, Mr. Chairman--because if that's what we wish to accomplish,we would never have ended up with a $45 billion fund if our view hadbeen very persuasive.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Is your concern about the $45billion the risk of loss or is it something other than that?MR. ANGELL. Well, it goes beyond that. The fund has becomeso large that it does have a risk; in a sense it puts us in a positionof what I would call speculating in foreign currencies because it goesbeyond what it seems to me is the demonstrated need as a reservecurrency country for us to have this facility [to conduct] ouroperations.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There's a chart or table--I forgetwhich--in one of the many studies here that indicates, for what it'sworth, that our foreign currency balances relative to our sistercentral banks are really quite small.MR. ANGELL. But, Jerry, we are the reserve currency of theworld and that's quite different than other countries who[unintelligible] have to look to a dollar exchange standard andhistorically held--MR. TRUMAN. The current system really is not that. We werethe reserve currency; the dollar is regarded as that in a certainsense, but the current monetary system is not built on the BrettonWoods system where the rest of the world is obligated to defend thedollar. That's not true anymore.MR. ANGELL. Well, I prefer to take the cautious view.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. My views on this issue won't come as anysurprise to you or to the Committee. I was concerned about the levelof both our warehousing and also the Exchange Stabilization Fund whenwe hit $10 billion. It may come as a surprise to you that I do have apragmatic bone in my body. I am willing to suggest that there is somelevel at which we should cooperate with Treasury and be involved.However, the level has gone beyond the bounds that I'm comfortablewith in either case. I voiced the concerns when we went from $10 to$12 billion and from $12 to $15 billion and then from $15 to $20billion or wherever it went along the way. And now we're going to $25billion. And much the same arguments were made [each] time as to whywe were going up and the necessity of going up. My concerns are that-76-3/27/90we'll be here for the October G-7 meeting and we'll be talking about a$45 billion Exchange Stabilization Fund limit. And it seems to methat where this [discussion] started, at least the way I interpretedEd Boehne, it's the size of our involvement that attracts theattention and that we could probably get away with cooperating withthe Treasury at a much lower dollar figure. So, my concerns are in asense political concerns [unintelligible] surrounding the sheer sizeof what we're getting into and the likelihood of that unless we getlucky and the dollar goes the other way. I suppose that's not luckyfor some people--sorry, Wayne--that we can wind it down and use that"stuff," to use Gary's word. I just think it's a matter of facing upto it either now or later in terms of the crunch with Treasury. Iprefer a Treasury/Fed Accord II now rather than down the road when insome sense we're already implicated in this process of, to use Wayne'swords, appropriations around the Congress. And as Tom Melzer said,[we are charged with] responsible management of our assets andaccountability to our directors. So, I am not in favor of increasingeither one at all. I don't want to tie your hands unnecessarily. Isuppose a way around it would be for some indication that we will windthis thing down over the course of the next year. But, given whatyou've said, I think the Treasury would find that totally unacceptableand threatening.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, Lee, all I can tell you is that asbest I can judge the ultimate legal authority is theirs and shouldthey choose to implement it through the Congress they would probablyeffectively put us out of the operation. You may find thatattractive; I frankly don't.MR. HOSKINS. I don't find that attractive but what I'msaying is that we did the $45 or $50 billion and at what point do wedraw the line?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me say this. All I can do isemploy my best efforts. I hope we don't get to that position. If wedo, I think we reopen the issue. We'd have to rethink this wholething. I think it's premature to do that. I hope at this particularstage that we will be able to implement the principles I suggestedhere to resolve this issue. But it's not wholly in our hands. It isconceivable that this may not resolve the issue; in that case we thenwill have to revisit it with different conclusions.MR. JOHNSON. Mr. Chairman, may I just ask Ted Truman atechnical question on warehousing?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure.MR. JOHNSON. In the past has there normally been some sortof maturity associated with a warehousing instrument, similar to aswap agreement?MR. TRUMAN. Well, I can only speak for the last 15 years.When you first did this operation in the late '70s, in 1976-77 inconnection with sterling balances, in the second and third sterlingbalances agreement there was a maturity on the arrangement. When wecame to the point where the Carter bonds had been issued and the issuewas how the Treasury was going to hold those proceeds, which initiallywere being held pending intervention and later were held pending-77-3/27/90repayment since the Carter bonds were 3 or 3-1/2 year notes, theCommittee eliminated that restriction. So at the moment there is notthat kind of restriction. Speaking only from what I've heard in thisdiscussion one component of resuming the discussions with the Treasurywould be the question of dealing with the warehousing sooner ratherthan later. And presumably if that were the desire of the Committee,warehousing of foreign currencies would be dealt with before otherforeign currencies would be dealt with. So, if you used foreignexchange--as has been done in the past--to pay our next increase ofIMF quotas, it would come out of the warehouse if that were the choiceof the Treasury. And we would certainly have the grounds on which toinsist on it. We even have the grounds to insist that they redeem SDRcertificates; that's written into the legislation. We can't forcethem but we do have the grounds because there is the legislativehistory on that point. So, it's the same type of issue. But at themoment there is no maturity. I'm not even sure it makes any sense tohave any maturity unless you wanted to approach the Treasury and say"Okay, $45 billion is too much and we want to get rid of $10 billionover the next 10 months." We could no doubt work out a program inwhich we did that. I'm not sure it would make much sense, but wecould do that.MR. JOHNSON. I was just asking what the history was.MR. TRUMAN. It was taken away when it didn't make sense inthe context of the Carter bonds.MR. HOSKINS. Just one more technical question, I guess toPeter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Go ahead.MR. HOSKINS. If we increase the warehousing limit to $25billion and we use it, what do you see in terms of collateralproblems?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, that would pretty clearly put usbeyond our ability to collateralize except by looking to the foreigncurrency, if we were up by that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Except by what?MR. HOSKINS. We'd collateralize with foreign currency.MR. STERNLIGHT. By looking to the foreign currency for usein the collateralization because even at present levels we see--MR. HOSKINS. The risk.MR. STERNLIGHT. --the risk later this year of coming downto, say, the $3 to $5 billion area of margin.MR. TRUMAN. So you could argue, if you wanted to raise thisgeneral question with Congress in a nonconfrontational way, that thatin one sense does give you the basis to raise this question. TheChairman of the Board made this promise in 19--whatever it was--SPEAKER(?). 1982.-78-3/27/90MR. TRUMAN. --in 1982 in connection with [unintelligible].The circumstances have changed; these are why the circumstances havechanged; and this is what we're now going to do. That invites theCongress to decide whether they're serious about the collateral issue,which was not a matter of law but rather a matter of procedure,including Governor Angell's warehousing.MR. ANGELL. And yet we would know--MR. HOSKINS. We could also use it to argue that we knowright now that we're going to exceed our collateral in terms of thesecurities, and we will be going ahead and using collateral in thenear future and that may or may not be acceptable to Congress, soperhaps we should not do that.MR. JOHNSON. How far would the $25 billion put us over,Peter?MR. STERNLIGHT. Right now as we look ahead for the rest ofthis year, if we don't make use of the foreign currency holdings forcollateralization of the currency, as I said, we would come down to amargin of $3 to $5 billion.MR. JOHNSON. By when would you say?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, there are a couple of low points. We[project] one low point in late May, another in July, and another inOctober; it depends on the ups and downs of the Treasury balances andreserve requirements.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, if we are required to go up andessentially reverse the Board's official position, it will surfacesome of these issues, which would not be all bad.MR. BOEHNE. Yes, there's a lot of good to say about it,MR. ANGELL. Well, yes. But if we're going to surface them,why don't we surface them before we do it? Why are we waiting untilit's a fait accompli before we surface them?MR. SYRON. Why wouldn't we want to wait until we reach thepoint where there's a reasonable chance that we're going to have--?MR. HOSKINS. Because Congress may tell us that it wascompletely inappropriate to do that. At this point we're asking forcounsel and advice.MR. ANGELL. If we have a reasonable chance, it's going to beon the Exchange Stabilization Fund in the immediate future. If we'regoing to ask about it, we better ask them now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, it's quite possible that we willhave agreed on raising these limits and that this may be close to thepeak. I just don't rule that out; that is a possibility. And I'dfeel more comfortable up on the Hill if we were up against some realproblems with respect to foreign currency and they asked how this washappening rather than raise a contingent type of thing.-79-3/27/90MR. MELZER. How are warehoused currencies treated? Is thata Treasury obligation or is it a foreign currency?MR. TRUMAN. Well, it's on our balance sheets.MR. CROSS. It's on our balance sheet as foreign currency.MR. TRUMAN. Right.MR. MELZER. Well, in answering that question on the $25billion did you presume that it jumped to $15 billion as well or isthat--?MR. TRUMAN. It doesn't matter which way it's done the way wedo it.MR. ANGELL. Now we're claiming that is an open marketoperation, as I understand it. Is that correct?SPEAKER(?). Collateralized [RP].MR. ANGELL. Is that what we're claiming? So what we'reclaiming is that the Exchange Stabilization Fund is a foreign exchangeoperation. Now, do we do that on Treasuries? When we buy do we buynew Treasury issues from the Treasury or do we buy them from--?MR. STERNLIGHT. Only in exchange for maturing issues.MR. ANGELL. In exchange for maturing issues. But we neverbuy new Treasury issues directly because we're not sure we have thepower to do that kind of an open market operation, is that correct?MR. STERNLIGHT. We definitely don't have that power.MR. HOSKINS. We don't have the power.MR. ANGELL. Okay. So, we don't have the power to do thatopen market operation and now everyone tells me we do have the powerto do this operation because we've done it in the past and nobody'scaught us on it?MR. CROSS. It's not a Treasury issue.MR. HOSKINS. See, that's the answer: they're not calledTreasuries!MR. ANGELL. But it's not open market operations.MR. HOSKINS. Yes, but the principle is the same, so I thinkyou're right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible.]MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think all of this business with thecollateral is really rather fortuitous because we agreed that if therewere a confrontation between the Treasury and the Fed that theTreasury would win. In fact, we promised the Congress in the '70sthat we would be supporting it.-80-3/27/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. BOEHNE. [We] also promised the Congress that before weuse foreign exchange as collateral, we'll let them know. And at theright moment we'll let them know and it seems to me that we will airthe whole issue. We've kept our word on both and now we can air itand it's aired in a way that's not confrontational. If we get turneddown, that's not all bad.MR. ANGELL. Well, Ed, I'm not seeking a confrontation withthe Treasury. I simply want the Treasury to go to the Congress andget the appropriation power. I don't agree with the rest of you whohave opinions about the political outcome as to what the politicaloutcome will be.MR. BOEHNE. My concern about that, Wayne, would be that theTreasury won't do that.MR. ANGELL. Of course they won't do that.MR. BOEHNE. They won't do that and, in effect, that gets usto the same point. And we don't have to try to get them to dosomething they're not going to do anyway.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You may not seek confrontation withthat, but it will create confrontation. That's very unfortunate sincewe--MR. ANGELL. Well, the Treasury is not going to go toCongress over this issue. I feel certain they will not.MR. JOHNSON. The thought of holding Argentine australs ascollateral against the dollar--well, who can say? Eventually, one dayit might be--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We can [unintelligible] it now.MR. JOHNSON. But who knows in 10 years.MR. TRUMAN. The Committee has to take a separate vote towarehouse Argentine australs.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I now ask that Sam consider[formulating] two appropriate motions that effectively would read inprinciple: (1) that should a question occur we would expand thewarehousing limit up to $15 billion; and (2) that we would raise theSystem's open position to fund that. The third issue, which isbasically best efforts on my part, I assume does not require a vote.Is that correct?MR. BOEHNE. It does not require a vote, but it's the mostimportant part.MR. JOHNSON. It's the most important part of--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What I meant by that is: Everyone is infavor, right?-81-3/27/90MR. CROSS. Well, Mr. Chairman, to go ahead with theunimportant parts of the resolution, I would recommend that theauthorization for the System's [overall open position in foreigncurrency] balances be increased from the present level of $21 billionto $25 billion effective immediately, because we do have interestearnings that come in all the time on these balances.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would a member of the Committee makethat motion, please?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I will make the motion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MR. BOEHNE. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. All in favor say "aye."SEVERAL. Aye.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Opposed?MR. HOSKINS. Nay.MR. ANGELL. No.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have two nays?SPEAKER(?). That's all I counted.SPEAKER(?). Three.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Three. Do we want a roll call on this?MR. TRUMAN. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think so. Let's take a roll call.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell NoPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Hoskins NoGovernor Johnson YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare NoGovernor Seger YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Would you now formulate--MR. CROSS. Similarly, Mr. Chairman, I would request that theCommittee express an agreement in principle to accept a furtherrequest from the Treasury for additional warehousing authority and toraise the present limit on that from $10 billion to $15 billion.-82-3/27/90MR. TRUMAN. It's up to them; they may ask for less.MR. CROSS. Yes. That's the upper limit, which would beraised from the present $10 billion, of which $9 billion has beendrawn, to $15 billion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Will a member--MR. ANGELL. An extension of that limit--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Will a Committee member make thatmotion, please?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell NoPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin YesPresident Hoskins NoGovernor Johnson YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare NoGovernor Seger YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Three [dissents] on each.MR. BERNARD. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I can't believe this, but this brings usto the end of this meeting! However,--MR. HOSKINS. I have a question.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You do?MR. HOSKINS. We did the first one; there are three other[questions] on the [the list].MR. CROSS. Four of them; you didn't read page 2.MR. HOSKINS. There are a number of issues that Ted raisedthat I didn't think we addressed. Are we going to come back to themat some other date or--?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I guess we could. There's no reason wecan't do it at luncheon. Would the Committee want to continue that atthe luncheon of the next meeting?-83-3/27/90MR. BOEHNE. With all due respect, I think we've milked thisone for a while. I think we have [addressed] those other questionsimplicitly. We talked about what the implications are for domesticpolicy; you've already agreed to keep us informed about G-7 meetings;and there's the other one--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me suggest this. I will at theluncheon of the next meeting report on the G-7 meeting. And if youwish to bring up those collateral issues at that time--MR. BOYKIN. I don't think we have a luncheon.MR. TRUMAN. If I may be allowed to advise you in public, Mr.Chairman: I would suggest that since the [G-7] meeting is going to beheld very shortly, on April 7, if there is anything even remotelysubstantive, you might want to have a telephone conference at least toreport on the G-7 meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, no. Suppose it's nonsubstantive?MR. TRUMAN. We'll have Norm call everybody up and say thereis nothing [substantive to report].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we leave that issue open? Ifthere's a substantive question, we'll have a telephone conference; ifnot, I will try to review it at the next luncheon. We can come in andhave lunch first.END OF MEETING-84-