Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeOctober 2, 1990A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 2, 1990, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneBoykinHoskinsKelleyLaWareMullinsSegerSternMessrs. Black, Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis,and Boston, respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Kohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Deputy Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPatrikis, Deputy General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey,Promisel, Rosenblum, Siegman, Simpson, andStockton, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Broaddus, T. Davis, Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofRichmond, Kansas City, Chicago, and Atlanta,respectivelyMessrs. Judd, McNees, and Miller, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Boston,and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Belongia, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of St. LouisMs. Ann Marie Meulendyke, Manager, Open MarketOperations, Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofOctober 2, 1990CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. Would somebodykindly move the minutes of the last FOMC meeting?MS. SEGER. I'll move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second? Without objection.Mr. Cross, would you bring us up to date on foreign operations?MR. CROSS. Yes, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Cross?MR. BOEHNE. Sam, could you elaborate some on your commentsabout the dollar being less of a safe haven, which certainly has beentrue in this latest Middle East crisis? Do you see that as somethingthat has been evolving over time and the Middle East situation broughtit to a head? Or do you see it as something that is more transitory?What are your thoughts on it?MR. CROSS. Well, it's very hard to be sure. It may be thatover time as other currencies tend to be more widely used and as othermarkets tend to be further developed one might expect some lesseningof the uniqueness of the dollar. Also, we now have a situation inEurope where for the first time the political differences anduncertainties that existed before aren't there, which may have meantthat on this occasion there was more willingness to use some of theseother currencies because they don't see the same kinds of politicalEast/West problems as before. It could be for any number of reasons.But it's certainly true that the traders we talk to tell us that theold timers who work for them were all taking positions that assumedthere would be a lot more movement into the dollar than happened. AsI say, it could be having a significant effect in the kind ofcautionary attitudes [unintelligible]. We also detect that a lot ofpeople are very hesitant to be very short of the dollar in thesecircumstances because they think if there is overt military hostilitythe likelihood is very high that the dollar would pop up. So, quiteoften recently on Fridays we see evidence that there's a lot ofsettling of the books--that people don't like to go home for theweekend very short of dollars because they fear that if some reallyserious hostilities were to break out they could find themselvessuffering very, very large costs.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions for Sam?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll make a comment in the contextof Ed Boehne's question. In this immediate setting I think it is alsotrue that concern abroad about financial fragility--or whatever youwant to call it--in the United States and in U.S. financialinstitutions unquestionably has been a factor in the timeframe of thelast month or so. It's impossible to quantify that, but there's noquestion in my mind that that's a factor.MR. CROSS. Well, that's true. I certainly should havementioned that factor. There is hesitation about U.S. institutions.10/2/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Extending on Sam's remarks, I thinkthere really is something fundamentally different about aconfrontation where there is the possibility of a whole country orcountries going under from a coup or some instability and the currencycould conceivably--with a very low probability that's still not zero--become worthless. And that probability did exist with the East/Westconfrontations for Europe and for Japan. This confrontation doesn'thave that characteristic. In other words, there's no crediblejudgment that one can reach that says this thing will be wiped out. Ithink we saw that reaction in Saudi Arabia where there was this hugerun [unintelligible] just moved as though it was the old dollarbecause that type of threat was there. So it may be that while thisconfrontation has negative effects on Europe and Japan they really arequite limited. And this war effect is very new to them. The realtest will be if the dollar doesn't do terribly much if there is a war,which is not all that inconceivable assuming that we can--MR. CROSS. What we also have heard a lot is that instead ofmovement from one currency to another currency there has been a surgeof movement to liquidity in many places. So this tends to be agreater shift to liquidity than to a currency.MR. LAWARE. Sam, at the other end of the spectrum, what setof circumstances might create a run on the dollar?MR. CROSS. One can think of any number of possibilities.Certainly, one concern is the fact that the Japanese industries areholding something on the order of $250 billion or so that would belargely unhedged. And because of what may happen here that couldcause them to get frightened and to start running for cover fast. Or,as I was indicating in my comments, there are factors in Japan thatcould lead to a desire to shift a lot more funds [to yen] for theirown reasons. One could envisage all kinds of scenarios that couldcause the dollar to start moving down very, very, rapidly, with a lotof investors all around trying to get out.MR. LAWARE. Thank you.MR. CROSS. It's a real danger.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Sam? If not,I'd just like to take a few minutes to review what occurred at the G-7meeting relative to the issues to be discussed today. Those of youwho have seen the communique know that a crucial paragraph on monetarypolicy brings forth the issue of, as they put it, "that the rise inthe price of oil associated with the Gulf crisis poses two risks: arisk of inflation and a risk of lower economic growth." The originaldraft that had been worked up by the deputies actually was skewed moretoward inflation problems and had much less in the way of the issue ofrecession. But [unintelligible] and Mr. Brady both pushed for asymmetrical statement --or more exactly a statement that encompassedboth even though [unintelligible] also involved income policies and awhole slew of other things, which were supported by no one.Interestingly, however, the following sentence in the communique wascrafted by , which seems to contradict the basic endeavorto get balance between inflation and growth, and it reads: "TheMinisters and Governors consider that stability-oriented monetarypolicies and sound fiscal policies constitute the correct policy10/2/90response." The interesting aspect of all of this is that theparticipants who were most strongly concerned about the inflationimpact of the Gulf affair were the , both ofwhom in the previous G-7 meeting had lectured the group on beingcareful not to let the inflation genie out of the bottle because ofall the difficulties they were having stuffing it back in. And Ithought it was quite interesting the extent to which they basicallywere not pushing for anything other than stability and clearly wereacting against any form of accommodation. My sense is that the othermembers of the G-7 were essentially all in the area of stability. Iheard very little in the way of--at least in the table discussions--"interest rates should move up." In side conversations with some ofthe Germans I did get the impression that concern about the majorincrease in German government deficits was going to cause some upwardpressure on monetary policy driven largely from the market side. Butthat concern did not get expressed in the underlying discussion thatevolved among the various participants. I would suspect at this stagethat pretty much everyone recognizes that if there is a crediblebudget agreement here, we will ease. I didn't get too much in the wayof concern about that, although I would suspect that if we embarkedupon significant ease without a budget agreement, we would. To theextent that these people ever express disapproval in anything strongerthan moving an eyelash, we would get a double eyelash effect orsomething like that. But the notion of stability in the context ofindividual adjustments was really enforced by the fact that there wasno criticism, for example, of the Japanese [3/4] percentage point risein the discount rate on the grounds that that was required to maintainwhat they perceived to be a basically stable policy.There was not too much conversation on exchange rates. Therewas a general belief that a weak dollar would be undesirable. Andthat was implicit in the communique, following up on the previous G-7meeting's communique which had indicated that the yen wasexceptionally weak, in language suggesting that the yen had reached abroadly acceptable range without specifying against which[currencies]. The general view of the group, even though it was notexplicitly stated, was that dollar stability--in fact, generalstability--was desired, althoughsuggested that it might not be all that bad if theyen did actually firm somewhat relative to the other currencies. Butthat was not a general view and that did not, of course, find its wayinto the communique. I got the impression indirectly by the way heresponded to the editing of the communique that Mr. Brady basicallywas not in favor of significant weakening of the dollar. He madeseveral statements suggesting that, but he made no pronouncements; itwas sort of half sentences. But he was clearly not desirous ofdriving the dollar down and probably would be uncomfortable if that infact happened. The French at the meeting and the Japanese in publicspeeches requested that there be exploration of "a more stableinternational monetary system" as they put it. And the G-7 basicallyagreed that some looking at the process was authorized, although Isensed no enthusiasm for the process on the grounds that no one wasthinking that anything useful would come out of it. But because astudy and not an action paper was requested nobody particularly foughtagainst it.With respect to intervention, generally nobody wanted todiscuss anything about ranges; nobody even wanted to discuss10/2/90contingent intervention. As a practical matter, while it may havebeen discussed peripherally, there was less talk about concertedintervention even in the abstract than at any time since I've attendedthose meetings. I would say in general that it wasn't a particularlydynamic meeting, in part I think because there has been a change inthe participants. Considering the background of all the things thatwere going on, it was remarkably quiet and pretty much described bythe communique. There were no sub rosa discussions and no impliedprograms that are not in the communique. And there is nothing much Ican report that was not in the newspapers. Does anybody have anyquestions or anything they want to comment on?MR. FORRESTAL. Was there any discussion about thepossibility of recession in the United States and the potentialspillover into other countries?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. There was general discussion ofthat in the context of the monetary policy issue. I might say thatthere is a high degree of awareness about what is going on in theAmerican economy and concern about it. But as far as I can tell it'sa limited concern, though clearly there.MR. FORRESTAL. Could I just follow with one other question?I've seen some press reports recently that the [Delors] proposal, theparallel currency, is getting noisier.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The hardened ECU?MR. FORRESTAL. Yes. I understand that it's getting moresupport than it did when he proposed it originally. Was there anydiscussion or do you have any sense that this is gaining any momentum?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the discussion wasn't at the G-7meeting but a couple of weeks earlier at the Basle meeting of the G-10governors. It was clear that the European part of the group had justcome from Rome where they had had a fairly extended discussion, whichsort of pushed back the [Delors] plan slightly. I got the impressionthat the interest in the hardened ECU was not that everyone had all ofa sudden looked at this and said "Gee, what a terrific idea." I thinkwhat happened was that the finance ministers finally had gotten themessage that when you have the type of monetary policy integrationcontemplated in the Delors plan a substantial loss of financialsovereignty is involved. So it wasn't the hardened ECU theme thatcreated the problem; it turned out to be the vehicle that enabled someof the governments to back off from their commitments by saying "Isn'tthis interesting? Let's look at that." But I would suggest if therehadn't been a major plan they would have found something else.MR. FORRESTAL. I take it that it's your sense that ourtrading partners will be following a fairly restrictive monetarypolicy for the foreseeable future?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think that's certainly true onthe part of the Germans. It is going to be true on the part of theBrits and the Canadians until they begin to see more weakness in theireconomies. And as Sam had mentioned this morning, Mr. Hashimoto isalready talking about what was effectively turning monetary policyaround. I'm not clear what that means. As of the G-7 meeting, one10/2/90had the impression that they would remain firm, although there was nodiscussion of a further rise in their discount rate. But, certainly,there was no indication of the type of reversal that was even remotelyimplicit in Hashimoto's remarks yesterday.MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there nothing else on this? We don'tneed anything to ratify [any transactions] since, fortunately, Iassume nothing was done.MR. CROSS. No, there is no need for any action.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Peter Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions?MR. HOSKINS. Peter, I've been on the call on occasion andI've watched the market tend to focus more and more on the funds rateas the measure of our policy. To an extent, at least based on yourreport, we are beginning to alter our program so as not to indicatethat we made an easing [move]. In other words, we had to add[reserves] and we didn't do it because the market might have reacted.MR. STERNLIGHT. Right.MR. HOSKINS. The question to you is: Are you comfortablewith that or would you be more comfortable with more flexibilityaround the funds rate? And if you would [prefer the latter], do youhave any ideas on how we can get that without disturbing the market?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we have been uncomfortable for a yearor more--two or three years maybe, going back since the October 1987stock market decline--with the extent to which we give a lot ofattention to the funds rate rather than feeling that we have someelement of flexibility where we would aim at a borrowing gap and havea rough expectation about the funds rate but where there was room forthe funds rate to vary some around that. I think what has put us inthe kind of box that we're in now is a weakening of the relationshipbetween borrowings and the funds rate spread over the discount rate.I wish there were greater flexibility so that the market could acceptour doing things when the funds rate is a bit to the easy or firm sideof what they think is the central point without their getting all thatexcited about the policy implications of our actions. I think itwould take some kind of public statement to get the market off itsfixation [on the funds rate]. And even then, it's going to be hard todo because the market is always reaching for something to guideitself. And unless we can put something else out there--and I'm notsure what else we have now to substitute for the current securityblanket--MR. HOSKINS. Well, I don't either. That's why I asked you.MR. PARRY. But if it were explained that there would begreater fluctuations in the funds rate, do you think that's somethingthey could live with?10/2/90MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, I think that could help.MR. PARRY. It will?MR. STERNLIGHT. No. I think that would be--MR. HOSKINS. That would take a public statement.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't know, really. When we say morevolatility around something, of course, they'll be looking at thesomething. Unless there is literally another instrument that we canemploy, even in part, with some credibility, merely allowing the fundsrate to fluctuate doesn't help us all that much because they will allbe competing on who knows what the central tendency is on the fundsrate. What we really need is another instrument--some mechanism thatcaptures the degree of tightness in the system better than the fundsrate itself.MR. BLACK. We need some kind of reserve measure tied to M2,but there's no way--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible] goes off in the wrongdirection.MR. BLACK. Our present structure was set up to target Ml,which then ceased to be a good indicator. We have all thisinstitutional set-up in effect and it's not useful.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. In fact, I'm going to come back tothat issue a little later because we've been giving a lot of thoughtto that structure not only in this context but also in the context ofreserve requirements, which were originally set up on an M1 targetingbasis.MR. BLACK. Very cleverly done, too.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The way they set it up, I thought itwould have been terrific if it had worked.MR. BLACK. I thought it was great at the time, but I didn'tknow what was going to happen to Ml.MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, if I could add to this for a second.I think--we'll see whether [Peter] agrees--that things became eventighter after that Thanksgiving problem we had but loosened up a bitrecently. I think the problem in the last few weeks has been one ofextraordinarily volatile expectations that we were going to ease,perhaps momentarily. And if we're not doing what the market expectsus to be doing, that's always going to be a problem for the Desk. Andthere's also a greater disconnection between the funds rate and theunderlying reserve conditions. I wonder, without being able to proveit, whether that isn't partly a function of the problems with the waythese banks are changing their operations to some extent in the moneymarkets. That creates another set of problems for the Desk. So, Ithink we've had some pretty unusual circumstances over the last threemaintenance periods.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.10/2/90MR. KOHN. But in general, my sense is that we've loosened abit over the last few months relative to where we were right afterThanksgiving.MR. STERNLIGHT. Maybe so. There was a day recently that wewere able to provide some reserves--I think it was through multidayRPs--and funds were [trading] a hair under 6 percent and that wasaccepted by the market. They thought there was a big reserve need andthey didn't think anything of it on that occasion. But at the momentI'm more conscious of the occasions when we felt our hands [were tied]because of the expectations of an imminent easing that Don referredto, and we didn't move lest they misinterpret our--MR. BLACK. Peter, does anybody think we've tightened anybecause we went above our expected--?MR. STERNLIGHT. No, I do not think so.MR. BLACK. I haven't seen any indication of it; I justwondered if you had.MR. PARRY. I'd like to pursue a little more your views onthe consequences of passage of the budget compromise. If thecompromise is passed and signed, you feel that that probably wouldproduce a rally in the long-term end of the market? Is that correct?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it would be a positive. I would notexpect a big rally because there's still that concern about inflation.MR. PARRY. That, and you said the consequence, if we thenfollowed that with an easing move, would be that long-term rates wouldprobably [unintelligible] and not move up. Is that what you'rethinking?MR. STERNLIGHT. In that context I would not expect the longend to move up; right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Peter? MarthaSeger.MS. SEGER. I'm just sitting here listening to Peter and Dontalk about this fed funds fixation and the problems [that creates].Are you sort of making the case for prompt release of our minutes?Maybe that would fix it so we could tell people what we're doingrather than make them try to read it from entrails.MR. KOHN. I wasn't trying to make that case, no. I'm notsure that would help them in terms of trying to guess what we're goingto do tomorrow, which is really what it's all about--not what we didyesterday.MS. SEGER. It would still give them more guidance than theynow get where they just really are flying by the seat of their pants.MR. BOEHNE. I'm not sure, Martha, that it makes the case torelease the minutes. It makes the case simply to say what the fedfunds target is, much the way we say what the discount rate is. Ithink the minutes are so ambiguous that they don't tell you very much.10/2/90But if we say the target is an 8 percent funds rate, people know whatan 8 percent funds rate is just like they know what a 7 percentdiscount rate is.MS. SEGER. Maybe the Greenbook--MR. BOEHNE. If there's a case in all of this, that's thecase. I don't see it on the minutes side.MS. SEGER. Well, I think we need to give them some moreguidance so they don't have to hang on every basis point change [inthe funds rate] and try to equate that with a policy move.MR. MULLINS. Would there be a benefit in going to a rangefrom our point estimate? Or would that just--MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I like to think of what we have as arange anyway. But the market would immediately put the rate in themiddle of the range and if they're looking for--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They'll be looking for the central pointof that range.MR. STERNLIGHT. If they are looking for ease, then anythingto the lower side of that range will make them begin to think it's thefirst step on the easing side; conversely, if they are looking fortightening.MR. PARRY. But it would make your job easier to use a range?MR. STERNLIGHT. I tend to think of it as a range anyway, butthe market doesn't.MR. BLACK. You are in the [minority]. Of all the observersyou're one of the few who really think that. Don't virtually allobservers think of it as a target?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In principle, you either have aninterest rate or a non-interest rate [target]. The trouble is intrying to finesse all this; it doesn't work.MR. BLACK. You have to be able to predict--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Either we have to say interest ratesdon't matter and we basically are targeting some financial variable orstructure of variables or we target an interest rate. And then we'realways going to find somebody who's seeking the central point ofwhatever range we contemplate. I don't know what we do about that,but it's not satisfactory; that's for sure.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You're absolutely right. As long asthere are legions of very, very well paid people out there whoselivelihood depends upon their ability to understand every nuance inMr. Sternlight's activities, we're stuck with it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are you suggesting something aboutcreating some more [un]employment?10/2/90VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Actually, that would do it!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible.]VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's true, though, that there areliterally thousands of people all over the world who do only that.MS. SEGER. [That's] why we need to tell them what we'redoing.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't think it would change it.MR. SYRON. They have to find something to look for.MR. MELZER. Right. They'd be looking for [something].VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No matter what we did, unless wereally went the whole distance by going through some kind of aquantity as opposed to a rate--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Or lock in a mechanical [approach]--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But even that--. If you go back tothe period in 1980 and 1981 where we really did, at least for a periodof time, [target] the money supply range, we had pandemonium everyThursday afternoon when the money supply figures were published. Andthat gets very frustrating. But I must say it's pretty darn hard tofigure out how to avoid it.MR. BOEHNE. If we say, for example, what the funds rate is,then they will try to figure out what it is we look at when we areabout to change the funds rate.SPEAKER(?). Yes.MR. BOEHNE. And if we release that, then they'll go back--it's an impossible situation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Jerry suggests a significant part of thegross national product is value added from [Fed watchers].MR. SYRON. Nationwide.MR. FORRESTAL. He has a new instrument. They can all comeback and work for Don.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Peter? If not,may I have a motion to ratify the Desk's actions since the lastmeeting?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Prell.10/2/90MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Prell?MR. SYRON. Mike, I know a lot of this is because of the oilissue, but I have one technical and one substantive question. Thetechnical question: Is the big [drop] that we see in the first quarterof 1991 in the CPI because of what you already have anticipated on theexcise tax?MR. PRELL. That is part of the first-quarter effect. Ofcourse, with the timing of the gasoline tax that has been proposed,that means we'll get something before the end of the year.MR. SYRON. My other question relates to your forecast of twomildly negative quarters but then quite a bounceback. I know thatit's completely [impossible] for anyone to forecast what's going tohappen in the Middle East, but I just wonder how likely your forecastis from a much more qualitative point of view. Perhaps I'm factoringtoo much into this for how likely I think the credit crunch is and howmuch momentum I think this downturn could cumulate once we get intoit, particularly on the consumer confidence side. That may or may notbe offset by the assumption you had to make about when oil priceswould change that.MR. PRELL. I'm pleased that you said we had to make thatassumption because, obviously, there was some degree of arbitrarinessto that, and we hope that this is a plausible baseline. We feelsomewhat optimistic--but [unintelligible] I think to highlight thekind of policy issues you confront. Basically, that rebound doesfollow fairly naturally from the improvement in real disposable incomethat would result from this kind of decline in oil prices. Historysuggests that oil price shocks of the sort we have had do tend todisturb consumers, and [thus] we see very sharp drops in confidence.The previous large drops were in somewhat similar circumstances.Unless the economy really follows through with a significantlynegative performance, one might expect confidence to improve somewhat.We certainly see downside risks here because of the credit situation,but we think we've built in some allowance for that in an informalway. But should quality spreads widen dramatically, should lendersreally pull in their horns more sharply than we sense they are, thatwould certainly be a drag on business spending. We've assumed thatinventories will be kept in very tight check over the coming months;that's one of the reasons for the weakness in production in theforecast. We don't have a buildup [in inventories]; they keepproduction lines running. So, that positions us for a nice rebound inproduction as soon as that underlying demand picks up. But as weenter into a period of such weakness, there are a number of variablesthat could turn more negative than we have [projected]. It's possibletoo that we will skate through this without any cumulative decline.MR. SYRON. Is there an historical analog for a disturbancecausing this kind of muted downturn but then bouncing back thisquickly?MR. PRELL. Well, I guess one would have to reach pretty farback to find any example. This is a supply shock. The supply shocks-10-10/2/90that come to mind occurred in 1973, which was a period when otherthings also tended to exacerbate recessionary pressures, and again inthe 1979-80 period when we had a recession with an oil price shock.But the magnitudes differ and the general circumstances differ. Ithink one couldn't simply appeal to historical precedent to justifythis forecast.MR. SYRON. Thank you.MR. PARRY. You mentioned the conservative inventory policyhere, but basically it isn't much of a cycle in inventories. Do youfeel very confident about that? Typically, one expects some buildupof excess inventories, which are subsequently run off, and then someincreased production as the economy picks up. We go through thesecycles in real GNP. But in truth, these inventories are really pretty[consistently] at very low levels; that may be a potential source forsome greater cyclicality than was in the forecast.MR. PRELL. Well, as I suggested, we've assumed thatbusinesses do move their inventories very consistently with sales inthis period ahead. Our sense is that in recent years, given the kindof inventory management practices that have evolved, the patternreally does support that kind of assumption about their behavior. Onecan already see an awareness on the part of businessmen that there maybe weak sales in the months ahead. We have anecdotal reports ofretailers ordering very cautiously for the fall. Basically, we arelooking for the production adjustment to happen very rapidly andthat's when our recession is occurring.MR. PARRY. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Mike, my question is about your relativelyquick drop--from my point of view--in the inflation rate out in 1992.My question focuses on a couple of observations. One is that ex foodand energy, the trend has been upward in the last couple of years; andI'm wondering what you think is going to put the squeeze back oninflation. The second has to do with potential GNP. If the oil pricedoubles, or under the other assumption increases by 50 percent, thatmust have some impact on the potential GNP that you've built in, whichmeans that you have lower growth for the real economy but you alsohave lower potential GNP. I'd like you to sort that out for me.MR. PRELL. On the latter point, we really haven't doneanything exotic in the assumptions about potential GNP. You're quiteright that the shift in the relative price of energy could affect theproductivity of the capital stock; it could have an effect on thelevel of potential GNP. If oil prices stayed very high, one wouldhave to be concerned about some effect. I can't state the magnitude;perhaps Dave has something to contribute on that point. Basically,though--assuming there isn't a major contraction of supply that ispermanent, so to speak, going out through 1992--I think our forecastfollows quite naturally from the assumption we made about oil prices,the projection we made for the dollar, and our anticipated increase inslack in the economy. We have a 6-1/2 percent unemployment rate. Wethink that is high enough and the slowness of growth per period greatenough that we should see some downward pressure on real wages. We10/2/90anticipate that import prices will be rising fairly rapidly in thenear term, but as a result of our dollar path [the rise] will bedecelerating and thus that will be a helpful factor in thedeceleration [of overall inflation] by 1992. And we have a favorabletrend relative to overall inflation and energy prices as we go outthrough 1992. So, the cumulation of these things puts [inflation]back into the low 4 percent area during 1992.MR. HOSKINS. Thank you.MR. PRELL. Dave.MR. STOCKTON. On the potential outlook question, I'd saythat given our basic forecast, which is just sort of a continuation ofa modest rise in the relative price of energy--abstracting from thistemporary rise--that we're not expecting any significant scrapping ofthe capital stock. And that is the principal way in which thepotential output falls in the short run. Obviously, if [energy] wereto be maintained at that higher relative price, there would be greaterscrapping of the capital stock and greater substitution away fromenergy that would [lead] to a reduction of potential output.MR. PRELL. This is a complex question--one we really want tolook at in the weeks ahead. As we noted in the Greenbook, one stillhas to be very tentative about one's assumptions on potential GNP.And we've yet to address that in that broader production framework.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. When you look at the GNP data rebased to1987, you tend to get lower growth rates [unintelligible], of course,slower productivity. And when you take a look at the potential, thequestion is: Are you going to be viewing it solely in the context of1982 dollars or in 1987 dollars, which I assume is the base that willbe emerging relatively soon? And that base is .1 or .2 less, as Irecall, on a systematic basis.MR. PRELL. Well, that's just one more of the uncertainties.And, of course, if and when there are revisions of the data, that willalter the sectoral distribution of value added as the result of therepricing of computers and so on. And that could alter one'simpressions of what has been going on in productivity performance.MR. HOSKINS. Let me just follow up on--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. HOSKINS. I'm sorry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Roger.MR. GUFFEY. Looking at the forecast, Mike, it appears to methat a good deal of emphasis was put on the net export sector. Youhave it coming back fairly quickly. What kind of assurances do youhave, given the uncertainty of the Middle East problem, that that'sreally going to come about? You have it coming back very quickly, itseems to me.MR. TRUMAN. There are really three factors there. Theanswer is that we can't give you too many assurances, obviously, for-12-10/2/90the reason that you cited: We have the same [uncertain] oil situationhere. There are some short-term effects built in, which cause thislow that's going to look like [unintelligible]. As a short-termfactor, we took account of the fact that we're not going to ship anymore grain to Iraq right away but that the grain will go somewhereelse as we get into 1991. So, that tends to give you a short-termdecline that magnifies the bounceback. Then in the fourth quarter tothe first quarter, with the negative growth in the United States,imports are held down. So that gives you an arithmetic effect as faras net exports are concerned. Then, as we get further out into theforecast, the lower dollar that has come about over the last yeartends to give a boost to exports as well as to hold down imports. Thegrowth assumption that's in here has been marked down somewhat fromrecent forecasts; it was marked down last time and it was marked downthis time consistent with the effects that we have in the U.S.economy. And we have quite slow growth built in, as the Chairmanmentioned earlier, for Canada and the United Kingdom, for example; wehave negative growth in those two countries. On the other hand, wehave some resumption of growth next year, especially in Canada. So,that does give a boost in that direction. We also have a somewhatrosier outlook--or let me say a less negative outlook--for LatinAmerica in 1991, which gives us a boost to [exports]. Those are thebig factors.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I'm back on my housing kick. If I'm reading thispage correctly, you are estimating housing starts for this presentcalendar year at 1.2 million, going down to 1.15 million next year,with this present quarter actually being the low quarter--although thenext quarter is going to be about the same. It surprises me that wesee this downturn ending so quickly--unless you're a lot moreoptimistic than I am about the credit situation, which, obviously, youare.MR. PRELL. I suspect so. But that doesn't mean that we'reexpecting things to return to the kind of situation we had three orfour years ago. I must say that on the mortgage side, as opposed tothe construction side, we still don't see signs of any great additionto effective demand in that market. But I think the constructioncredit side will continue to be a touchy situation for a while longer.As you know, we have assumed that there would be some gradualimprovement in access to credit by builders who have decent projectsto propose. But the key here is that we're looking primarily to theweakness in real income over the next couple of quarters to be themajor drag on housing demand. And as that situation improves, weexpect some people to come back into the market and provide some liftto housing demand. The level to which we go back is still arelatively low level of overall housing activity; it certainly doesnot go beyond what one might think the longer-run demographics wouldsuggest should be the basic level of housing demand. So, we don'tthink we have a very aggressive forecast here as we look out to 1991.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you have a number that you use forsort of gross extinctions--in other words, the equivalent of the ageof stock in the passenger car market--from the housing stock? Thereis a figure that is basically the net extinctions, which is related tothe total number of operable housing units and the total number of---13-10/2/90MR. PRELL. Well, the figures that we've built into ourthinking would involve about 400,000 units a year to replacedilapidated or demolished units and meet the second-home demand. Ifyou add that to the demographic trend, we estimate that the basichousing start level ought to be somewhere at 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 millionunits--maybe toward the lower end, if you want to be conservative.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So we're at the point where the vacancyrate increase is negligible and the housing starts number is followingwith the demographics?MR. PRELL. Well, we are sort of building into this forecastthe notion that we're going to absorb some excess supply at thispoint. That's one moderating influence in the growth of starts overthe next couple of years.SPEAKER(?). That's just residential, right?MR. PRELL. That's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MS. SEGER. Mike, how about this heavy flow of horriblepublicity about real estate problems, such as the latest Newsweekcover story. If you [don't] own a house, it seems to me you'd get aslight case of cold feet about buying one because it practicallyguarantees a big loss on your investment, whereas a few years agopractically everyone--especially around this area--who stepped intothe housing market expected to make a killing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I just add to that?MS. SEGER. Isn't that right?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The equivalent Newsweek cover at the topof the market was exactly at the top of the market. And then we got asignal that maybe--MS. SEGER. Yes, a bleeding signal.MR. PRELL. I think we've been pointing for some time to thealtered psychology of this market. The investment motive for buying ahome in many areas of the country is not very strong at this point.There are still areas where prices are reasonably firm. On the whole,though, the picture is certainly one of a flattening out of prices forboth new and existing homes. It looks much like the kind of rate ofincrease or stability that we saw in the last recession. But interestrates are anticipated to be a bit lower. They're at the low end ofthe range we've seen in the past decade or more. And there is somebasic underlying demand. Now, houses might get smaller. We've seen alot of moving-up-the-scale by homebuilders in recent years and perhapsif there's some moderation in demand for shelter, it will take theform in part of less extravagant houses. But at some point we'regoing to have this pressure to house this population. While we mayhave doubling up and so on for a while, I think there is someunderlying support here.-14-10/2/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But Governor Seger is right. It couldjust as easily go to a million annual rate for a quarter or two andstill be consistent with--MR. PRELL. It could go even lower than that. It's a smallsector. It has some side effects but it would take a very deep plungerelative to our forecast to have a major effect in altering theoutlook.MS. SEGER. It's small, but it involves a lot of smallbusiness people who write their Congressmen.MR. PRELL. Well, you're moving into another sphere. I guessyou could say that might--MS. SEGER. I'm not; it makes no sense here.MR. PRELL. That might [hint] at some offset in terms offiscal policy.MS. SEGER. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Mike, I was interested in the general tenor ofyour presentation, which was: "We are projecting two consecutivenegative quarters but we don't really believe it very much."MR. PRELL. That's a slight variation of what I tried to say.MR. MULLINS. There are no hard data to support it.MR. PRELL. We can't see it yet.MR. MULLINS. True, you talked about new orders, which lookedfairly depressing. Also, you could make the point, which you made,that the purchasing managers index would be rather consistent withyour forecast, it seems to me. As for consumer spending, August--thefirst post-oil-shock month--didn't look too great and some of thethird quarter will be [what happened in] July. But again, the autosales really are holding up even in September. Yet the forecast hasbeen lowered for the fourth quarter by 1-1/2 percent and for the firstquarter [of 1991] by a little over 1-1/2 percent based upon apparentlyno hard data supportive of it. What did you see that fed into suchdramatic changes, despite the fact that the hard data didn't reallycompel you to do it?MR. PRELL. Well, as I noted, there were several [factors].One of the biggest single considerations was the significantly higherlevel of oil prices that we have in the fourth quarter and in thefirst quarter of next year, which is going to squeeze the realpurchasing power of households by a significant degree.MR. MULLINS. So, if we reduce the oil [price] forecast towhere it was in the August Greenbook that would account for most ofthe---15-10/2/90MR. PRELL. That would account for at least the majority ofit; I wouldn't say it would account for all of it in a [strict]mechanical translation. We thought there were other factors in theenvironment too. The general inflation trend looks a bit worse andthe excise tax hit also implies somewhat greater inflation in the nearterm and still further erosion of real income. We also looked at thecredit market developments and at least intuitively judged that thereis more restraint being imposed there than we might have anticipatedin our previous forecast. We try to take into account the anecdotalinformation. I mentioned that as something that certainly has lookednegative and I think it would be silly for us to ignore that totally.MR. MULLINS. Do you see hard evidence of the credit marketconstraint?MR. PRELL. Hard evidence? Well, obviously, the trends arevisible. The lending practices surveys that we pick up aren't thatup-to-the-minute, but the recent survey showed a slight widening ofquality spreads in the bond market. Very clearly something that hasimpressed us is the turmoil in the banking sector. That is somethingwe can't yet document in terms of its effect on their lending, but itseems to us to suggest some significant further constraint on them.MR. MULLINS. May I ask a related question on the[projection]? We have now gone through six quarters with GNP growthaveraging a little over 1 percent. And capacity utilization, it seemsto me, hasn't come down that much. We have talked about whyunemployment hasn't gone up so much--because of the participationrates. What's your view? Is this about what you'd expect: a 2percent drop in capacity utilization?MR. PRELL. We have had some reasonable increases inindustrial production thus far this year. Indeed, there is somethingof a tension between the industrial production numbers and the GNPnumbers over the course of this year. The relative movement ispushing the limits of what one might have expected. But the naturalconsequence of that is that we don't have capacity utilization comingdown a great deal. I don't have an answer for this. These aresomewhat independent data sets and they sometimes do diverge. Theyare also both subject to revision. And where the truth lies, I can'tsay with any certainty.MR. MULLINS. Could one explanation be something analogous towhat happened in the labor market, in the sense that the labor forcehasn't grown as rapidly as we expected? Perhaps the capital stock hasnot been growing, in fact.MR. PRELL. Well, in a sense this is a mechanicalcalculation. All the variation in capacity utilization essentiallycomes from the variation in industrial production. We don't measurecapacity month-by-month. I guess one might say that there hasn't beenanything very obviously strange about the relationship of capacityutilization to price behavior this year. Materials prices have notbeen collapsing; the PPI for finished goods has not been collapsing.This doesn't suggest that capacity utilization really has been fallingdramatically. So, I don't see any indication that we've been ledastray by these numbers.-16-10/2/90MR. MULLINS. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Mr. Prell?President Hoskins, didn't you have a question?MR. HOSKINS. I was just going to follow up on your comment,but it's so far removed now that I don't think we ought to put Mikeback on the rack to torture him more on that.MR. PRELL. I could use a couple more inches!MR. HOSKINS. If I listened to your comments correctly, [theimplication] was that if we do have a slowing in real GNP andpotential GNP is also slowing, we're running off a gap or slack modeland the 6-1/2 percent unemployment isn't going to buy us the samereduction in inflation. That was the only point I was trying to make.But it isn't [unintelligible] and nobody knows.MR. PRELL. Well, the point we tried to make is that ifpotential GNP is growing more slowly, one has to lower one's sights onwhat kind of GNP growth we can have and achieve a given degree ofslack. That, I think, is the cutting edge on this issue.MR. ANGELL. Mike, following up on David Mullins' questionsin regard to the fourth quarter: I note that you have nominal GNP at2.6 percent for that quarter. If my memory serves me correctly, wehardly had any quarters in the 1981-1982 recession that had nominalGNP that low. That 2.6 percent is an extremely low nominal number. Iwondered: How does V2 on a one-quarter lag basis look with 2.6percent? We really have a fair idea, don't we Don, as to where M2might be in the third quarter relative to the second quarter? Wecould put that to bed and then take this number [and determine] whatkind of a V2 change we would have.MR. KOHN. For the fourth quarter?MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. KOHN. We have a minus 2 percent velocity. Now, wewrestled with this issue, and we tried to address it at least in asentence or two in the Bluebook. Obviously, we did not have acomparable slowdown in money to accompany the slowdown in nominal GNP.Just from a modeling perspective, we find that the models are drivenby consumption, and nominal consumption remains quite high. A lot ofthat is prices--oil and whatnot--and it's not real. But nominalspending--dollars flowing through--remains quite high, and that shouldhelp to support M2. From a more theoretical perspective, the notionis that holdings and increases in holdings of M2 are related in somesense to notions of permanent income and longer-term trends. So, wewouldn't ordinarily expect money demand to react very sharplycontemporaneously to slowdowns in nominal GNP. It would work throughin the sense that it averages through in a slower path in nominal GNPover time. That's how we tried to square this circle. We reallydon't expect a comparable slowdown in M2 for those reasons.MR. PRELL. Governor Angell, I might just note that therelatively low deflator we have gotten for the fourth quarter---17-10/2/90MR. ANGELL. I noticed that.MR. PRELL. --is something of an artifact of our assumptionabout oil prices, the oil import pattern, and how fast those prices ofimported oil flow through to finished products, and so on. The factthat we had a big bulge in the oil price gives us this temporary dip,which is then reversed in the first quarter. That isn't to say wedon't have a pattern of slower nominal GNP growth over this quarterand the next; but it is still a relatively low number.MR. ANGELL. But on the nominal [GNP] there's also a rathersignificant move back from what looks like a 1990 nominal of about 5percent. That's not for the [calendar] year, but for the Q2-to-Q2period; then it looks as though it goes from 5 percent nominal to 7percent nominal. But I don't think it needs any more elaboration.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mike? If not,would somebody like to start the Committee discussion?MR. FORRESTAL. I will start off, Mr. Chairman. I would haveto say that the business and consumer attitudes we have found in theSixth District since our last meeting suggest a quite fragile economicoutlook. The people that I've talked to in the past several weekshave become increasingly negative, with just a few exceptions. Wehave been looking with interest at the oil sector, the energy sectoron the Louisiana coast, expecting that perhaps the higher oil pricesmight have given rise to some greater interest in investment in thatsector. But we have been told by our contacts in the industry thatthere is just too much uncertainty about the price of oil in thefuture. So, they're not ready to embark at this point on anysignificant added investment.The only bright spots that I can find in our economy are forthe most part in the export-producing industries. The industries thatare competing with imports are still shrinking, and that'sparticularly true in the apparel area. Retailers in the district areanticipating substantial caution on the part of consumers, which Ithink is certainly justified. Interestingly, they're delaying ordersfor Christmas merchandise; they think that manufacturers will need toclear out goods at lower prices later on. I'm not sure that their betis quite good on that score since manufacturers' inventories are quitelean. So, it's hard to tell how their strategy will finally come out.Now, what I've been talking about is really a reflection ofattitudes and anecdotal information. The hard data that we get fromthe July numbers suggest that the District is doing fairly well incomparison to the rest of the country. In the month of July, forexample, unemployment fell just a little, which moved the rate a bitcloser to the national average. But we did get hard data for Augustfor the state of Florida and that suggested that there is going to bea significant increase in the rate of unemployment for the month ofAugust.Picking up on what Mike said about the credit crunch, thebusiness contacts that we have are reporting increasingly stringentcredit policies at banks. While I'm not in a position to say thatgood projects are not finding financing, the atmosphere created by the-18-10/2/90documentation that is being required is producing a cautionary effect.So, the anecdotal information in the District is quite negative.As we look at the national economy, our forecast is similarto the one in the Greenbook, although we don't actually show declinesin the fourth and first quarters. Our services consumption sector iscertainly not strong, but it's not as weak as that shown in theGreenbook and that keeps our GNP from turning negative. Also, ourinvestment spending forecast is not quite as soft. Now, having saidthat about the Atlanta staff forecast, I want to throw in a caveat andsay that I suspect that our forecast is not incorporating theanecdotal evidence that I've talked about but rather is using the hardnumbers. So the errors, if any, in our forecast are likely to be onthe down side. I think the oil shock came at a time when businessconfidence was already quite low, and that has caused projects whichmight have seemed a little doubtful to be put on the shelf. There arepressures on businesses to reduce expenses and that could quickly leadto reductions in both output and employment.The other issue that is a concern is the weakness in thebanking system. Unfortunately, the media attention to this problem iscertainly not helping. And it's in the banking sector as well as thereal estate sector, Martha. So, I think the financial sectordifficulties are probably adding to the tax-like impacts of the oilshock. In these circumstances, it seems to me that one could easilycome up with a negative judgment about the national economy. And thatis my judgment; I find myself turning quite negative.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, at present it's really not clearwhat impact the developments in the Middle East are having on theTwelfth District economy. On the one hand, there are anecdotalreports that do suggest a considerably less optimistic attitude bybusiness leaders in the District, and we've also seen some slowing inretail sales. We do a survey of business leaders asking them whetherthey expect recession in the next 12 months, and in the most recentsurvey 40 percent of the survey respondents said they do expect arecession. That represents a change from only 4 percent several weeksago. That to us was a rather significant change. While the attitudesof most of these respondents have changed considerably, when we thenasked them whether they actually had made changes in their businessplans, we found that a number are taking an increasingly cautiousattitude toward investment and operating costs, but the vast majorityreally have not changed their plans at this point. When we talk toretailers, we find that quite a few have experienced either slowersales or actual decreases in sales of nondurable goods in August andearly September. These are not published data; these are just reportsfrom individuals. At the same time, however, the recent publisheddata don't show very much in the way of weakness. Employment, forexample, showed some improvement in July and August over what was abit of a sluggish performance in the second quarter. Employmentlevels in August were 3.2 percent higher than a year ago. Thatcompares to 1.6 percent for the rest of the nation, so it's a verystrong performance.As for real estate, although this number has a little problemwith it, real estate loans--single-family and home equity loans--have-19-10/2/90continued to expand at a rate of 22.7 percent in the past year. Ifyou look at the monthly seasonally adjusted increases in the pastseven months, they have ranged between 13 percent and 45 percent. Imust admit that some of that is due to the bank restructurings,because S&Ls are becoming a less significant factor, particularly inthe state of California and also in Arizona. But even stripping thatout, there is underlying strength in real estate loans in single-family and home equity loans in the Twelfth District.If I can turn to the national outlook for the moment, thebasic path of the Greenbook forecast certainly seems plausible to us.We expect one or two extremely weak--and I guess they could benegative--quarters. We would say that is primarily resulting from theoil shock. We then would expect that to be followed by a pickup ofgrowth in the first half of next year. I think one of the primarysources of strength is going to be in the net export area, resultingfrom the 15 percent decline in the trade-weighted value of the dollarin the past year. We also expect, using the Greenbook's assumptionswith regard to oil prices later on in the period, that consumerspending should pick up in 1991. Inflation certainly is going to behigher next year--probably somewhat over 5 percent, as indicated inthe Greenbook. Inflation will be fueled not only by higher oilprices, but we ought to keep in mind also the impact of the decline inthe value of the dollar, and more importantly, underlying wagepressures. The unemployment rate at its current level suggests that,even without the oil shock, the economy would have been straining atits capacity to produce in the months ahead and that that would havebeen a further impetus to strong underlying price pressures.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. This is obviously a very volatile and highlyuncertain period and any economic forecast is going to be subject toan unusual degree of uncertainty. At the same time, I think we haveto avoid overemphasizing these uncertainties. To me the main thingthat has changed is that we have this oil problem in the Middle Eastand we don't know how that is going to affect the price of oil. Giventhe kind of assumptions that the staff has made about what will happento the price of oil, I believe their forecast is a very plausible oneand I think the economic projections make sense. I would guess thatthe odds of error are about equal in both directions. The key featureof the forecast to me is not so much that a recession is predicted,but that the recession the staff is projecting is relatively shallowand brief. And when you think about recessions that we've had in thepast, they have almost always been preceded by some kind ofoverheating of the economy: inventories have been bloated to someextent, usually inflation has accelerated rapidly, and interest ratesgenerally have risen rapidly. But those conditions really don't existfor the most part today. So again, I think the staff's projection ispretty well on target. I make this point because I think it impliesthat the policy approach that we take ought to be cautious andmeasured, like the one that we have been taking in recent years. Idon't think there's any cause for panic now even though we obviouslyneed to be alert to what is going to happen in the Middle East.So far as our District economy is concerned, usually I don'tsee anything that's all that different, but I come out with a littledifferent view than Bob Forrestal did. I don't think the Beigebook-20-10/2/90report reflects conditions as well as what we've heard since thenbecause our most recent anecdotal information suggests that economicactivity is still growing for the most part, but at very slow rates.The sharp slowing that we had been reporting early in the year seemsto have subsided. The main weak point in our area, as is true I guessin most other places, is certainly commercial building. We have somemajor problems in the Baltimore-Washington-Norfolk corridor. It looksas if we increasingly will have to deal with the kind of real estateproblems that some other parts of the country have been through.Apart from that particular situation, however, I would describe theactivity in our area as still growing, but at a very, very modestpace.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In a District context,there really is very little recent specific data that will give ameaningful indication as to where the economy is going. Everybody isin a state of suspended animation--waiting to see how some of thesemajor uncertainties will work out. But I agree with Mike that there'sa considerable dichotomy between the sentiment out there and theunderlying facts. On balance, though, I think the District economy iscontinuing to show further moderation. We're still doing a bit betterthan other parts of the country, but I think the growth rate is comingdown.Despite that, I'm quite surprised, really, that some of thebasic businesses are better than I might have expected. The steelbusiness, for example, continues to be strong; and as the year hasgone forward it really has shown improvement. They started this yearexpecting shipments of about 80 to 81 million tons; that number hascome up and we're close enough to the end of the year that 84 milliontons looks like a very safe [bet by the] fourth quarter. Order booksare basically full; there are some orders being delayed but nooutright cancellations that I'm aware of. Meanwhile, though, those inthe steel business are trying to raise prices where they can and whenthey can, and to some extent the increases are sticking. Theconstruction business in the Midwest has finally hit the air pocketthat others have experienced. The August numbers, both residentialand nonresidential, showed declines--not perhaps as significant as inother parts of the country--but they were down, and that's the firsttime we've experienced that. General attitudes of those in theconstruction business are, understandably, quite pessimistic.In the auto sector, sales expectations certainly are beingreduced. The third-quarter number for cars and light trucks togethercame in at 14.6 million. The fourth-quarter number is now down to14.2 million and that brings 1990 down to 14.3 million; there has beena steady erosion as we've gone through the year. For 1991, at leastat the company I talk to, they are expecting 14 million at this point;but they have brought that down from 14.3 million the last time Italked to them and from 14.9 million the time before that. So, itclearly has been coming down. In the September numbers that Mikereferred to, fleet sales apparently had an impact both on the first,but maybe most particularly, the second 10-day period of September;those sales were moved forward a little earlier than is normally thecase to deal with production schedules. The fourth-quarter productionschedules for the auto companies are higher than last year, but last-21-10/2/90year was a comparatively low period. Clearly, the production risksare on the down side which, of course, is exactly what happened in thethird quarter. They had a very big production increase scheduled forthe third quarter and they reduced that right through that period. Asan aside, the heavy duty truck business has been and continues to bevery, very soft. The news out of that area is bad.The agricultural sector continues to be strong. Another weekor so of this good weather and crop production is just going to beexcellent. Farm income, despite low commodity prices, is going to be"pretty good," which means really very good. There is someuncertainty and the budget resolution adds to that uncertainty. As aconsequence, the agricultural equipment business seems to haveplateaued. And as the major manufacturers look forward to next year,they think it's possible that equipment sales have plateaued and that1991 will not be as good as 1990, and that's the first time in 2-1/2years that we've had that comparison.On the price side, I must say as I talk to a lot of peoplearound the District, that they are using opportunities to raise priceswhere they can. Many of them felt they got burned the last timearound on this energy issue and this time rather than waiting andputting through more major increases on an annual basis they aretrying to add a little here and a little there whenever they have anopportunity. Whether the competitive conditions are going to permitthat remains to be seen.What to me is the most worrisome is this attitudinal issue.While the current level of activity seems to be pretty good and thereis certainly no evidence of accelerating deterioration, mostbusinesses are worried about a recession. And many of the CEOs that Italk to are running their businesses as if we are going to get into arecession. They are looking at their plans for 1991 very carefully.They are trying to curtail capital spending where they can. The risk,of course, is that this could become a self-fulfilling prophecy and wecould experience something of a downturn as a result. Therefore,Mike's forecast looks entirely reasonable from our perspective.Because of that and given the budget resolution and the other caveats,with respect to policy I think we need to be alert to the opportunityto respond to potential weakness.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As far as the FirstDistrict goes, the situation is not very ambiguous. Activity hasclearly slackened and it is becoming softer--with a lot of variation,of course, sector by sector. In the real estate sector, of course, weare seeing some adjustment in prices. Residential prices on averageare down about 15 percent; condominium prices are down 40 to 60percent depending on where they are; and commercial rental rates aredown about 33 percent. Consistent with that, 90 percent of thebanking assets in the District are now in institutions that we haverated either currently or prospectively as 3s, 4s, and 5s, and about55 percent are in institutions that are 4s and 5s. As you talk topeople, it is interesting that in many ways it seems that businessesare gloomier the closer they are to the consumer. Sales of whitegoods and appliances generally are quite poor and are poorer than weexpected, even given the housing cycle. Car sales have been bad but-22-10/2/90not really awful, with essentially mixed changes as they have beennationally and fewer sales of small trucks. Talking to [retailers in]different types of apparel stores, what we found--and I suppose thisisn't unexpected--is that the discounters are doing significantlybetter than traditional upstairs stores, but even they are finding anenormous amount of price sensitivity. Real specials when they runthem--I talked to a representative after they had anextraordinary special--will bring people in, but on a day-to-day basispeople won't come in. And, one interesting thing that some of thepeople who run these discount chains tell me is that they obviouslyare keeping their inventories very lean, but they have the perceptionthat the people they buy from also are keeping inventories lean andthat's one reason they are not expecting a terribly good Christmasseason. They think they may not see the surplus of goods coming intothem that they have seen in earlier periods. Interestingly--I'm notsure it means an awful lot except noise--consumer confidence bouncedup in the region from 28 to 37. [Laughter.]With our manufacturers, the outlook is somewhat more mixed.Computers are quite weak, even including their export sector; that isa relatively recent change. But I will say--maybe this is consistentwith what Mike was talking about regarding expectations on the new IBMsystems--that people who produce fabricated metal boxes that thecomputers go in say that they are doing reasonably well and that theyare expecting pretty good orders further down the line. Manufacturersof longer lead time products that utilize manufacturers[unintelligible], such as those who produce power systems andlocomotives, are still doing reasonably well.The credit issue continues to be very, very difficult. Thereis an enormous amount of nervousness about this and, as other peoplehave said, it's a daily story in the newspapers and on the talk radioshows, which is kind of an ultimate index of these things. Somesignificant tightening is probably appropriate in home equity lineconditions by banks. And we have seen some businesses that really arevery substantial in size actually cutting back their capital spendingor being more cautious on capital spending because of a concern abouthow much more debt they want to take on. They are becoming very, veryworried just about the environment and the attention that is beingpaid to different quality paper. In that regard, mutual funds that wetalk to are very, very nervous about all types of bank paper and a lotof them have cut back on it. And we're seeing substantial outflowsfrom junk bond funds, which again I suppose is what one might expect.As far as the national outlook goes, we're pretty much inagreement with the Greenbook, although we have this question ofwhether we will get as much of a snapback as quickly. But again, Ithink that is a slightly different perception on the credit side. Iwould say that with respect to that one issue, which we think mightcause some cumulation of this [slowdown], there really is a lot ofnervousness about the financial fragility question. Looking at thelatest two examination reports on shared national credits and highlyleveraged transactions, the increases in classifications in thoseareas are just very, very substantial. So the concern I would have,even if we get into what should be a relatively mild downturnprecipitated by a supply interruption, is that that could causesignificant problems for some of these institutions, which will-23-10/2/90further tighten the credit situation and may expand a slowdown beyondone induced by a supply constraint.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. As for the District, I would say activity interms of what we can measure is still slowing; I would guess we'reprobably bouncing along around zero right now in the District. Onerelatively bright spot, at least through June 30th, is the bankingarea. For the first six months of the year, we're showing at smallbanks in the District return on assets of 1 percent, return on equityof 12 to 12-1/2 percent, and really no significant buildup innonperforming loans. Now, I don't think that's going to hold upnecessarily through the balance of the year, but that sector so farlooks pretty decent. In terms of the numbers on the large reportingbanks, there's not a lot of credit being extended but my sense is thatthat's somewhat of a mutual thing. I think there's just a sort ofparalysis. Dick, you mentioned this too: I'm not sure borrowers, evenif the credit is available, are all that anxious to borrow in thisenvironment.I had a dramatic example of something we have heard aboutfrom a number of people this morning. I was in a couple of areas inour District last week where geographically the economy is reallydoing quite well, not only statistically but also if you talk topeople they say business is going well. But their attitude is muchmore negative than the reality of what they're dealing with. I thinkthat pervades people's actions in the conduct of day-to-day business.The other feeling I get is that there's not a lot of sensethat monetary policy is somehow at fault. In other words, I'm notgetting accosted by people saying: "You guys have really screwed up;you really ought to be doing something differently." I'm just notpicking that up. Perhaps the corollary to that is that there is ageneral malaise out there, a lot of uncertainty, paralysis--howeveryou want to describe it. I'm not sure we have it in our power to snapthe economy out of it. And maybe yesterday's stock market reaction--and I realize this is just temporary--gives us some insight into theinfluence the Middle East situation has on expectations and thismalaise that has set in: the slightest whiff of some resolution therereally had a very positive, temporary, impact on attitudes.Turning to the national situation, I personally would not besurprised to see one or two negative quarters, and I wouldn't reallyhave any quibble with what Mike has projected. We look at monetarypolicy from perhaps a somewhat different perspective than Mike, but Ithink we're saying essentially the same thing. Our assessment is thatthe current course of policy is unlikely to exacerbate whateverrecessionary pressures exist. I think there is some sense--and Imentioned this a meeting or two ago--that some people might criticizethe Fed for being too tight. And yet if you look at the latest threemonths--whether you look at reserves, the base, narrow money, or broadmoney--compared to the prior 12 months, there really has been notightening of monetary policy on that basis. In fact, some of themeasures suggest somewhat of an easing. Anyway, my view is that wehave built a tremendous [foundation], or whatever you want to call it.We have wrung out a tremendous amount of excess liquidity over thelast three years that had been built up from monetary stimulus or-24-10/2/90whatever in the mid-1980s. And if we can just come through this nextperiod here with a reasonably good monetary policy still intact--probably a combination of good luck and good policy--the prospects formaking significant progress on inflation down the road are reallypretty good, I think.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For some time I havecommented on reasonably good economic conditions in the District and Ithink by objective measures that is still the case: The economy iscontinuing to expand at least modestly. Of course, everygeneralization has holes in it and, as Si Keehn reported, farmimplement sales clearly have leveled off--and they had been quitestrong in the spring in our District. Agricultural conditions ingeneral are very good, but there are remaining pockets of drought, sothere obviously are ongoing problems in those areas. The constructionsector has weakened in some locations. Having said that, and havingreported that I think by objective measures the District economy isexpanding, like a lot of other people who have commented I think whathas changed recently are attitudes, which clearly have deterioratedsignificantly. There's a good deal of concern out there; we're evenpicking up some questions about the status of the large money centerbanks, which is a topic that doesn't come up very often in ourDistrict. But there is some concern about that. Attitudes clearlyhave worsened as a generalization, but there are exceptions. Ihappened to be in a meeting with the treasurers of many of thecorporations based in the Twin Cities and they almost universallyreported business as strong. Now, these companies tend to have verylarge international exposure, not just selling abroad but operatingabroad. So, they're not saying the U.S. economy is strong per se.But they are reporting that business for the most part is strong.There were a couple of exceptions; but in general I was surprised bythe tenor of their remarks and the comfort they seem to have, at leastlooking at their businesses worldwide.In regard to the national economic outlook, I don't disagreemuch with the Greenbook forecast. Our own model has us avoiding arecession, although we have a continuation of three or four morequarters of very slightly positive real growth. But we can alsocalculate probabilities of recession with the model, and clearly theprobabilities have gone up relative to those calculated prior to theprevious FOMC meeting. I think that's just a statement of how therisks have shifted; that clearly argues that there are greaterdownside risks for the real economy. Unfortunately, the inflationnumbers, as Mike commented, also have been disappointing irrespectiveof food and energy prices. And our model doesn't provide much comforton the longer-term inflation outlook either. So, I see risks sittingout there in both directions. It's not a pleasant outlook tocontemplate, obviously.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, the economy in the Dallas Districtseems to reflect many of the national trends, but overall we may bedoing just slightly better than the nation now. The picture is quitemixed, however, and virtually all segments of the region's economy aregrowing more slowly than earlier in the year. The higher energy-25-10/2/90prices help fewer people and hurt more people in our District than wasthe case years ago. So, the net impact is less certain. Residentialconstruction activity has shown a modest pickup from the extremelydepressed levels of the last several years, but nonresidentialconstruction is flatter now, with the exception of the Houston area.Retail sales have shown some very slim gains in recent months. Therefining petro-chemical business has held up relatively well lately.Other areas of manufacturing have been somewhat weak. We did meetwith our advisory council on small business and agriculture a fewweeks ago. Our agricultural conditions seem to have improved,certainly in recent weeks. Outside of the issue of creditavailability, which incidentally is not a new issue with us, theeconomy may be doing considerably better than it had been over thepast several years of meeting with that group.Looking at the national economy, I have no real disagreementwith the staff's Greenbook forecast. Intuitively, I wonder if thethird quarter will be quite as strong as they're indicating, but Iwould not have a great quarrel with it. We don't see any evidencethat we're heading into a cumulative downturn. As a matter of fact,as I look at Mike's forecast and think about that outcome, it wouldnot be a bad result, if it could actually be accomplished. It seemsto me that the assumption is that a steady monetary policy wouldaccomplish that result. So, in spite of all the uncertainties andconcerns, I would tend to pay a bit more attention to the inflationpicture rather than [to the possibility of] the economy slipping overtoo far.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. The District economic indicators are generallyweak and, as elsewhere, business and consumer confidence is low and Ithink deteriorating. Employment is falling in the District;manufacturing is slumping; construction is off; retail sales fell inAugust and the first part of September; and bank lending is declining.And at the anecdotal level, there is more concern on the part of theordinary public and the business community about the soundness ofbanks. It's hard to measure, but I think it's there and I think it'sgrowing. I'm also hearing anecdotal evidence about the slowingpayments of accounts receivables. Again, it's hard to measure, butthey seem to have slowed a good bit. One businessman told me at ameeting that he doesn't even hear "the check is in the mail" anymore;people just say that the money isn't coming, which I think is a majorchange.At the national level, I think the risks are on the downside. My hunch is that we're facing a recession that will be morepronounced than contemplated in the Greenbook. I think business andconsumer confidence are likely to get worse and the stresses and thecracks in the financial system are likely to weigh more substantiallyon aggregate demand during the coming months than is built into theforecast.We talk about a cumulative downturn and we say we don't seethe evidence for a cumulative downturn. I think we're probablylooking for the kind of evidence that was typical of recessions thatwe had when the economy was more dominated by manufacturing. We tendto look at sales and orders and inventories and that sort of thing.We have a different kind of economy and I think the cumulative-26-10/2/90downturn may have a different kind of anatomy this time. We had ademand side softening of the economy coming into the summer. Theeconomy had slowed a good bit. Then on top of that we had the supplyshock, which has caused it to slow more. Now we have the financialfragilities. And it seems to me that that's the cumulative set offorces that will take us into a recession rather than having businesspeople misjudging sales, seeing their inventories build up, and thencutting back on their orders. I think we're in a different kind ofeconomy. It's important for us to resist inflation in this kind ofenvironment and to reduce inflation over time; but it's also importantto buy some insurance against too deep a slump in economic activitywhere we would then find ourselves in a situation--if the economystarts to get away from us--in which we're forced to ease too rapidlyin a very short period of time. I think we've bought a lot ofcredibility in recent years by trying to stay ahead of the economiccurve, and I think we should continue that approach to policy even inthe face of the uncertainties that we're experiencing at the moment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In terms of the national economyfirst, I think the forecast that Mike and his colleagues have put onthe table is as good a forecast as you're going to get right now. Ourown bank forecast is very similar in all of its major elements toMike's forecast. But having said that, I think the point Mike made atthe outset and that several others have made is very important: Therereally is a sharp dichotomy between attitudes and expectations versuswhat we see in the economic statistics and what those hard economicstatistics would suggest in terms of a forecast. And I think there isa danger in that environment of the classic self-fulfilling prophecy.There have been several comments made about the financialfragility aspects of that. Let me just add a couple of insights inthat area. First of all, part of what we're seeing in banking,broadly defined, is also being seen in other countries. There is asimilar situation at least in many respects in Japan and, while it'snot widely talked about, there are symptoms of the same kind ofconditions beginning to develop even in the London clearing banksbecause of asset quality problems and overextension of real estateloans and so on. So, while the problem to date has received a lotmore attention in the United States, it is not one that is in all ofits dimensions unique to the United States. It has secular elementsto it, especially in this country, in terms of even greater questionsin the marketplace as to how these institutions are going to generatethe earnings that they need not only to raise capital but also tomaintain reasonable rates of return for shareholders. But right nowthere clearly is a very, very pronounced cyclical element surroundingthis issue of credit quality concerns.Looking at that from the vantage point of the major moneycenter banks, there are three areas: the LDC loans, the HLT loans, andthe real estate loans. Right now what we see is a clustering ofweighted classified asset ratios in the money center banks in NewYork. For the institutions that have been the subject of a lot ofthis recent attention, those weighted classified asset ratios are nowin the range of below 20 percent, which is not great but certainlyshould be manageable. I would say right now that by far the greatestrisk of further deterioration in asset quality is in the real estate-27-10/2/90area. The LDC situation, if anything, is better, especially after allthe chargeoffs that were taken for Argentina. The exposures in thatarea essentially now are in four big countries: Mexico, Venezuela,Brazil, and Argentina--not that the others are totally insignificant;but of those countries two are in pretty good shape. The HLTsituation, while laden with uncertainties, again I would judge asmanageable. But the big, big question is on the real estate side.Even if, as I think, the situation right now is better than a lot ofthe market scuttlebutt would have it, it's certainly not as good aswe'd like to see it. And it's very important to recognize that if youjust take those seven institutions, you're talking about bankingassets of about $700 billion, which is something like a quarter or athird of domestic banking assets. And with only one or maybe twoexceptions, for the foreseeable future the growth in assets in theseinstitutions is going to be very, very restrained because of capitalconsiderations, leaving aside whatever judgments one might want tomake about credit screening and those types of things. I think it'salso important to keep in mind that the foreign banks, especiallyJapanese banks, that have been a very important source of the netgrowth of credit in the United States are not going to be a source ofthat kind of growth in the future, at least in the foreseeable future.Again, I'm leaving aside what we mean when we talk about creditcrunches. I think we have a situation in which a very large number ofinstitutions, both foreign and domestic, are simply not in a positionto be doing a lot of lending because of de facto constraints, andappropriate constraints, coming from the capital side. But at themoment my assessment still would be that the situation, while notpretty, is certainly not as difficult as some of these reports wouldindicate.I should also say in the area of financial fragility thatwhile the spotlight at the moment is on the banks, it should also bekept in mind that the securities houses and the insurance companiesare by no means exempt from these problems. Indeed, I would stipulatethat some of the potential sources of vulnerability in the securitiesindustry could be even more acute than some of the ones in banking,even though that is not a subject of great conversation at the moment.Against that backdrop, a question that keeps running throughmy mind is: Why are attitudes so sour? Now, presumably everybody islooking at the same numbers that we're looking at. What is it thathas produced this very, very substantial deterioration in attitudesand expectations? It seems to me that there are at least three orfour factors at work here. One is that I do detect, even among themost aggressive businessmen, a recognition now that inflation hasproven to be much more stubborn than we expected and than theyexpected. There was a time when we talked about inflation that a lotof people would say to us "You're fighting the last war." They don'tsay that anymore. I think there is a recognition that the coreinflation rate has not gone down and probably has crept up. So,that's a factor. I think the budget process, leaving aside what youthink are the results in terms of numbers, has taken a major toll interms of expectations or attitudes. On Wall Street and on Main Streetthat has been viewed as a farce and I think in its own way has clearlyundercut attitudes and expectations. Again, no matter what you thinkof the program itself, which I actually think is pretty decent, we'restill staring at this incredibly massive deficit for next year. Youcan dress it up any way you want, but I think that number has been a10/2/90shock to people as well. The third factor that I think is very, veryimportant in terms of this souring of attitudes and expectations hasbeen a decline in asset values. For the typical household it reallyhas struck right in the breadbasket because between stocks and housesthere has been a very sharp psychological adjustment if not a realadjustment. One of the things that sharply distinguishes this periodfrom other periods that we've gone through in the past is the factthat asset values at the level of both the household and the corporatesector are declining in many cases. Some of that, of course,especially in real estate, is a result of the excesses that wentbefore. Nevertheless, it is there.I also think that there are renewed and heightened concerns,even among people who don't normally think about this question, aboutthe reliability of our external sources of finance. All these newsreports about the Japanese pulling back and other things are catchingthe attention of people who normally don't even give those types ofissues a second thought. In a way, Sam's earlier comments about theexchange rate are a manifestation of that. So, you take all of thatand superimpose the Middle East on top of it and the conclusion I cometo is that we shouldn't be terribly surprised that expectations andattitudes are as sour as they are. When you put it all together, itseems to me that what we have right now that is different from most ofour earlier experience is either the reality or the danger of asignificant element of illiquidity and/or credit rationing beginningto manifest itself in asset markets, especially real estate. And thatdoes seem to me to carry with it some dangers that are quite differentfrom some of the things that we've had to deal with in the past.Indeed, I would be concerned that any further or more widespreadilliquidity, again especially in real estate markets, could very wellbe the thing that tips some of these expectational factors into moreunderlying behavioral factors.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to theDistrict itself, the economy continues to grow moderately and thereare mixed results in individual industries or economic areas ofactivity. In the energy sector, for example, the higher oil priceshave pushed up the rig count modestly. For example, in August thecount was 282 in the District and in September 301. However, thatfollowed a drop in the rig count from July to August. But it has comeback and, as has been stated around this table before, the question iswhether or not there is enough equipment and skilled labor to meet thedemand. The last and important part of that equation is whether ornot there are enough lenders out there willing to finance oilspeculation exploration. Having been burned in past years, I'm notsure that that kind of financing will come from District banks.Whether it will come from Boston's probably is not very clear either!With regard to the agricultural sector, farmers have put inthe bin the largest wheat crop since 1982. The corn and soybean croplook very good, with some concern about the bean crop being nippedwith a little early frost. But with regard to the wheat crop, giventhe lack of exports to Iraq that has already been mentioned and theprojection of restricted or lower levels of exports to the SovietUnion, the reaction in the market is simply to [unintelligible] thebig harvest. The lower exports and less demand clearly have dropped-29-10/2/90the price of those commodities substantially. In the livestockindustry, on the other hand, both hogs and cattle are going greatguns, particularly with the prospect for cheaper feed in the future.As for automobile assembly activity in the District, automakers continue to shut lines down or to shut down entire assemblyfactories. For example, in Oklahoma City a plant will go down a fullweek in October and in Kansas City a Ford plant will shut down a weekor two weeks, depending upon their order levels. As a result, it'soff and on. There isn't much lost income when those auto workers arenot working, however, because of the arrangements under the autocontracts. So, it's really not a matter of cutting their purchasingpower but rather a question of how much they're actually working andwhat kind of orders they're getting for particular automobiles ortrucks. On the other hand, in the aircraft industry, which wasmentioned this morning by Mike--and Wichita is a big player in this--the billings for 1990 and 1991 are projected to be about 30 percenthigher than last year, year-over-year. So, that industry is stillclicking along very well. With regard to construction, activity is uprather significantly over year-ago levels: about 30 percent innonresidential and 5 to 7 percent in residential.So all in all, the District, although not booming by anystretch of the imagination, is doing as well as or better than thenation. And that is important with regard to the outlook in the sensethat a lot of people I talk to say "Well, we're doing pretty well, butI think we're in a recession." When you press them on why theybelieve we're in a recession they say they watch the news or read thenewspapers and given what's happening in the Middle East they simplythink that times are [not] as good as they otherwise would have been.But there's no real evidence that we're in a recession.With regard to the national economy, we go through the sameexercise that the staff here does with regard to projections and withbasically the same assumptions. One thing we did not build in thismonth was the fiscal restraint that would take place with regard to a$35 billion budget agreement. Even with that, we're a little lessoptimistic than the staff in the sense that we would project anadditional quarter of flat growth--not negative, not positive, butflat--in the second quarter of 1991. Otherwise, it looks verysimilar. But given the uncertainties that are out there, I don'tthink one can put a lot of faith in the long-run projection. Thereare too many uncertainties. As a result, it seems to me we probablyshould be doing nothing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. First on the national outlook, I don't have alot of problem with Mike's forecast. But there is a very large errorband around forecasts, and as the Chairman indicated last week to thebusiness economists, that error band is increasing, not gettingsmaller, certainly relative to 20 years ago. That error band is acouple of percentage points either way. So, I'm not so worried aboutthe forecast as I am about our perceived response to it. As severalpeople already mentioned, we had an oil price shock; that was a realshock. There's not much we can do to increase output because of that.We have had a wealth loss and I don't think that calls for much of aresponse by us. Some of the other concerns, of course, relate to our-30-10/2/90ability to fine tune in some sense. I don't think we have a very goodrecord on being able to pick out when the appropriate time is toincrease the rate of growth in money and when the appropriate time isto shut it down. Nor do I think the evidence from the academiccommunity, at least as they judge policy in terms of the importance ofexpectations, supports our doing anything other than providing astable monetary policy. I would judge stability by the rates ofgrowth in M2, and we've had a pretty stable rate of growth for threeyears as Tom Melzer mentioned. And with Don's numbers--they arecoming up--it looks like we're going to be fairly close to that numberof the last three years. So, I think the problem now is not making anerror to signal the markets, essentially the currency and bondmarkets, that we're running a risk of making some of the mistakes thatwe did in the past--that is overdoing it in the face of a potentialrecession. So, I think we need to find some way to [provide] somecertainty or at least not increase the instability about the future.I suppose one could make an argument for tightening policy as a way tosend a signal. I'll save that for later.Let me talk about the District. The Fourth District is doinggenerally better than the nation, but not a lot better. As just oneexample, our employment in manufacturing in the last year has beenflat while the nation's has declined about 2 percent. Ourunemployment rates, after tilting up in the second quarter in Ohio andPennsylvania, now are back at 5.3 and 4.8 percent respectively. So,the level of activity is holding up pretty well. Capital goodsproducers, which we have a [unintelligible], are still filling theirorder books, but they are less optimistic. One turnaround has been inheavy duty truck activity; the orders there are starting to revive.Also, the export side, which has been a strength for us, still seemsto be strong but we're beginning to get some signs of a softeningthere. We recently talked to an economist at one particularconstruction machinery company who indicated that they had experienceda very sharp falloff [in demand] for construction machinery worldwidestarting in August. So, there are some signs that the economy hassoftened, but as far as the numbers go, in general the Fourth Districtseems to be holding up okay.In terms of attitudes, they are very similar to what peoplehave indicated around the table. I went through the District lastweek on a bunch of road trips and when I talked to individuals theyalways seemed to have a good reason why their business was doing okay.Everyone had his or her own peculiar reason--we just got lucky or wegot this order that will take us out through the second quarter ofnext year. But there is this pervasive view of impending disaster outthere. I think there is some tightening in terms of cost controlwithin the larger firms because of that, even though their order bookshaven't shifted much. Overall, I don't think the District has changedmuch other than in terms of the attitudinal caution because of the oilprice shock.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I have just a couple of comments about twoindustries I've been following closely in the last several months.One is autos. Quite a bit has been made of the fact that deliveriesin August and September have looked pretty healthy, and that has beenused as an indicator of consumer spending not falling into a sewer-31-10/2/90someplace. What I picked up from some analysts within the industrywere two things: (1) that the seasonals are atrocious because the autoindustry no longer has the regular seasonal swings that it used to, sothat applying the seasonal factors that we do doesn't make a lot ofsense; and (2) that the auto sales and these deliveries statisticsreally were distorted this time. Si alluded to it, but didn't expandon it. They were distorted by fleet deliveries, but these are fleetsales that are controlled by the auto companies themselves, primarilyto car rental agencies. All of the Big Three own car rental agenciesand they use deliveries to them to sort of cook the books, if you wantto say that. They can more or less determine what kind of salesstatistics they want to report by getting either more orders placed orfewer orders placed for their car rental subs. And there was anexceptional amount of that done in September for a couple of bigreasons. One is that they simply didn't have enough orders comingfrom the traditional sources--purchases by folks like you and me--toget their assembly plants cranked up. They needed to get morestrength in orders, so they chose to provide it in that way. Also,there is this continued push in the industry for market penetration.There's a real horse race out there. It's as if nobody wants to blinkand no one wants to cut back and run the risk of cutting their marketshare statistics still more. So, they are really trying to hold theirproduction up. Then there are the rating agencies--Moodys andStandard and Poors--and those folks are really checking carefully onthe Big Three these days with threats of downgrading their debtobligations. Apparently important factors considered are productionand market share as an indication of future viability. So, that'sanother factor entering in. Anyway, I was warned by two differentpeople that these statistics should not be taken at face value at all.Also, I got an interesting statistic on showroom traffic, which wouldbe the kind the consumer would usually think of; it has droppedsubstantially to about 15 percent below a year ago. And what theycall the closure rate, or the number of deals that are actually closedas a percentage of the individuals they deal with, has dropped by 20percent just in August. It was pointed out to me too that inventoriesare building and that the auto inventories themselves are probablyabout 4 days above normal and that truck inventories are getting up toabout 20 days more than the dealers would like to have.Another industry that I was probing Mike on is homebuilding,because I've been talking to a lot of homebuilders in the last coupleof months, and there really is a problem out there. The financingsituation is getting more and more attention; it started out as an S&Lproblem in the form of limits on loans to a single borrower but now ithas spread way beyond that. We are hearing of more and morehomebuilders failing and closing their businesses or liquidating, etc.Small business groups in general, I think, are showing a lot ofnervousness. They seem very negative. Retailers who are in the smallbusiness category seem to be very cautious about their Christmasorders. Again, as Bob Boykin said, small businesses always havegripes about getting credit, but I've never heard them as loud as theyare this time because now they're talking about having had credit butthen the lines were cut. So, this is a little different from lack ofavailability initially. And these credit availability problems areway beyond small business. Again, we're hearing it from businesses ofall sizes and in many different industries.-32-10/2/90So, I wouldn't be surprised to see the couple of negativequarters that are shown in the Greenbook. I guess what I would besurprised to see is the kind of snapback next year that the staff isassuming. I'd like to see it but, frankly, I doubt that it willhappen.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, let me focus for just a moment onthe budget deal that was struck this past weekend. It seems to methat the basic dilemma we have been struggling with for months now hasbeen intensifying recently; even before the oil shock, the economy washaving some problems. We have a perception that we are going toweaken substantially, largely driven by the oil situation. But evenbefore that I was disappointed in the level of economic activity--inthe second quarter, for instance. In the case of the financialsystem, we know there is a lot of pressure there and a great deal ofcredit stringency in the banking system that is playing back into thereal economy. Taken by themselves, these kinds of factors would pushone in the direction of easing. On the other hand, the inflationsituation seems to look worse, again driven by the oil situation. Buteven before that occurred there was precious little progress beingmade; maybe there was some deterioration. So, there's a concern that[higher prices] are becoming embedded, which would lead one in thedirection of firming.So, what we needed was a way to break out of the impasse.And we now have a fiscal deal. I imagine everybody would define theideal fiscal deal differently, but this one I'm sure is not it. Iwould hope that it's a new genre in the shabby history of budgetdeals; I would hope that this one is going to turn out to be firmerand to have less smoke and mirrors in it than those we've had in thepast. We don't know that much about it yet, but it looks that way.I've been trying to find more reports on the teeth that may be in theenforcement part of this and I haven't found very much yet. But thereis some evidence that there are teeth in it and that's encouraging.It is a multiyear commitment, which I think we all felt was veryimportant. And I think it has a good configuration to it: it's aboutthe right size early on and then grows as it goes down the line.Could it be another snow job? Oh, sure it could! We could turn outto be as disappointed as we've been in the past. But if it works, Idon't think it needs to be all that it is cracked up to be in orderfor it to do a lot for us. It could go far toward restoring ourfiscal health; it could help the saving rate a lot. It would bydefinition, I guess, help the saving rate a lot. It should helpinvestment a lot, which I think is the absolute key to the future ofthis country's economy. In the area of reducing inflation, it wouldseem to me that there is the possibility of more progress availablehere than in anything that we could do at this point through monetarypolicy by cooling excess demand and providing relative strength to thedollar. In general, we've all been talking about the malaise inattitude that we have around the country and I think it could go along way to [reversing] that. Again, I don't think it has to be asgood as it's touted to be in order to be highly beneficial. If it'snot passed, we're quite likely to be due for a very painful tripthrough the wringer. If that should occur, I think the Fed isprobably just going to have to look to the long-term best interests ofthe country and kind of let the short term fall out as it may. But if-33-10/2/90it's passed, it can only help--and perhaps can help a great deal. Thequestion is: How much? Keeping in mind the fact that we're stillgoing to have very large deficits to be dealt with for the next coupleof years at the minimum, I think that if it's passed, we should belooking for appropriate ways to support it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I generally agree with the staff's forecast. Ithink we're facing a stalled out economy that is likely to dip for aquarter or two into negative territory. I'm a little less optimistic,as a number of people are, on the [prospects for a] consumer-ledpickup in 1991. First, that assumes oil prices are going down as themajor impetus; we'll see what happens there. I also worry more aboutfurther erosion of consumer confidence, given the fragility of thebanking system, new taxes both on the [state] and federal levels,continued real estate value problems, and also just the experience ofa recession. People haven't seen one in 8 years and many of them werenot adults at that time. I also would sign on to what most peoplehave said about attitudes. I would just make one additional point.President Corrigan mentioned asset values falling. I think we alsohave to take into account the fact that debt ratios of individuals andfirms are relatively high. And with the economy slowing, a lot ofthem are facing the prospect of servicing debt. Before, there was aneasy way out: you could sell the house at a higher price or you couldsplit up the firm and sell [parts of] it off. I think it's not acheery prospect facing those constraints and living with them; thereis some sense that the good times are gone in a lot of markets.I'm also a little less optimistic on the export side, dueprimarily to concern about the growth of foreign economies. It seemsto me that when you see the stock index in Japan go from 39,000 to22,000 that is not bullish. Germany also has had a reduction of 30percent in stock prices pretty recently. I'm concerned about the oilimpact in eastern Europe. Obviously, Canada and the United Kingdomare not in great shape, but the dollar should help. I would justperhaps be a little less optimistic overall on the pickup. We alsodon't see the momentum to a downturn; we don't see a free fall. Ithink Ed is exactly right: the world has changed in some sense, andmaybe we will not see the typical inventory cycles of the past.Instead of seeing a momentum to the downturn, we have seen aratcheting down, it seems to me. We had a near-term growth path of 1to 1-1/2 percent and it was disrupted by the oil price shock.I also agree with Mike Kelley on the budget deal. I think itis contractionary. While it is an embarrassing spectacle to see oneof these made like sausages into law--and this one isn't law yeteither--it does have some real taxes and some real cuts in it. MikeKelley mentioned the enforcement agreements. What they have in thisin effect are little decentralized Gramm-Rudman sequester constraintsby categories of spending: defense, domestic spending, and the like.And if more is spent than the budget allows on those categories, in 15days you go into a sequester. And by the way, those detailed Gramm-Rudman constraints last for a couple of years and then go back to moremacro constraints. And on entitlements and revenue bills there is aconstraint that they must be pay-as-you-go or there is sequestration.So, I am encouraged by the discipline they have tried to build in;even the rough discipline of Gramm-Rudman, I think, has been-34-10/2/90beneficial. I wonder if we would have had even this without that. Bythe way, I think the markets responded positively to the budget deal,although they were lucky to have a day in which oil prices came down![Laughter.]On the inflation side, I agree that no real progress isapparent. I continue to believe that the right approach is a stablemonetary policy and I think we should see slack opening up. I thinkthat's essentially what we should do; about all we can do is tomaintain a moderately restrictive stance. I also continue to thinkthat we're not in the 1970s scenario and that if we do [maintain thatstance] there is little realistic danger that the oil price shock willget generalized into inflationary expectations, especially given thestate of the economy.My real concern continues to be the credit markets. It's notat all clear to me that we are maintaining a constant stance. Itseems to me that with the slower projected growth in economic activityand constant short rates, it's hard to avoid a conclusion thatmonetary conditions may have tightened. The budget deal at the marginis more contractionary than we projected in the Greenbook. And eventhough a couple of people have mentioned that the monetary aggregatesare back on their growth paths, that's due almost exclusively to thegrowth in two components--currency and money market funds. The corecomponents of money continue to creep along and that has been going onfor seven months. From the beginning of 1990 through the thirdquarter, savings deposits have grown at 3/4 of a percent annually;small time deposits have grown at 3/4 percent; large time depositshave contracted by 8 percent; other checkable deposits have contractedby 1/2 of a percent; money market deposit accounts have grown at 4-1/4percent, but that growth was mainly in February and March; and demanddeposits have rebounded 2-1/2 percent. So, the reason M2 and M3 areback on track is because of the rapid growth in currency--much of itfor export, which I think is not much related to economic activity--and money market funds. Money market funds this year have grown at 12and 22 percent for the two categories. Again, I think the increase inmoney market funds is not responding to increased economic activitynor is it likely to engender greater growth. It's responding toproblems in the stock market. At the margin it does increase credit,but it increases credit to a specific segment of the economy:investment-grade institutions, and the Treasury and commercial papermarkets. Indeed, the SEC has a rule out, as you may know, to restrictinvestment of money funds in below A1/T1 paper. Now, to be honestabout it, it's really not fair to cut out a couple of categories. Butit does seem to me that when you look at the recent reaction of moneymarket funds--and we can understand what's going on in currency andthe consistency of all the other core money categories and thepersistence of this very slow growth at well below our lower range--that there is a concern that money is growing more slowly than weprojected and endorsed.The final point I would make in this vein, which has beenmade by a number of other people, is something new in the condition ofthe banking system. There have been well publicized concerns aboutthe FDIC fund, which is projected to be $10 billion at the end of theyear and then perhaps go into single digits. Insurance fees on bankshave increased from 8 basis points to 19-1/2 basis points in a little10/2/90over a year and the prospect is that they will go higher as will thecapital ratio.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's 23 basis points in the budget--MR. MULLINS. It's 23 basis points in the budget deal, whichbrings in $4 billion over 5 years. This is not what we talked aboutearlier in the summer; it's not [the limits on] loans to one borrower;it's not examiners' zeal. It is a lot of big losses in a lot ofinstitutions. Commercial real estate problems are evident throughoutthe banking system. Community banks, small regionals, large regionalsand money center banks all have significant investments in commercialreal estate. I think we will have several more quarters of bad newswhile the accounting reality catches up with these institutions. Moregenerally, I think we're in for a protracted period of retrenchment inthe banking industry both to deal with the asset quality problems tobuild capital, as Jerry mentioned, and also to figure out how to beprofitable in the new world. I think all this has translated intohigher funding costs for banks, lower stock prices, and bank debtyields at junk bond levels. And it seems to me inescapable that thesesorts of pressures in the banking industry have shrunk or restrictedcredit. Specifically, I would be concerned that they have limitedcredit to a very large portion of the economy, those small businessesand large businesses that are not investment grade. I'm lessconcerned about the investment grade institutions; they have thepublic market to go to. It's difficult to make a case that the restof the economy has an easily accessible alternative source of funds.I look at insurance companies; they're not doing so well. One can seesome of the impact on finance companies. But if we do have thiscontraction in the banking industry, it certainly has to havetightened conditions for a major portion of the industry.So, I think we're currently facing a stalled out economy,which is projected to dip into negative territory. What concerns meon top of that is the increasingly tight credit market conditions.With the lags in the process, I think we do have a risk of turning amild downturn into a fairly ugly situation. I agree with Dick Syronthat herein lies the potential for a cumulative deterioration. I'mmore concerned about this problem this time than last time--firstbecause the economy has weakened; secondly, because the corecomponents of money don't seem to be picking up; and finally, and mostimportantly, because the pressure on the banking industry seems tohave tightened and the tourniquet has been turned an extra notch. Iwould still believe in a stable policy. I'm just concerned that whatwe are getting is one which is more constrained than what weprojected, endorsed, and would like.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I won't presume on the Committee to try torestate or recite all of my views at this point. You have all heardmy concerns about the fragility of the financial system. Perhaps Ican shorten my remarks by simply associating myself strongly with bothEd Boehne's statement and Jerry Corrigan's statement. In addition, Ithink that the banks are really scared and have become super cautious.I think bankers are demoralized. I've been talking to a lot ofbankers in all parts of the country over the last several weeks and Ihave never seen them [exhibit] a lower sense of optimism and10/2/90bewilderment as to where to go from here. And that will make thecredit crunch worse in the future than it is at present, particularlyif there are signs that the economy actually is going into a period ofrecession. Perhaps under those conditions, the momentum in a downturnmight be very surprising and might cause the recession to last longerand go deeper.I have to say that, being a cynic, I believe that the budgetdeal is a sham and a delusion. If you had walked across the SaharaDesert without a canteen, you would think the water in Boston Harborwas [potable]. [Laughter.] And yet, in thinking or contemplating anymove toward ease as a result of the perceived window that we have herebecause the markets have reacted favorably to this budget agreement, Iworry about the dollar because we have an environment of risinginterest rates elsewhere in the world against the contrast of perhapslower rates here and a softer economy, which is less inviting toinvestors. Yet I think a case might be made that perhaps at leastsome modest move toward ease has already been discounted in theexchange value of the dollar. So, I'm concerned that perhaps this isthe time to make a very slight move toward a bit more accommodation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. There really has not been any money shock thathas synchronized all the sectors of the economy and there is noinventory correction cycle underway. This is not a recession asgenerally defined. Never before have we had a recession in whichmonetary policy eased 12 months prior to what somebody says was thelikely high point. I don't agree that June was, but somebody thinksit was. It clearly is a synchronized slowdown in the U.S. economy,but it is more in the nature of an event related to buildings and realestate and, consequently, banks and thrifts. We have to be careful ifwe really want to be forward looking, not to look backward at the realeconomy. If you are trying to be forward-looking, that's always adisaster; you can't get ahead by looking backward.Now, I think there are some considerable risks, but thoserisks are in the years out ahead, not in the 6 months ahead of us.The considerable risk is that we will go through this slowdown eventand end up with inflation at a rate of 6 or 7 percent and end up witha set of easings that tips the dollar loose. I do agree with theanalysis of Sam Cross that there still is a safe-haven effect on thedollar. The considerable risk is that we will throw the monetarypolicy tool away before we have the ability to use it. I would notenjoy being in a situation of a declining dollar with all that meansfor future inflation. That could then mean that inflation doesn'tpeak in the third and fourth quarters of 1990; the peak might be outthere further ahead. So, it seems to me that the exchange value ofthe dollar is a real restraint on us, but I don't see any reason toadmit that to anyone outside this room. But I would hate to see usget into a position where we no longer have any potential to do itbecause we have a spread of 300 or 400 basis points between theTreasury bill rate and the 30-year Treasury. It seems to me thatunder those circumstances then, the fears that people have aboutdownward risks certainly would be justified. So, I think there isconsiderable risk. I do believe the U.S. economy has a lot ofrecuperative ability. [Unintelligible]--and I'm not able to tell aswell as David is how each of the parts go--but if monetary policy is-37-10/2/90reasonably steady and stable, then I think the adjustment mechanismscan take place and can take place in an environment in which we getsome of these corrections made. I must admit that when I first cameon board I was pleased that we had engaged in monetary policy actionsthat I think avoided a recession in 1986. But looking back on it, Ihave a feeling that what has happened in Boston and in New England andelsewhere would not have been carried to such excesses, if we had leta correction take place a little earlier. So, I'm just urgingcaution.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We're running late, as I'm sure you'reall aware, so we do have coffee out there which I hope is not toochilled. And lunch is not that far away. So, let's make the coffeebreak a bit shorter than usual and then reconvene.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Kohn.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Kohn?MR. HOSKINS. Back to David's comments about the componentsof the aggregates: Instead of looking into that aspect, let's look at[velocity]. You put a memo out in June, I think, saying that theremight have been a shift in M2 velocity. If that were the case, isn'tthe [recent] resumption of growth inconsistent with that? Wouldn'tyou expect lower growth rates?MR. KOHN. Well, I think we're still seeing that velocityshift. That is, if you look at the resumption of growth that we'vehad on a quarterly average basis, we're still seeing in the thirdquarter a quarterly average growth of only 3 percent even with thelast two months being strong. And that's about 2-1/2 percentagepoints less than the model was predicting for the nominal GNP we thinkwe have gotten. We have growth in the fourth quarter projected atabout 4-3/4 percent on a quarterly average basis; it's 4 percentmonth-over-month. And even that, I think, is close to 2 points lessthan the model predicted. So, yes, there has been some pickup in M2growth, but certainly if it slows down to the 4 percent pace, that'sstill consistent with the velocity shifts we thought we were gettingbefore. We have about 4-1/2 percent for the year and that's a 1-1/2percent shift over the year, which is not completely out of line withpast history though on the outer edge of it. So, I don't think thepattern really contradicts what we were talking about at midyear; itmay be a little stronger, probably impelled by these uncertaintyfactors. I think the underlying shifts are still there. GovernorMullins remarked about the deposit components still being weak, andthat was part of the picture. [Banks] didn't need to make loans; theydidn't need deposits; they weren't going to compete for funds and Ithink that's still true.MR. PARRY. Don, the three alternatives you talked about aredifferent from what was in the Bluebook, right?-38-10/2/90MR. KOHN. Slightly, in the sense that as I thought about thesort of--MR. PARRY. Is there no analytic support at all--somethingthat might suggest that the inflation problem is severe and should bedealt with?MR. KOHN. For the tightening alternative, "C"?MR. PARRY. Yes.MR. KOHN. I think there is some support for it. If youthought it was sufficiently severe, my feeling was--I think I used theword "practical" as I presented these--MR. PARRY. That doesn't sound very economic.MR. KOHN. Under the circumstances of a tightening fiscalpolicy and widely expressed concerns about credit conditions, myfeeling was that an alternative C was in the Bluebook but I didn't seeexpending a lot of the Committee's time on it so close to lunch.MR. BLACK. You took time to add an "A+" though.MR. KOHN. No, the easiest alternative I had was exactly thesame as this--an "A minus/B".SPEAKER(?). That's right.MR. FORRESTAL. Don, you may have said this, but I missed itif you did. If we did alternative A in one step, 50 basis points,what do you think would happen to long-term rates?MR. KOHN. I think they'd go down. Peter, I think, maydisagree. The market is not expecting that, but in a situation inwhich the economy is seen to be very weak and fiscal policy is movingtoward restraint, whether it's enough or not, I think long-term rateswould go down. They wouldn't go down by anywhere near the 50 basispoints, though. It would be a restrained reaction. And if the dollarfell and if the incoming data in the subsequent couple of monthsdidn't confirm the economic weakness [unintelligible], then bond rateswould end up two months from now higher than they are right now.SPEAKER(?). Absolutely.MR. STERN. I'd like to follow up on Lee's question. In theM2 forecast for the fourth quarter, have you included anything forthis flight to liquidity? Or is it based pretty much on the way youthink velocity is deviating from--MR. KOHN. We have a little, but slowing down. This is not awar forecast or something like that. We have conditions settling downsomewhat, but still we have allowed a little for the flight toliquidity. Though we still have this velocity shift going on, it'snot as much as we had in the third quarter; we have much less in thefourth quarter in a settling down kind of process.-39-10/2/90MR. SYRON. Ted, can I ask you--this is slightly differentthan what you assumed--what your view is on the pressure on the dollarunder "A" and then "A prime," if we part with the assumption thatsomething is done on the budget deficit?MR. TRUMAN. Which one is which?MR. SYRON. "A" is the traditional "A". "A prime" is"A minus/B," I guess.MR. TRUMAN. Well, I think you would get a reaction with "A,"quite pronounced, if you get it all done at once. With the two-stepprocess the way Don described, you might get a reaction with thesecond step, depending on what the circumstances were at that time.As Sam said earlier and Don suggested, I think there is somethingbuilt into the market at this time. Sam, you may want to commentagain in light of what has been said. We probably would get someadjustment. In some sense there was an adjustment yesterday,essentially anticipatory. The exchange market came back a littletoday; I think the adjustment may have been overdone.MR. CROSS. Certainly, you'd likely get a reaction if therewere the larger move. On the more moderate one, I think the marketsare expecting it but there might still be a reaction, even though theyare expecting it and have built it into their thinking, on the groundsthat it would sort of confirm it. Basically, I think the generalattitude toward the dollar is negative and that kind of easing wouldtend to confirm that the Committee may be going in that direction.So, you could get a reaction even on the smaller move.MR. SYRON. Could I ask your degree of nervousness about acumulative decline on either of these things?MR. TRUMAN. Falling out of bed?MR. CROSS. There certainly is that possibility. And if ithappens this quickly and spreads through all the other markets and hasall these effects on interest rates and the stock market andeverything else, then we have a real mess on our hands. It'simpossible to assess how big the possibility of that is. But themarket's view toward the dollar is generally negative. So, there issome susceptibility--some fertile ground to see something starting asa movement down, which could then lead to a lot of efforts to get outand protect the dollar. That is a serious possibility.MR. ANGELL. Sam, what would be the odds of the dollarengaging in a significant downward move if we stand pat on policy--that is, take the third alternative?MR. CROSS. Well, the dollar has been stable for the past fewweeks, basically, except for the strange things going on with the yen.MR. ANGELL. So, we could be somewhat encouraged to believethat it might be stable or even slightly strong again?MR. CROSS. Well, as I say, if you cut away from all of thesethings, as far as we can tell the general sentiment toward the dollaris negative. Markets are talking about moving further toward 150 on10/2/90the mark and toward 130+ on the yen. So, that is the sort offramework we are dealing with. After having heard the statements ofthe Chairman and various other things that have gone on, the marketscertainly would not be surprised to see the middle option move tied inwith action on the budget. That is probably the general expectationof most people out there.MR. MELZER. How is the long end behaving today?MR. KOHN. It's up a little, but not much.MR. GUFFEY. We talk about the prospects for the longer endand the dollar if we ease. Do you have any concern, given all thecommentary that has taken place with respect to the fragility of thebanking sector, that if we were to do anything before the budget isreally set in concrete that it would be misinterpreted? Maybemisinterpreted is not the right word. Rather, would it be thoughtthat we reacted to the fragility of the banking system and as a resultwould that propel the market into greater negativism and[unintelligible]?MR. KOHN. As I indicated in my briefing, I think an actionbefore the budget is at least more wrapped up than it is now would bea little confusing to the markets. They wouldn't know whether youwere responding to fiscal policy or to credit market conditions andthat sort of thing. Under those circumstances, I would advocate thatthe Chairman look for an opportunity to explain that and explain whatwas propelling the Committee and give the reasons why you did it. Ithink that would be important, especially if it were separated fromthe fiscal policy response.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Don? If not, letme start off by giving you as quick a review as I can on the budgetplan. I realize the inclination of John LaWare and I sympathize withit, but having looked at this I'm inclined to believe that the degreeof criticism is a bit overdone. However, I might add that the factthat it is a bit overdone may make it difficult to get it passed onFriday because there is a lot of "real stuff" in here. Let me definewhat I mean by real stuff. I would say that any program that requiresa majority of both houses of the Congress and a Presidential signatureto be reversed would be defined as being enforced. If you go down thelist of all the various items that they have agreed to--though I musttell you there is a disproportionate amount of tax and tax-type stuffin there, much more than I would prefer--it does have thecharacteristic of enforceability. The consequence of that is that$500 billion is not a number which I would argue has no smoke andmirrors. My view of $500 billion is that it has always had some smokeand mirrors in it no matter what; it's a question of how much. If weget a reconciliation bill and an affirmation of what David Mullinscalls the "mini Gramm-Rudman," they've actually come up with somethingthat is a lot better than anything they have done before.There are a few holes in the system which can break throughbetween the budget resolution on Friday and the actual 13 or 12individual budget items that have to be, according to thereconciliation instructions, on the floors in the House and Senate andin place by October 19th. But I don't think they are very large. Inother words, once you lock in the reconciliation on the floor in both-41-10/2/90houses, given fairly rigid instructions to the various committeeswithin each house as I understand it, the leeway is not all thatconsiderable. There is some fudging possible, for example, in theagriculture committees where they can take the $13 billion and knockoff a couple [billion]. I don't think that can be done in any of theother ones in any realistic way. No I take it back. There is oneother, but it is not very important. You can't do it, for example, inthe civil service lump sum; that's specific and that's it. The postalaffairs item is one that's in there. In any event, there are a numberof items in which there can be slippages between the reconciliationand the final passage, but I don't think enough to make all that muchdifference. The probability of passage is fairly high in the Senatebut a very close call in the House. The markets responded positivelyto it and to the anticipation of it, but as David said, they werelucky that they ended up with the oil price decline. Sometimes luckis not always bad! I would think that the consequences of that dealbeing voted down on Friday would be very adverse in the markets.There would be disillusionment the likes of which would be very large.And even though it's the Administration's position that they may needmore than one vote to get it put in place--in other words, lose it andthen come back at it--I'm not all that certain. I think that if theylose it, unless they lose it by just a handful of votes, it's going tobe final.There's not much to say on the Middle East issue with theexception that it's fairly clear that the futures markets have fairlypersuasively forecast some form of war. We have $35 oil when in factproduction has pretty much closed the gap on what has been lost. Andinevitably, consumption has to be down 1/2 million barrels a day atthese prices. The supply/demand balance is not all that differentfrom what it was before the invasion of Kuwait. What we're looking atis a large number of refineries around the world that are concernedabout being shut down because of inadequate crude or bidding in themarket for inventories that already exist. What we have is not aflow/price effect, but basically an inventory adjustment/price effect.There's no knowing where that number will go because there's nothingthat one can readily evaluate with respect to price changes underthose conditions. I think there's enough of that buying to hold theprice up for a while. The forward markets are discounted $10 to $13 abarrel. And there I think we are looking at a bimodal distribution inwhich part of the forward market reflects a war that actuallyhappened--loss of the Iraqi/Kuwait oil but also some Saudi oil--andthe other part is the expectation of a war where nothing is destroyedor there is no war and everyone goes back to production. If they goback to production, prices will fall below $20 a barrel in thisenvironment. This is not a market in which it is going to go back to$21 and stay. This is a market which has an over-inventory, highproduction levels, and an awful lot of cheating out there which no oneyet has figured out. I cannot believe that Libya is producing atwhere it says it is; it's not the way they behave. As a consequence,what we have is a highly uncertain situation. When we were here thelast time, we were discussing when and if war might break out. Ithink it's still the case that lots of materials are moving across theocean to Saudi Arabia. We're obviously not positioned; if we were,all that stuff wouldn't be coming. So, we are not ripe yet for anultimate confrontation on either side. It's only when we get to thatpoint that the issue will be enjoined and resolved or there will bemilitary confrontation. But that's weeks away, maybe well into-42-10/2/90November. What we're likely to get is a heating up to a point whereit's going to go either way and probably will get resolved within sixweeks after that, hopefully. In fact, I think the odds of peace havegone up rather than down in the last two or three weeks.So, we have that large uncertainty out there. In theinterim, we have all the issues that everyone here has beendiscussing. I do think the evidence clearly suggests that we have acredit implosion going on. We can see it all over the place. I don'tknow whether the word "crunch" is a relevant notion, but everything isreally being pulled back. Commercial banks, on the basis ofrestrictive capital requirements and fear of not being able to meetthe requirements, are pulling back. Asset quality results are givingthem some concern. And while I don't know how to read it, I thinkthat Ed Boehne is right in the sense that what's happening here issome sort of pressure. I may change my mind in three or four days,but I still think we're in a situation in which there are forecasts ofthunderstorms and everyone is saying well the thunder has occurred andthe lightening has occurred and it's raining, but nobody has stuck hishand out the window. And at the moment it isn't raining. The pointis, as best I can judge, that the third-quarter GNP figures in theGreenbook are not phony. I think they are relatively hard numbers.They can get revised down; they are being put down more and more butthe economy has not yet slipped into a recession. Now, that maychange next week, but I think it's important to distinguish betweenforecast and history.In any event, we have some really significant pressures outthere. And at this point what strikes me as our major concern is thatif we're going to maintain a semblance of monetary stability in anenvironment in which credit pressures are tightening the market, thenI think we have to find some mechanism to ease. We probably shouldease at some point, really, to offset the credit crunch--with orwithout a budget deal. But what I would recommend at this particularstage, in the context of all of this, is that we go asymmetric towardease today with an understanding that if the budget resolution passeswe go down 25 basis points, say, on Monday, but stay asymmetric.There is still a possibility, although I think the odds are fallingvery sharply, that the budget deal--although it can't fall apart afterthe reconciliation--can get muddied in a certain sense. I wouldhesitate to go more than 25 basis points on the budget resolutionitself because it's not the ultimate final deal, although it is mostof it. And I think it would be appropriate to respond to that. Inthat context, I would just stay asymmetric, and if the economic datalook very poor on Friday, it might be desirable--especially if thebudget deal finally makes it--to go down again, although I'm not surethat that would be the appropriate response. But what I would suggestat this particular point is to presume that under certaincontingencies we would move. If there is an area of uncertainty aboutthe events as they emerge, it would probably be desirable to have atelephone conference. In fact, this is a very touchy period and ifthere's any uncertainty or questions about what is actually happening,I think it would be appropriate for us to have a conference. At lunchwe will be discussing an additional action that the Board is currentlycontemplating, which is the reserve requirement issue that I mentionedto you previously. It is not supposed to involve interest rateeffects, but does have an anti-credit crunch implication if the Boarddoes decide to move in that direction. So, in light of the fact that10/2/90the credit pressures have picked up, if anything, in the degree ofstringency and--having looked at the plot of retail M2 excluding theelements that you suggest--that monetary growth clearly is prettyslow, I would agree with the way you put it, David: that we aretighter than we had intended. So, in the context of a budgetagreement and this stringency, I would think it appropriate to takethe types of actions under the various contingencies I have outlined,and I throw that on the table as a recommendation for discussion.MR. GUFFEY. May I have a clarification, Mr. Chairman? Areyou talking about Friday or are you talking about early the followingweek?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not Friday, no.MR. GUFFEY. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Probably Monday, I would assume.MS. SEGER. I think it's a holiday.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It is?MR. SYRON. Columbus Day.MR. BLACK. It's not a holiday for financial markets, thoughit is a bank holiday.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's a bank holiday?MR. ANGELL. For the Federal Reserve and commercial banksit's a scheduled holiday.MR. BLACK. But the securities market will be open.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How do you implement monetary policywhen the banks are closed?MR. BOEHNE. You wait until Tuesday! [Laughter.]MR. MELZER. May I ask a question on the luncheon discussion?If you decide to do that, how do you think that will play? Will thatbe perceived as some sort of an easing in policy or will it beperceived as a technical matter?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're talking about the reserverequirements?MR. MELZER. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, we hope it's perceived as atechnical issue. But it is a non-interest rate easing effect in thesame sense that if you reduce taxes on commercial banks, some of itgoes through into increased loan availability. How much depends onwhat the incidence is. I don't think it will be perceived as aneasing.10/2/90MR. KEEHN. What might the timing of that be, assuming you gothrough with it?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would say sooner rather than later.We haven't quite decided.MR. KEEHN. Fairly near term?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I would assume so. In fact, howthat is perceived will be dependent on the words that Joe Coyne putsout with the action! The purpose of that is to emphasize it as atechnical issue, which it is. It's basically something that we havebeen discussing; as you can see, that memorandum has been on theBoard's agenda for quite a long while.MR. HOSKINS. I have a question. If this problem withbanking is a kind of nonprice rationing, I don't see how loweringprices at the banks is going to help a lot in terms of availability ofcredit.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are you talking about the reserverequirements?MR. HOSKINS. No, more generally about lowering interestrates. If [banks] are tightening their standards and they don't wantto make real estate loans, then lowering rates 1/2 point probablyisn't going to change them.MR. SYRON. It will improve their earnings.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I disagree with Mr. Hoskins. Basically,if you're a commercial bank and you're concerned with your capital,you pull back; and the method by which you pull back is an assetrationing that opens up your margins. In other words, the way youration essentially is either through increases in price or throughasset quality. To the extent that you're opening up, if the federalfunds rate moves down, you may bring the level of loan rates down.That's the tradeoff. So in that sense, it does make credit available.MR. HOSKINS. Well, we can discuss it some other time. I cansee the reserve requirement effect a little better and, by the way, Iwould be in favor of something like that because it is a direct tax.You do increase capital almost instantly for them; that's clear.What's not so clear to me is whether you increase demand for loanswhen you lower the funds rate and all loan rates go down.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You don't increase demand, you increasesupply.MR. HOSKINS. Or you'll increase supply if bankers are notrationing on the basis of price but on the basis of credit quality.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, but credit quality and price areinterchangeable in anybody's portfolio. [Unintelligible] if you tellme I'm making a loan at 12 percent and I think the borrower is adeadbeat, I would say I want 30 percent; that's the same creditrestraint.-45-10/2/90MR. KEEHN. Could I ask an operational question to be sure Ihave this clear? You're suggesting that we ease early next week, say,Tuesday. Is the purpose of that easing to respond to the tighteningthat has taken place in the market?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, that's in response to the budgetresolution passing.MR. KEEHN. That was the question. Are you then suggestingwe would ease 25 basis points near term before that?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, no action prior to Tuesday. I thinkif we did it sooner, it would be very confusing.MR. LAWARE. But you are suggesting a second 25 basis point[move] when the budget agreement is wrapped up?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. After the budget agreement is wrappedup.MR. KEEHN. That would be after the 13 individualappropriations have been done and the situation clarifies?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. PARRY. And this is primarily in response to the creditconditions?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, it's a combination of both thebudget agreement and credit conditions. If the budget issue were noton the table, I would still argue for the easing of 25 basis points.I'm just saying on combining the two, it depends on how the budgetagreement--MR. PARRY. Because there's more weakness than that impartedby the supply shock? If, as I thought was stated, most of theweakness was a result of this supply shock, there's nothing we can doabout that really.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh no, it's more weakness than that. Iwould say that the appropriate policy under the oil price supply shockis to do what we were doing before--to try in a sense to maintain thesame money supply growth pattern we would have had prior to the oilshock, absorbing a lower level of physical activity and a slightlyhigher level of inflation largely because we can't avoid either ofthose two. I would say that the appropriate action is essentially tobe where we were. It's not to be accommodative; it's not to try tostop the rise in prices, because we can't.MR. PARRY. Well, one can do something about the inflation tosome extent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What I'm trying to say is that there aretwo types of inflation. One is the oil price pass-through. The otheris whether it embodies itself in the wage structure. It's the secondthat we have to be very careful to avoid.MR. PARRY. That's right.-46-10/2/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If we believe that the oil price goes upand the [unintelligible] comes down and there's no wage effect, it's acomplete washout. There is no way to keep the [higher] price in thereunless it embodies itself in some nonprice cost, in other words wagecosts, cost of capital, or something.MR. PARRY. I guess I see the tradeoffs perhaps somewhatdifferently. You are computing the Greenbook's forecast of what islikely to happen to the oil price but the Greenbook's forecast ofinterest rates is constant. If you had interest rates declining--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm not using the Greenbook forecast. Ifrankly think that if we take Mike at his word, this one is a realproblem. But I would say that I see no reason for us to change thepolicy patterns that we had in effect as of July. Basically, thetargets that we constructed for the money supply should not change asa consequence of the Middle East crisis. That's what I think shouldgovern what we're doing. If we do that, in my judgment we do notaccommodate the inflation process.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, if you would favor this movewithout the budget agreement because of economic considerations,wouldn't it be wiser to link it more to those economic considerationsso we don't have this precedent of having acted because fiscal policyhas acted? I think that could set a precedent for us in the futurethat--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That may be, but the number of budgetagreements that we're going to see making a precedent is going to beso few that--MR. BLACK. You have a point there. You still stressed it inthe context of a longer-term objective of trying to control inflation,given that the aggregates have picked up some, but a lot of thatpickup may be fictitious. It seems to me that under thosecircumstances maybe a little lower interest rate is compatible withkeeping the money supply running at the rate we had in mind all along,and couching it in those terms--MR. MULLINS. Make it economic not political.MR. BLACK. Yes, that's essentially what I'm saying.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't disagree with that, but theissue basically is that I don't see how we can get around notresponding to a real budget agreement. This is a real budgetagreement. There is no question that there is a significantabsorption of purchasing power coming out of the system. No one hasever seen a joint monetary policy/fiscal policy switch pulled off, andI don't think we're going to see it here. But I do think that there'sa general expectation [of an easing response], which we'll have greatdifficulty getting around, at least on the verbiage side. Let me putit this way: If I had the impression right at this stage that theeconomy was strongly inflationary, I think the argument we would makeis that we should do nothing unless that budget agreement were makingthe economy go through the roof. That's not where we stand. I wouldargue for some ease, as indeed I have, because of the creditstringency issue over the last several months. If anything, what10/2/90evidence we have suggests that that stringency has gotten worse inrecent weeks.MR. BLACK. But I would still express that in terms ofreiterating our long-term objectives.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh yes, absolutely.MR. BLACK. This is perfectly compatible with that and it'snot throwing in the towel [on inflation]; that's what we're concernedabout.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it is important for us toemphasize that we have set target ranges for the money supply. Ifgrowth veers outside of them the Committee would then act[accordingly], and I think that anything we do in the next six monthshad better keep monetary growth well within those ranges or we'regoing to accommodate this oil price thing. And then I think we'regoing to be in the soup.MR. BLACK. All I'm saying is let's make that a part of thestatement. I think most of us would agree that that is the way wewant to do it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's right. That's acceptableto me.MR. BLACK. It's hard to know, really, what funds rate levelto pick out of thin air that will give us the rate of growth we wantin the aggregates. I was cheered by the pickup in M2, but when youexamine it you wonder if that isn't part fictitious.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. I think that a small part of itdoes show up, but David is right: it's in M1 and money market mutualfunds.MR. BLACK. To me, if in fact M2 is really still relativelyweak, then this easing is perfectly compatible with the policy thataims toward price stability. But if M2 for some reason or otherstrengthened a great deal beyond what we think, then--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it this way, Bob. If M2 wereat the upper edges of its range at this stage, I would feel veryuncomfortable. And my judgment is that David is right. One has to becareful about taking out individual components; when you look at aprice index and say without this, this, and this--MR. ANGELL. We don't know how to read M2, and certainly wedon't know how to read it disaggregated. That's nonsense.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are you arguing that the money marketmutual funds are not in this basic thing?MR. ANGELL. I'm arguing that we do not have sufficientknowledge about where the increased liquidity is located or whether ornot being located one place versus another place makes a difference.-48-10/2/90CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But we do know the motives for theaccumulation [unintelligible] assets.MR. ANGELL. But we do not know that the motive for holdingthe assets is what affects behavior.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would say, basically, that if you knowthe motive for holding it, you know what the behavior is; that's thedefinition. We know the currency--MR. ANGELL. But does anybody believe that if someone has$40,000 in a money market mutual fund that he is less apt to buy anautomobile than if he had the $40,000 in--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. If he just moved it out of thestock market, I would say the answer is yes.MS. SEGER. Because they're scared to death of the stockmarket.MR. ANGELL. But when the stocks were sold, someone boughtthe stocks. There's no use going on. I'm not going to be convinced![Laughter.]MR. HOSKINS. Don, what is the relationship between thechanges in the components of M2 that you can discover and spending inthe economy?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't want to make a point of this,and I don't think David wanted to make a point of it, but I think it'snot an irrelevant consideration to try to disaggregate on occasion.Even if we don't disaggregate, we still get moderate growth. Goahead.MR. KOHN. I think I'll stay out of it! [Laughter.]Obviously, we aggregate these things; they work better that way.SPEAKER(?). Good choice.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm ready to answer particularquestions, but I do think we ought to get going on the policydiscussion.MR. SYRON. Just a specific question, Mr. Chairman. I have alot of sympathy with what you suggest. The specific question has todo with timing. You would envision next Tuesday. Would you alsoenvision, without putting too fine a point on it--I know this is anaction by the Board--the reserve requirement action being announcedaround the same time?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It could be or it could be earlier.MR. BLACK. I'd feel a little better if I knew how thatreserve requirement matter worked out.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I got confused about a differentdisaggregation problem. The thrust of your suggestion, Mr. Chairman,-49-10/2/90was that next Tuesday you would envision, in an almost automaticfashion, an adjustment of 25 basis points in the funds rate?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If the budget resolution passes.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm just trying to clarify the twosteps here. You have said, assuming this budget resolution getspassed in the Congress, that on Tuesday of next week there would be a25 basis point adjustment in the federal funds rate. You thenstipulated that there might be another?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. At that point we would stayasymmetric toward ease.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And we would contemplate another move ifthe economic data and/or the budget deal suggest that.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, given that you're thinking aboutmoving on Tuesday after a holiday on Monday, we won't know then howthe markets will react to the budget resolution being passed. Wouldyou consider--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The stock market will be open on Monday.And we don't do anything until 11:30 a.m., so the markets will alreadybe open on Tuesday--MR. GUFFEY. Well, 24 hours can make a difference in the waythe market reacts to digesting what happens on Friday. That is mypoint. And I would delay [our move].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Until Wednesday?MR. GUFFEY. Yes. Also, it complicates the Desk's problems,being the last day of the reserve period.MR. STERNLIGHT. That wouldn't be a problem; that would bethe middle of the two-week reserve period.MR. GUFFEY. Oh, that's right. Okay. I'd just like to seehow the market reacts to the budget activity before we go forward andcomplicate matters if it is a negative reaction.MR. SYRON. But the budget action this week--excuse me--is abinding decision, right?SPEAKER(?). That's correct.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It is a decision that is about 80percent bound, maybe more than that, if my recollection is correct.Theoretically, it's 100 percent binding, but I think as long as wehave Bobby Byrd and Jamie Whitten up there--MR. BLACK. Is this change in the reserve requirements goingto have any real impact?-50-10/2/90MR. MELZER. What will it do to the growth rate? Can youcalculate an effective growth rate of reserves?MR. KOHN. We would make a shift adjustment for this, so allour published data [would reflect that]. Traditionally, whenever wepublish reserve requirements, as St. Louis does for its monetary baserequirements, we would make a shift adjustment. In dollar terms itwould drop the monetary base.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I get the discussion started? BobForrestal has the floor.MR. FORRESTAL. Oh, I was going to ask a question. I don'twant to prolong this either so I'll quickly ask the question and thenmake my comments. Suppose they don't pass the budget resolution, whendo we face sequestration?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's an interesting question.Theoretically it is supposed to be effective--well, they are going tovote Friday night so I guess it's Tuesday morning.MR. FORRESTAL. Tuesday morning. If we face sequestrationand it's real and they don't change it, then the contractionary forcein the economy is even greater.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are you going to believe that thatsequestration is real for the first 24 hours? I wouldn't.MR. FORRESTAL. I don't know; that's a judgment call. Mypoint is that I think we need to be prepared for that contingency.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I would be very hesitant to moveupon the sequestration, which is readily reversible by a majority ofthe Congress and the President, especially given the size of thesequestration we're looking at; it's not credible. So, I'd be alittle careful.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, if you want to get the [policy]discussion going, let me say that I agree with your prescription. AsI said at the meeting last time, I think that there is greaterweakness in the economy than the forecast suggests. And I think thatweakness was already present at mid-summer before the Iraqi invasionof Kuwait. So, I think it would have been appropriate to ease at thattime, and I think the argument for easing at this point is evengreater. In the interest of time, I won't go into the whole litany ofreasons why I think that. Suffice it to say that I have two points.I think that we have established a great deal of credibility. We cancontinue to use that credibility, but I think it's time to use it andto exercise leadership. And I think that'll be understood. The thingthat appeals to me about the 25 basis point move is that we can testthe market a little as well and see what the reaction is before wemove to the second step. If we had a sharp drop in the dollar or arunup on the long end of the maturity spectrum, we'd know that. So, Iagree with what you're prescribing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.-51-10/2/90MR. MELZER. My preference would probably be alternative B,asymmetric toward ease. If I were voting I wouldn't dissent againstthe 25 basis point move downward. In any case, I'd be very sensitiveto growth of the aggregates--sensitive to their heralding a possibleslowdown and a decline in market rates, and thus pegging the fundsrate at too high a level. So, I can identify with the generalsensitivity that you have. I'd like to make three other comments veryquickly. One, I agree with what Bob Black was saying. I'd muchrather see the rationale here being made in the context of what'shappening in the economy--expectations with respect to how that mayaffect our performance against monetary aggregates and so forth asopposed to [the budget issue]. I'm just thinking back to how theunintended credit tightening rationale played in July; and if we canput [our action] in a broader context of the economy and our broadergoals, I think we'd be better off. Secondly, I'm very goosey abouttying too much to budget deals, particularly if there are two steps inthat. My assumption has always been that that is a political positionmore than an economic position. I understand why we're there and Idon't--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But it's not inconsistent; it's a littleconsistent with--MR. MELZER. No, I understand. But, again, in an economiccontext I might have some questions as to the extent of the responsethat would be necessary. My only point is this: If we make oneadjustment that's perceived to be in connection with that, that mightbe quite enough. If we make another one, the perception might be thatwe're following right along. I don't think people will necessarilydistinguish between the budget deal and fiscal restraint, and there'sa lot more fiscal restraint promised down the road. And I'd hate tosee us get into a linkage where we sort of condition people to thinkthat there is always going to be a monetary policy offset.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I honestly don't think that's--MR. MELZER. Okay. Well, I just wanted to express thatconcern. And then finally, I really don't know about the adjustmentin reserve requirements, but I'm sure you are weighing it in thecontext of everything else you have in mind. As you know, people havebeen taught to think in terms of the three tools of monetary policy.And I'm not sure how that would play, particularly in conjunction withthe two contemplated easings.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we discuss that at lunch?MR. MELZER. That's fine; that's a concern I have that Idon't know how to accommodate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Well, I would agree with the program with allthese different components. The reason is that I'm not upset with[unintelligible] there is in the Greenbook that we need to dosomething about inflation in sort of a [unintelligible]. But I don'tthink we're going to get it--and [this reflects] my own degree ofnervousness about the financial markets--without doing something. AsI look at this, I think the reserve requirement part is important. I10/2/90look at the reserve requirement part as having something to do withbank earnings and the longer-term threat to [the viability of] thefinancial system. I look at the 25 basis points that will be doneearly next week as something that is in return for what is--when youassign probability to it--a significant degree of fiscal restraint.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. I would absolutely agree with your proposal as toboth timing and methodology, which I would gather is alternative B asDon verbally described it, with asymmetric language now and anassumption that we may move next week with a continuation ofasymmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the price level consequences of theoil shock are my greatest concern, and I would hope that we would takeactions to make sure that those price level consequences don't getembedded in underlying inflation. And I think the inflationarypressures were significant even before the oil shock. It seems to methat the best way to deal with this situation would be to have anunchanged funds rate. So, I would support that alternative, whateverit is--"B," or "B-A", or whatever.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I agree with the decision that Tom Melzer hasexpressed and I also agree with what Bob Parry has suggested.Monetary policy does its job best when it looks at the price level.And this is not a monetary event in terms of its cause and it is not agood precedent to have a linkup with fiscal policy. It really is theworst form of fine tuning because it is being made on the basis of thereal economy and then it is linked up with fiscal policy. And it hasthe potential of being 50 basis points, so I cannot support thispolicy action.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I support your proposition.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I support your proposition with onecaveat. I am still quite worried about the exchange rate creatingproblems for us. So, I would urge that after doing the first step wego quite slowly and test the waters before being committed irrevocablyin any sense to the second step.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the way things are working, Iwould suspect that if we get to the first step, we should have atelephone conference to evaluate how that step went because we can'tproject a sequence of events that is at all complex through to thenext FOMC meeting. I just don't think we know how to do that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. A lot could happen.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.-53-10/2/90MS. SEGER. I certainly support an easing move, basicallybecause of the spreading weakness in the economy that I think wasapparent even before August 2nd, the credit crunch situation, and thefragility of the financial system that doesn't seem to be gettingbetter. My preference would be for something called maybe "A*," whichwould be an immediate 25 basis point cut reflecting those concerns, tobe followed by another 25, which would be the reward to the boys onthe Hill for doing the budget.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, I have some sympathy with the concerns thathave been expressed about the real economy. Unfortunately, I have theimpression that we're losing sight of the inflation situation as we dothat. As I said before, I think there are equivalent risks here. Inthat environment, I would favor stability in policy. And as I look atthe alternatives, something like the growth of M2 that we would getunder "B" would be acceptable to me. I could even imagine going a bitbeyond that--that is, trying to make sure that growth in M2 didn'tfall below the 4 percent or so anticipated in "B," which would theninvolve some slight easing. But I have the sense here that we'retalking about going beyond that for reasons that I don't find verycompelling. Those have to do with the composition of M2, and/or realestate problems that are long-term, and inventory problems that wecertainly aren't going to solve with policy actions taken here today.So, I must say that I'm uncomfortable with where we seem to be headed.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What would you do?MR. STERN. I'd be willing to contemplate an asymmetricdirective and even a 1/4 point move in the funds rate depending onwhat happens on Friday--the economic data, and how the aggregates arelooking and so forth. But I think I would want to stop there.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would certainly say, assuming that isdone, that we would go back to the Committee. So, you have anothershot at it in the sense that, as far as I'm concerned, it is not aself-evident process. We would evaluate how that move went--MR. HOSKINS. There's one problem. If we go back into aCommittee meeting and then we come out with asymmetric language again,I think a lot of people don't like to dissent around asymmetriclanguage.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, that's not what I'm getting at. I'mtalking about a basic discussion of what the actual response was.Jerry is raising a crucial question. If we all of a sudden find thatthe dollar is loose on the down side, we'd be crazy to move again. Mysuspicion is that the members of this Committee will evaluate what hashappened pretty much the same way. Each of us is going to be lookingat the same data. I don't contemplate that as a particular problem,frankly. President Boykin.MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, as much as I would like tosupport what you're recommending, I have some difficulty doing it. Iguess to me the Greenbook forecast looks a little more realistic thanit does to others. I'm afraid we might lose sight of the inflationsituation. I'm more concerned that the timing would be premature by-54-10/2/90several weeks if we did make a move. It seems to me that the last 1/4point move was tied to the credit situation. And I have to confess Idon't fully understand--we'll discuss it at lunch--but if you do thereserve requirement change, it's to address that. That seems to me atleast a nod in that direction. So, if that is a nod, I would want towait a while longer and let the economic data come through beforedoing what is being contemplated. So, I would not favor it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Well, I favor your recommendation, Mr. Chairman,but I regret deeply that it will look like an endorsement of this non-agreement, which I cynically still have great doubts about.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. I support your suggestion, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, this is a time when we have to beextremely cautious, as everybody has suggested here. We have hadrecent increases in the core rate of inflation; we have weakness inthe dollar and complete uncertainty as to how this budget package isgoing to play. The more I look at it the more it bothers me. Forexample, I don't know whether the public is going to [react] the sameway. And there is this nervousness in the bond market, which made melean initially toward doing nothing on the federal funds rate. But tome changing the federal funds rate is not really a change in policy;it's a change in policy if we really are trying to do something with arate of growth in the aggregates. And you have satisfied me that yourintention is to try to keep to what I think is an appropriate target.So, I don't think that's a change in policy. The market, however, isgoing to look at it as a change in policy, and that's why I suggestedearlier that we couch it in terms of not having abandoned our long-runtarget, but just as a way of implementing what we want to do.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I agree with that.MR. BLACK. So, I would go along with it. It wouldn't havebeen my first choice, but you're probably more right than I was when Igot here. As to this second step, I sure would agree with JerryCorrigan--as you did and I think everybody has--that we want to lookat that one very closely. But to the extent that we can disabuse themarket of the notion that we really have changed the thrust of ourpolicy every time the federal funds rate jumps a little--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I would say that we have a specificoperational problem that we have to find a way of resolving. Just tobe locked in on the federal funds rate is to me simplistic monetarypolicy; it doesn't work.MR. BLACK. As I've said before, it's a modern day version ofthe real bills doctrine. We set a particular rate and the market getsall the money it wants at that rate. The only way we have toencourage it to take more is to lower that rate, or the only way todiscourage it is to raise the rate, which is what we had under thereal bills doctrine. And I don't like the initiative for the10/2/90generation of the money supply to come from the market. It ought tobe supply determined rather than demand determined since the long-termvelocity of M2 looks like a pretty stable function to me now. So,I've always endorsed that. I don't have the answer, as I indicatedearlier. We just don't have any reserve measure that can be expectedto control M2, so I don't know what the alternative is. And I am veryfrustrated over that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I was going to give the case for alternative Cthat Don didn't have time to give. Given what's on the table here, Ithink I better address the issue.MR. KOHN. I'll talk to you after the presentation; save itup for next time.MR. HOSKINS. I think there is a danger of our losing sightof what the fundamental job of a central bank is, which, of course, isto bring down inflation over time. And this is the kind of periodwhen I think we typically have lost sight of that in the past, so I'mvery cautious about any wavering at this point in time. Monetarygrowth is returning to the 4 to 5 percent range. I think our growthranges are rather wide. I dissented in February because I didn't want[M2] to get to 6 percent this year; I wanted us to keep the rate ofgrowth around 4 to 5 percent. So, I would not be happy to see M2surge up to that level. I don't think we have the credibility thatsome people around the table think we have, though of course that'sdebatable; I think we have to earn it yet. But with respect to policymoves, I'm very concerned about the reaction in the marketplace--thatthey might see us as tossing in the towel on inflation. So, I dothink that the explanation that you give--and I would prefer to linkthis motion if it carries to the economy and M2--needs to be donecarefully. Again, I didn't want to tie it continuously to the creditcrunch because then we're locking ourselves in. As the banking systemgets weaker, which I think is a structural problem over time and not acyclical problem, we'll be tying ourselves to something like that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. When we talk about credit stringencyhere, hopefully you're referring to a sort of supply-side effect ofrestraint in the context of weakening demand. In a sense if we'retrying to maintain a steady supply and the markets are tightening upindependently of what we are doing--at, say, an 8 percent funds rate--I think this is a classic case of what's wrong with [focusing policyon] an 8 percent funds rate or some other fixed funds rate.MR. HOSKINS. Well, I would agree if I could see a littlemore clearly that that was happening. If, as I think Don suggested,we begin to see some real weakness in M2, then we would recognize thisas a severe credit related problem. I don't see that yet, and that'swhy I'm having a little trouble right now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's very internal.MR. HOSKINS. My preference, of course, contrary to popularopinion, would be not to raise rates at this point, but to stay wherewe are. I would agree pretty much with [others on] this side of the-56-10/2/90table that 50 basis points is a lot to do. I'm uncomfortable doingthat for the reasons I've suggested.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I support the proposal. I also agree that thebest way to deal with this situation is to try to keep a stablepolicy. I think that's what we should do and about all we can do.And that's what this proposal seeks to do. I also agree that it'suseful to get the market attuned to a little more flexibility in thefed funds rate and to get market participants to think some about thedifference between the monetary policy stance and a specific interestrate. I also think the timing is right. Given the lags in theprocess, if we wait much longer, we run the risk of this creditsituation producing some real damage six months from now and turning amild downturn into something that could be more severe. The dollar isa concern. Looking at the alternatives, the alternatives are perhapsnot too kind to the dollar as well, if we were to have a more severedownturn and trouble in the banking system. So, I don't see any easyway out for the dollar, given the situation we face. In terms of thesize of the move, the long-bond market has come down about 40 basispoints and I think following that roughly in magnitude would beconsistent with a stable policy of monetary restraint.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would prefer to delay the 1/4point [move] until there is something more concrete to support it inthe economic data than what we're looking at now. I don't see that wewould be creating a greater supply, given the credit crunch, simply bydropping the rate 1/4 or even 1/2 point. It's rather like pushing ona string. As a result, I'd wait until either one or two thingshappened: until either the economic data suggested that it'sappropriate to ease or until the budget agreement itself is actuallyput together with some certainty. Now, that may be three weeks; thatmay not be until the 19th of October. It's October 2 now, so that'sabout 2-1/2 weeks away.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me rephrase my proposal in the formof a voting proposal. I would recommend alternative B asymmetrictoward ease, with the presumption that if the budget resolution passesboth houses there would be a 25 basis point decline [in the funds rateobjective] on Tuesday morning or Wednesday or sometime around then.Implicit in the proposal is that I'd like to remain asymmetric towardease but--and this is something of a change from what I indicatedearlier because I'm sensing different views in the Committee--that'sas far as I would go. It would merely be an asymmetric position withno presumption of a [further] move. And if events materialized in theusual manner, in the way they have not under an asymmetric directivesince the last FOMC meeting, what I would suggest is that it has thesame status of that. That is, under the same conditions we would moveand there would be no implication of further action or the necessityof automatic action either as a consequence of an October 19th budgetagreement or anything else. Obviously, if the economic data all of asudden turn sharply adverse, that would trigger it; that's the type ofthing I would use. So, that's the proposal that I would put on thetable and request that we get a vote on.-57-10/2/90MR. LAWARE. Excuse me, are you suggesting that whateversecond move might happen would be subject to a [conference] call?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, there will be a call in any eventto evaluate the first move, assuming that we have one, to get somejudgment [on the reaction]. But that has nothing to do with the--MR. HOSKINS. There's no implied second move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's no implied second move.MR. SYRON. No automaticity.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's no automaticity; that's correct.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just one other point: As I listened,Mr. Chairman, I thought there was a lot of wisdom in the suggestionthat several people made about not tying this unduly to the budgetresolution in your public statements. The more I think about that,the more I think it would be embarrassing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I would say that the budgetagreement would not be a relevant reason to move were it not for thefact that there was a weak economy. One can basically say that in thecontext of squeezing down the deficit, there is a little more reasonbut the fundamental reason is the economy and not the [budget]agreement.MR. ANGELL. Could we just be asymmetric and then see whathappens in the marketplace after the budget deal and then you simplywould have the authority [to call for a move]? Or do you feel you'dbe in a position of saying yes or no?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, are you saying: Suppose somethinghappens, would I feel obligated to request the Desk to move even if Ithought at that point that it was a mistake because of some eventsthat had occurred?MR. ANGELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's a good question. I wouldaccept that.MR. ANGELL. Okay, in other words we will have asymmetriclanguage and it will be simply the Chairman's judgment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, that's my inclination, as I'veindicated, if [the legislation] passes and nothing else ofsignificance happens to prevent action. But I grant you that ifthere's some adverse market response or if something peculiar happens,it might not be desirable to move. At that point, however, I think itwould be appropriate to have a telephone conference to discuss why.But my inclination would be in that direction.MR. ANGELL. But it's sort of like what we had in July?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Exactly.-58-10/2/90MR. ANGELL. Okay. That's my point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further comments?MR. BLACK. One thing to bear in mind is that the employmentreport comes out on Friday and that's significant.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me be very specific. This is anasymmetric directive. Asymmetric directives are not automatic bytheir very nature. However, I do suggest to you that if the Congresspasses the budget bill, I would intend to implement the easing. It isconceivable that other events concurrent to that may make that unwise.That's as far as I'm going.MR. BOEHNE. Let's hurry up and vote.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Please.MR. BERNARD. The language would be: "In the implementationof policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintainthe existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking accountof progress toward price stability, the strength of the businessexpansion, the behavior of the monetary aggregates, and developmentsin foreign exchange and domestic financial markets, slightly greaterreserve restraint might or somewhat lesser reserve restraint would beacceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserveconditions are expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 overthe period from September through December at annual rates of about 4and 2 percent respectively. The Chairman may call for Committeeconsultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations thatreserve conditions during the period before the next meeting arelikely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outsidea range of 6 to 10 percent."MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, in light of our abilities on thefunds rate, I wonder whether it would be a little more accurate topull that range in a bit. The 400 basis points--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We've raised this issue before.MR. ANGELL. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would suggest the following: May I askDon Kohn to submit a recommendation to this Committee on thatquestion, because we've been doing this for long time?MR. ANGELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I agree with you that we probably[unintelligible], but let's not muddy this.MR. PARRY. We could discuss it over breakfast.SPEAKER(?). We'll be here at breakfast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, we're voting on the directive now.Please call the roll.-59-10/2/90 -60-MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell NoPresident Boehne YesPresident Boykin NoPresident Hoskins NoGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Seger NoPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let us have lunch.END OF MEETING