Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 14, 1991A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 14, 1991, at 2:00 p.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBlackForrestalKeehnKelleyLaWareMullinsParryMessrs. Guffey, Hoskins, Melzer, and Syron, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas,and Minneapolis, respectivelyKohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Deputy SecretaryCoyne, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPatrikis, Deputy General CounselPrell, EconomistMessrs. Broaddus, R. Davis, Lindsey, Scheld,Siegman, Simpson, Slifman, and Ms. Tschinkel,Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Divisionof Monetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Ms. Greene, Mr. Lang,Ms. Munnell, Messrs. Rolnick, and Rosenblum,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofSt. Louis, Cleveland, Kansas City, New York,Philadelphia, Boston, Minneapolis, and Dallas,respectivelyMr. Judd, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank ofSan FranciscoMs. Meulendyke, Manager, Open Market Operations,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMay 14, 1991[Secretary's note: The Committee approved the minutes of the March26th meeting at the start of this meeting.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any comments raised by thereport on the examination of the System Open Market Account--agendaitem 2? If not, would somebody like to move that?SPEAKER(?). So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We have a memorandumfrom Mr. Mattingly on amendments to the Rules Regarding Availabilityof Information. Virgil, do you have anything to add at thisparticular stage?MR. MATTLINGLY. No, I think these are technical. The majorreason is that the Committee is required by law to have a fee schedulefor processing requests under the Freedom of Information Act, so wecame forth with these recommendations. Because we had to do so, wesuggested certain other changes to the rules to update them. They areall technical; they don't result in any substantive change in any ofthe disclosure policies of the Committee.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any questions at all on thisissue? If not, would somebody like to move acceptance?SPEAKER(?). Move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Gretchen Greene,would you now report on foreign currency operations?MS. GREENE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I hope you can hearme; I'm suffering from the same throat ailment as some others here.[Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Ms. Greene? If not, wouldsomebody like to move to ratify the transactions?MR. KOHN. There is nothing to ratify.MS. GREENE. There were no transactions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No transactions. That's easy. Thankyou. In that event, let's move on to the report of the Domestic Desk.Peter Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Questions for Mr.Sternlight?5/14/91MR. FORRESTAL Peter, what was the foreign participation,particularly Japanese, in the Treasury refinancing?MR. STERNLIGHT. It was quite strong in the 3-year, rathermodest in the 10-year, and about average in the [30-year] bond. Thebond had really light coverage. I think the major deficiency therewas domestic demand; customer demand was really on the light side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. On the 30-year bond auction I noticed a messytail and light coverage. How much of that had to do with this botchedbid problem?MR. STERNLIGHT. There was, as you note, a botched bid; butit still would have been quite light coverage.MR. MULLINS. But the tail wouldn't have been there?MR. STERNLIGHT. The tail wouldn't have been as big, but--MR. MULLINS. We don't have an automated auction system!MR. STERNLIGHT. We're working on it, Governor; we don't haveit yet but I would say that even an automated system is not going toremove totally the possibility of botches from time to time.MR. MULLINS. How about the noncompetitive bids?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't remember specifically; I don'tremember their being out of the [ordinary].MR. KOHN. On the 3-year note, they were very close to theprevious one; but I'm not sure about the 10- and the 30-year issues.MR. MULLINS. Okay, I thought there was some sense that theyhad ticked up a bit.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Are you surprised by the narrowing of qualityspreads at the long-term end of the market? What do you thinkexplains most of that narrowing, particularly that involving less thaninvestment grade securities?MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm a little surprised at the extent of it.I think the big widening of spreads occurred, and particularly gotexacerbated, during that somewhat scary year-end period when somegenuine systemic concerns were beginning to emerge. As it was clearthat we were getting through that period and that the economy was,though in a downturn, not in utter collapse, I think there was reasonto expect there would be some narrowing. So, the fact of somenarrowing shouldn't be any surprise; but the extent of it has been alittle more than I would have predicted.MR. KOHN. On the index I'm looking at, which is the MerrillLynch index, although the spreads have narrowed by 4 percentage pointsfrom their highs around the end of the year, as Peter said, they are5/14/91back to where they were in the first half of 1990. And that's 4percentage points over where they were in '86, '87, and '88.MR. KEEHN. Peter, the 30-year Treasury rate, which seems tobe going in the wrong direction, is hard to judge. What is themarket's view on this? Is this a supply issue--just a very heavyvolume of financing coming to market for [unintelligible]--or is thisinflationary expectations?MR. STERNLIGHT. It's very hard to sort out. I think both ofthose factors are there, President Keehn. Recently the most potentconcern has been just the sheer supply. But lurking in the backgroundthere is concern not so much about a lot of inflation expected but ofrecovery expected and concern that there will be more competingdemands for long-term financing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Peter?MR. HOSKINS. I just have a short one for Peter. TheBluebook indicates that the [funds] rate traded low because of marketexpectations. And I was wondering if you were having troublesignaling to the market.MR. STERNLIGHT. There was that one occasion when the fundsrate was sagging in mid-April and there was even some speculationbeginning to build up that we were deliberately being tolerant oflower rates, and we thought it was good just to clear up thosemisperceptions by going in early one day. And I think the market gotthat message quite clearly on that occasion. Through virtually allthe rest of the period the market seemed pretty clear in itsperception of what they thought we basically were aiming for.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move to ratifythe actions of the Desk?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Let's now move on toMike Prell.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Prell?MR. SYRON. Mike, on inventories: What do you make, ifanything, of these stories that we have a smaller number of retailoutlets for any given volume of sales and that there is a seculardowntrend in this? Is that something worth paying attention to?MR. PRELL. Well, I've made the argument for a long time nowas I've looked at the trend of inventory-sales ratios in retailing.I've looked at the enormous growth in floor space in retailing and themany shopping malls that have opened up. We have developed an awful5/14/91lot of stores. Each one of them has some inventory. They haveclearly moved beyond the point of adequate returns and we're seeing anindustry shakeout. And in the course of that shakeout we probablywill have some consolidation over time and some movement down ininventory-sales ratios. That's a very macro sort of view of theprocess. But clearly retailers have moved to try to capitalize oncomputerization and some of these other [techniques] such as "just-in-time" deliveries. They should be doing better on inventories thanthey seem to have done, and maybe this is part of the story.MR. SYRON. What makes it a little hard to tell exactly isthe lack of some abstract notion that targets what the inventory-salesratio is and how far we are--MR. PRELL. We still don't hear a lot of complaints thatinventories are uncomfortably heavy. On the other hand, the profitsaren't there. Something is out of kilter. I think this excesscapacity in the industry is reflecting part of the excess stock ofconsumer goods on the shelves.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. One of the reasons for weakness in the secondquarter is the pickup in nonfarm inventory liquidation. If you lookat what we know in terms of sales and industrial production, which isadmittedly very sketchy, do you think it's possible or would you saymore likely now that we could actually see the pattern that seemed tobe developing in the first quarter continuing in the second? That is,could actual inventory liquidation turn out to be less in the secondquarter than in the first?MR. PRELL. Well, I think you put your finger on the problemin saying anything with any great conviction at this point: We don'thave much data. We've looked at orders to try to see beyond the datafor recent months that we have on industrial production. We don'tknow a great deal about the flow coming in from abroad or going outfrom current production; that's an unknown. We basically reached thisconclusion as one that was consistent with what we thought plausibleas a final demand picture and what we sensed was going on in terms ofproduction. Also, I think there is certainly in some sectors a desireto achieve lower inventory levels. And, as I've noted, this is thethird successive quarter of substantial inventory liquidation. For arecession that we entered with supposedly pretty lean positions, we'reending up in total absolute dimensions with an inventory liquidationthat's pretty much in the ballpark of previous cycles--not relative toGNP but simply in '82 dollar terms. So, maybe there is some upsiderisk, but I don't think there's a great desire to accumulateinventories at this time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Is there something unusual in what we're seeingin personal income?MR. PRELL. I don't think this is greatly atypical.MR. SLIFMAN. Relative to what is happening to GNP, this isnot atypical. In other words--5/14/91MR. PARRY. But GNP has been strong.MR. SLIFMAN. The falloff in GNP, assuming our forecast isright, would be about half the typical peak-to-trough decline in GNP.But if you look at the ratio, say, of personal income to GNP, thatratio has its own cyclical pattern.MR. PRELL. And we may not be getting, overall, the kind ofcushion we did in some cycles in terms of the government sector. ButI don't think there's a gross disparity here. We were disappointed,as I noted, in the first quarter; much of the surprise was in datarevisions. Some of it seems quite plausible to us. Previously, theinterest income figure seemed to be holding up more than appearedreasonable in light of what was happening to interest rates. So nowwe've had a significant reduction in interest income in the figuresfor the early part of this year. It's reasonably sensible.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They calculate that interest income in avery simplistic manner.MR. PRELL. Well, of course, they use the very best data thatare available: our flow-of-funds accounts!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mike? If not,can we have our "tour de table"? Who wants to start off? Si.MR. PRELL. Let me correct something. We did have somenumbers and I blanked out on this. We're getting more DPI decline inthis recession than on average in prior recessions. That's what I hadin the back of my mind, but then I was thinking no other data I hadseen looked different from that.MR. PARRY. Again, is that relative to the GNP decline?MR. PRELL. Yes, especially since this is a lesser GNPdecline.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Who would like to start?MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, conditions in the District remainunchanged from the last meeting. You will remember that having comethrough the early phases somewhat better than other areas of thecountry, the data have now caught up with us, and the current level ofactivity in the Midwest, I think, is very much reflective of nationalconditions or already perhaps even a little weaker. There may be sometentative signs of improvement, but nothing specific to suggest thatwe have reached a turning point.I think you can tell from Mike's comments, and it's certainlytrue in the District, that the critical area of focus is the autoindustry. Our District will not show a real-side improvement until wesee a sustained pickup in the level of retail auto sales. With thefirst and second quarters essentially complete now, the 1991 modelyear really has been a big disappointment. The forecast of totalsales for the full year was being pulled down to 12-1/2 to 13 millionunits and even that reduced level is quite dependent upon having agood improvement in sales in the third and fourth quarters. Andthough car inventories at the retail level are really quite low at5/14/91this point, the dealers are still reducing their orders substantially.At the time of the last meeting I reported that orders by retaildealers were in excess of or within the sales level. That has turnedaround. The dealers have turned quite negative and are ordering carsat about 80 percent of the current sales level, and that's, of course,very unusual for this time of the year. In part, the dealer attitudesare based on the fact that many of them are losing money; at thispoint something like 50 percent of the dealers are in loss positions.Despite this, given the seasonal factors of course, production in thesecond quarter is going to be up quite a bit from the very depressedlevels in the first quarter. Still, that higher level of productionwill be substantially under the production levels of the secondquarter of last year. But because of this shift between the first andsecond quarters, in a production sense the industry is going to beless of a drag on GNP than it was in the first quarter; indeed, itmight have something of a positive effect. As a final comment on theauto industry, I certainly would say that the enormous first-quarterlosses that the Big Three experienced have cast a big pall on theDetroit area.Many of the other sectors of the District are impacted by theauto situation. In the steel business, for example, one of the CEOswas telling me that his business was, in his term, "rotten." Theycurrently are operating at about 70 percent of capacity. The forecastof shipments for the year has been reduced from 85 million tons lastyear to 76-77 million tons this year. And of that reduced level,about 20 percent is going into the export markets; of course, thosesales have very little margin, so there's not very much profit there.Other suppliers of the auto industry are equally hard pressed. Someof the other parts of the District also are having a fairly weak timeof it. Construction activity, for example, continues to fade.Construction contract awards are off very substantially from lastyear; through March the awards level is something like 26 percentunder last year's level. And people in the concrete business say thatthey are experiencing something of a free fall.More positively [for prices], though, the news in theagricultural sector is really quite good, mainly because of a reducedlevel of exports. Corn and wheat prices are under [downward]pressure; that's going to hold down farm income. Nonetheless, I thinkin an inflationary sense that ought to be good. Due to heavy rains--we have had a lot of rain in the Midwest--planting is about 10 dayslate. But this is really a good problem, not a bad problem. People Italk to say that the planting conditions really are excellent. Andwhile it's certainly far too early to judge the outlook for cropproduction, at least at this point it looks pretty good.Also positively on the inflation front, based on my talkingto people, I think the price outlook is continuing to improve.Competitive conditions in the marketplace are awfully tough. Priceincreases are just very, very difficult to sustain. And people whokeep track of their raw material purchases say that they areexperiencing very little price increases on raw material purchases.The CEOs, looking ahead, still don't have any expectations thatthey're going to experience a very big price escalation.Net, while in a national context we may well be reaching aturning point, certainly we don't yet see it in the District. From5/14/91our perspective within the District an improvement is going to be verydependent on the auto sector--an improved level of sales following theend of the model year production--and also an increase in exports.Certainly at this point both of these objectives seem agonizinglyelusive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the staff's downwardrevision in their projection of real GNP for the second quarter makessense in light of the incoming information. More generally, theoverall profile that they've predicted for the next three or fourquarters strikes us as eminently reasonable given the staff's policyassumptions, the behavior of most of the leading indicators, and thepattern of recent anecdotal information. It's interesting to me howclose the projections of the staff are to those of the privateeconomy. Mike suggested theirs were a bit stronger, but it seems tome they are remarkably close, which is something that many peoplemight view with alarm given the record of forecasters in the past. Imight be one of those except that I believe they're about right onthis. And I believe that the risk of error is about equal on the upside and on the down side. I guess the most important question weought to ask ourselves is: How great is the risk that we will have abig error on the down side? In other words, how likely is it that wewill get a significantly greater decline in the current quarter thanthe staff expects and that this will be followed perhaps by a greaterdecline in the third quarter? Obviously, we can't rule that outentirely; but in the absence of some totally unlikely, unexpectednegative supply shocks such as we had last August, the probability ofthat kind of decline seems to me to be pretty low. We've alreadytaken out a lot of insurance to prevent such a thing happening, withthe cumulative policy actions over the last six months or so. Andbeyond that, we're now seeing new signs of life in residentialconstruction, strength in the stock market and some of the otherleading indicators, and a recent upturn in the National Association ofPurchasing Managers' index, which was higher in April than it was inthe lowest quarter trough of any previous full economic upturn.So, those all suggest to me that we are probably now verynear the bottom of a recession. Whether it's going to be longer orwhether it's a near trough, I don't know. But it seems to me that asignificant further weakening is decidedly unlikely. I wasparticularly glad to see that the staff has reduced its inflationforecast because I have felt for some time that we had followed a verywise policy [course of] action and that it would pay off in terms ofinflation numbers. The staff has cut a couple of notches off theinflation projections for both this year and next year and they're nowpredicting a core rate of inflation of about 3 percent at the end of1992. And I think we ought to have at least that degree of progressagainst inflation. But it is important that we keep in mind what thestaff has assumed when it made these projections, and that is thatwe'll come very close to achieving the midpoint of our target rangefor M2. I think it's critically important that we take whatever stepsare required to keep M2 somewhat in that range in case the recoveryand consequently the money demand turns out to be somewhat strongerthan it now appears to us that it might be.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.-7-5/14/91MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, activity in the AtlantaDistrict is generally the same as in the rest of the country as awhole, although I must say that the business people I've spoken torecently are somewhat less pessimistic than they were six weeks ago.In the immediate Atlanta metropolitan area, the sentiment has gotten abig boost by the announcements from UPS and Holiday Inn that they aremoving corporate headquarters there as well as the awarding of thefighter aircraft contract to Lockheed. The most positive event thathas happened is that there have been significant increases in sales ofsingle-family homes in the last several weeks. On the retail side,consistent with the report we had this morning, retailers in theDistrict are reporting a pickup in sales in March but activity inApril fell off and was below their expectations. Tourism, too, haspicked up as well as convention bookings in the District, and that isinteresting to note, too. Foreign visitors are beginning to come intothe area again after the Persian Gulf situation; that's particularlytrue in Florida.In the manufacturing area, orders are still fairly weak,employment levels continue to be reduced, and capital expenditures arestill being postponed by most business people that we talk to.Exports from the District have also been weak; some are attributingthat to weaker growth abroad. But I think another factor to be takeninto account is that military shipments from the District portsdisplaced regular shipments; that probably accounts for some decreasein that export activity. The agricultural area is quite mixed. Cropproduction probably will be lower this year but fruit, vegetable, andlivestock should be higher. Si mentioned the rains; we've also hadheavy rains almost throughout the entire District and that has delayedplanting in practically every state. All of the states in theDistrict have been hit, as have many others of course, by revenueshortfalls. Up until now in our District the legislatures haveresisted any major tax increases. But if we don't get a turnaround inthe economy fairly soon, I think most of the states in our Districtare going to have to look at major tax increases next year.The credit crunch seems to be about the same as it was at thetime of our last meeting; that is to say there really doesn't seem tobe much change in the standards that the banks are applying. Theproblem, according to most bankers, is on the demand side. There justisn't a great deal of demand for loans. Price increases, as someoneelse mentioned, are minimal if not nonexistent; and that seems to bewhat is expected over the next several months.Looking at the national economy, we've lowered our forecastsince the last meeting. We're somewhat weaker in both '91 and '92compared to the Greenbook, but not appreciably. We have bothconsumption and exports weaker and as a result our unemployment is abit higher. But we also show a little better success on the inflationside; our inflation number is a bit lower. I think the risks in theforecast are more symmetric now than they were several weeks ago--certainly more symmetric than they were earlier. I have been sayingright along that I thought the risks were on the down side; I'm not sosure that they're completely on the down side now. But, and I thinkBob Black was alluding to this, the costs of missing are really notsymmetric at all. That is to say, it seems to me that the costsinvolved in overshooting the forecast are not very high, given thepresent levels of capacity and unemployment. But if the economy turns5/14/91out to be weaker than the forecast, then I think the costs would bevery, very high indeed. Obviously, we need to take that into accountas we set our policy recommendations.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the Twelfth District employmentstatistics have become a bit weaker since our last meeting, althoughthe District as a whole continues to outperform the rest of thenation. In March only the state of Arizona reported a month-to-monthgain in employment in our District. However, the declines in theDistrict's other states follow several months of relatively robustemployment growth. Employment levels still are between 1.6 and 4.8percent higher than they were a year ago in District states other thanCalifornia. And that would compare, I think, to a fall of about 1.2percent in the rest of the nation. California's economy has slowedwith the nation. Since last July employment has fallen nearly everymonth; in April the state posted its first year-over-year decline inthe level of employment which was down 0.4 of a percent. Durablegoods employment continues to fall, led by declines in aerospace andelectronics. I think some of our losses were gains in the AtlantaDistrict. Construction employment has fallen to a level about 8percent less than it was a year ago but, interestingly, real estatesales and prices have picked up. As a matter of fact, the medianprice of residential real estate in California is now above itsprevious peak.The effects of California's economic slowdown, combined withgrowing structural problems in the state's budget, have resulted in aprojected $12.6 billion deficit by the end of the next fiscal year.Tax receipts have been low for rather obvious reasons: weak sales,weak consumer spending, and also unexpectedly low corporate and bankprofits. At the same time, case loads in the health area, welfare,and especially at prisons have risen sharply, and mandatory cost-of-living adjustments have further increased required expenditures. Atthe same time Governor Wilson has proposed [reducing] the deficitthrough a 1.5 cent sales tax increase--the tax right now is 6 percentor higher based upon some local initiatives--elimination of all COLAson programs, and shifting some state services to the counties,although no one can figure out where the counties are going to get themoney to finance this. Where this will all end up is difficult to saybecause the governor is adamant about not changing income taxes.As far as the national outlook is concerned, our view is notvery different from that of the Greenbook. We have slightly slowereconomic growth and a bit less inflation. We expect the economy to beroughly flat in the current quarter and then we think real growthprobably will average somewhere in the 3 to 3-1/2 percent range in thesecond half, which is a little weaker actually than the Greenbook.Next year, we look for growth to slow a bit to 2-1/2 to 3 percent.It's clear that the main sources of expansion should be the easing ofmonetary policy, which President Black referred to, a gradualimprovement in consumer and business confidence, and a pickup ininventory investment. It also seems quite obvious that the recentrise in the dollar and slower economic growth abroad are going tolimit the contribution to growth that will be coming from the foreignsector. In view of the slack in the economy and also the lower oil5/14/91prices and the higher dollar, we would expect inflation as measured bythe CPI to decline next year to about the 3 to 3-1/2 percent range.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. With regard to the national economy, we have noquarrel with the Greenbook forecast.For the Eleventh District, we have been right at the top ofthe Districts in terms of maintenance of employment levels. As amatter of fact, we were probably number one until a couple of monthsago; I believe about a month ago the Kansas City District overtook us.But now we're beginning to experience a decline in employment and arise in unemployment rates. Many of our local unemployment rates arenow at or above the national average. The strongest data in ourDistrict are in Texas, particularly the Houston and the Gulf Coastareas. Petrochemicals and energy seem to be helping them a little.The impression we get from our directors is that growth is positivebut barely so.Borrowers in our District believe that the credit crunch isvery real; they always have and still do. Generally, bankers havebeen telling us that there is just not good credit demand. The TexasBankers Association did a poll the other day and the majority of themsaid there was a credit crunch and that it was all the regulators'fault that it existed. State finances are tight, too, and Texas isbeginning to talk about an income tax.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The economy in NewEngland is very poor, with few spots showing improvement; [there aresome exceptions], primarily housing. Perhaps most disturbing is thatI think this may have to do with just getting further into arecession; an enveloping feeling of gloom has affected everything.And I see that it spreads further down in the Northeast, actually.As other people have noted, we too have continued problemswith state and local governments. If anything, the estimates of thedeficits on a state-by-state basis are increasing and increasing in afairly significant way, which will absolutely necessitate significanttax increases. The retail situation, however, is a little mixed.Durables are not good; autos in particular are very soft, althoughnondurables have picked up somewhat. Some mail order housesparticularly have noted a pickup in demand; a lot of that is probably[goods] sold out of the District. Interestingly, consistent withimproving their margins, some [chains]--and we still have to see howthis will work out--actually are charging for postage on catalogues.Commercial real estate continues to decline. As I mentioned,housing has picked up a bit for first-time [buyer] units, which in ourDistrict at this stage of the game are homes whose prices total lessthan about $200,000. Manufacturers seem to have become quitepessimistic even in the computer area where things have picked up alittle nationally. Suppliers to the auto industry and to theaerospace industry are quite pessimistic. Interestingly, we haveseveral defense contractors some of whom--for example,-10-5/14/91--also have a significant part of their business in thecommercial sector, and they have said that on balance any improvementthey got on the defense side was washed away by the regular civilianside. They still see this long-term reduction in restructuring on thedefense side. Prices, consistent with all this, continue to be prettywell behaved.Our lenders are quite cautious. Even a couple of our largestbanks will say, essentially, that they are not lending unless it'sextremely good credit. Others that are in a little better shape willtell you that they just are concerned about the loan quality comingin. But universally they are seeing very, very little in loan demand.As a consequence, they just don't want money. I think this is relatedto what is going on in the monetary aggregates. Some institutionsthat have had potential customers come to them are really loweringtheir offering rates quite a lot. Those are people coming frominstitutions that are closing or have capital [problems] and fromothers that don't feel they need any money. I'm not quite sure howone factors this into evaluating the situation, but at least in NewEngland--and I suspect more so nationally as well--this issue ofrestructuring that we've talked a lot about both in financial servicesand manufacturing, and what is happening in inventories and in stateand local governments, does make a situation in which one has to lookat the employment numbers at least somewhat skeptically as we goforward. Once managers get into this process of feeling that they canhave the same level of output and maintain their margins by reducingcosts if not increasing sales, they discover all kinds ofopportunities that I think they're going to exploit for some time tocome. I was struck by talking to several people who were saying thatthere's still more to do here and that they are discovering newopportunities.One interesting story that fits with what is going on ininventories--showing that this is again a two-sided sword--is that wetalked to an off-price discounter who indicated that business washorrible but the reason business was horrible wasn't so much that thedemand in the stores was horrible; it was because manufacturers hadmaintained their inventories more carefully and he wasn't able to pickup the volume of distress sale goods that he could before.Nationally, I find the Greenbook forecast very plausible on acenter-weighted basis. One would really have to nitpick to find faultwith it. It is more useful to ask what the risks are. I would thinkthat in a very, very marginal sense the risks might be slightly on thedown side; I see the third quarter falling into the same pattern asthe second quarter conceivably, typically because of concerns aboutexports. But I do think--and this goes back to what Bob Forrestalsaid--that one needs to look at the risks of the outcome, if you will,not just the risk of something happening. If we were to get muchfurther deterioration than we expect, that could be fairly difficultto deal with given the problems that we have in some sectors. On theother hand, one has to be very encouraged by at least the forecastedimprovement in prices that we see. It really would be tragic to throwthat away. So, I think it's very hard to be sure of the outlook atthis point, which makes it extremely important to follow the data thatcontinue to come in very, very closely.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.-11-5/14/91MR. STERN. Mr. Chairman, I would continue to characterizeconditions in the District as mixed, but overall not bad. Agricultureis looking pretty good. The key word there, as usual, is moisture,and in much of the District it now appears to be adequate this year.The livestock sector is really doing very well, as it has over thepast several years as well. In the paper industry and the forestproducts industry, again, conditions are mixed. There is a lot ofexcess capacity at the moment in paper and even more coming on[stream], but the profits aren't there. But that's a business wherethey tend to run at capacity almost no matter what, and they're stillrunning at capacity, at least in our District. The wood productsbusiness has come back a bit, and that's probably a consequence of aninventory cycle and maybe some optimism about the outlook forhomebuilding. Clearly, housing sales have picked up substantially,certainly in the Twin Cities. It's my understanding that not only arehouses selling but they are selling at pretty close to asking priceswithout any fancy financing so far as I can tell. On retail sales,once again I haven't heard any horror stories. Some people saybusiness is tough and some say it's satisfactory, and that seems to beabout the way that has been holding. Only one state in the Districthas a significant budget problem with which they have not yet come togrips. I don't know at this juncture what the pieces of thatresolution might turn out to be.With regard to the national outlook, I'm pretty comfortablewith the Greenbook forecast. I also think, as several people havecommented, that it pays to reflect on the risks a bit at thisjuncture. The risks are probably symmetric in the sense that while arecovery by midyear is likely, I do think we're going to need to see agood deal more consumer spending. In that regard, I have been underthe impression, and Mike confirmed it, that perhaps disposable incomehas been somewhat weaker than I would have expected throughout thiscontraction, and that is certainly a source of concern in my mind. Onthe other hand, as to the risks on the inflation side, I find therecent data encouraging and most of the anecdotal reports I'm gettingencouraging as well. But I must say I'm not persuaded yet that wehave nailed down a significant reduction in the core rate ofinflation. I'm a little puzzled as to why the bond market has notresponded at this juncture, not just to the inflation news but to theoverall picture of what is happening domestically and abroad. And Iwonder if we don't have to be a little sensitive to that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You mean [the volume of debt financing]doesn't explain it?MR. STERN. No, I don't find that an adequate explanation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. In the District, the signals are mixed but onbalance I think the overall District economy is still down like thatfor the nation. As in the nation, commercial real estate and retailsales are generally negative. There are some indications thatmanufacturing is beginning to bottom out. The only clear area ofupturn is in home sales. Loan demand is still weak. Bankers say thatthere isn't demand; the business people--or some of them, anyway--saythat the bankers won't lend. With regard to state and local-12-5/14/91governments, Philadelphia is about to go broke; the states havedeficits. So, I think that situation is fairly general.I would say the attitudes vary from cautious optimism, withmore emphasis on "cautious" than "optimism," to a lot of concern onthe part of business people about when a recovery will occur and whatkind will occur. I find more people who are just about writing off1991 as a bad year and they are beginning to look to 1992. I sense,and I don't think it's particularly unusual at this stage of thebusiness cycle, a dichotomy now between those who analyze the economyand those who manage it. I think most of those who analyze theeconomy see signs that the economy is beginning to pick up, whereasthose people who have annual meetings to chair--whether they want todownsize the company another notch or they are going to meet thefinancial analysts--want to be reassured that there really is arecovery out there; they don't really yet feel it in their bones.We're at a fairly critical period in that, if we don't begin to seesome tangible evidence on a broader base that we are indeed going toget a recovery, we could see confidence really drop off and we mighthave a double-dip in terms of the downturn. I do subscribe to thenotion that the economy is going to pick up, but I think we're playingwith some tender attitudes out there. I would say that the risks areprobably even to maybe marginally on the down side. But I [agreewith] those who are concerned about the outcome. If we don't get arecovery or if it's postponed, I think there will be some real costsand it will be quite difficult to try to get the economy turnedaround.On the inflation side, my sense is that financial markets maybe somewhat behind in appreciating what is going on in most of theeconomy. We're making better progress on inflation than I would haveexpected a few months ago and that's positive. I think the long bondmarket has some catching up to do there. As for the Greenbookforecast, I think it's reasonable. I would probably have more of asaucer shape kind of recovery--perhaps a little weaker--but it's hardto quarrel with the basic analysis there.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the District itselfwe continue to see some modest pickup in economic activity. Inmanufacturing, for example, the auto plants are not back full out, butthe Ford plants are running two shifts and a large General Motorsplant in Kansas City itself is beginning to put people back on [thepayroll]. It also has raised a problem in that they simply have begunto use overtime rather than put a second shift back on. And theunions have become very upset because auto manufacturers haven't putthe second shift people back to work. As a result, I think they'retrying to manage [unintelligible]. It does seem quite clear to methat although the auto makers' projections are not strong, there willbe some positive impact on our output in the period ahead simplybecause they are starting from a very low base and they are at workand are producing. In the aviation area, general business aviation--the small jets, for example--is still very good. They had very goodbookings and sales in the first quarter and that is projected tocontinue. Construction remains sluggish, particularly in thecommercial area, but in the residential and other nonresidential areassome pickup is evident.-13-5/14/91The agricultural area has already been discussed. The winterwheat crop looks to be fairly good and is spotty only in the sensethat we've had some fairly severe weather come through the Midwest andthat could be devastating to wheat at this stage in its developmentsimply because of the hail and strong winds. But by and large thereis a fairly optimistic view of that crop. The problem, obviously, isthe weak commodity price for wheat. Nonetheless, it's better toproduce than not to produce. Cattle producers, as I've indicatedbefore, are doing very well, and that's projected to continue.In the energy area, drilling has slacked off I think simplybecause the stability of the imported oil prices at $20 a barrel orthereabouts does not encourage very much exploratory drilling. Therehas been some development drilling. That is, after a field isdiscovered, it has to be developed, and there is some modest activitygoing on in that area. The other area of optimism in the energy fieldis the oil field suppliers who take some encouragement from the Gulfcontacts that they established as a result of the Persian Gulf oilcatastrophe.With regard to the national picture, I have no great quarrelwith the Greenbook forecast. As a matter of fact, I think it's a gooddeal better than it has been in the past. We believe that the staffis a little over-optimistic on the timing in that their second-quarterforecast is considerably stronger than we have, although the secondhalf of the year really comes out about the same. So, it's simply [adifference in] timing. When we scaled back the second quarter wescaled back a bit from where we were before. But, on balance, it's asgood a forecast as I think one can make, and it's a believableforecast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, on the forecastfirst: We have a profile at least that is similar to Mike's, althoughnot quite as strong--especially in the second half of the year. Butcertainly [we expect] a respectable recovery over this six-quarterperiod. Mike did mention several areas of uncertainty. One of thereasons why our recovery is less robust than the staff's is netexports; the staff essentially has net exports plateauing and we havea $20 billion deterioration built in over the entire forecast period.I don't have a lot of confidence in that forecast and I think Mikemade the point earlier that it could go the other way. But it is inmarginal terms an area of great uncertainty in this forecast period.And the difference between 0 and +20 or 0 and -20 in terms of the kindof growth rates we're talking about here is not inconsequential.Another point I'd just mention about the forecast--several people havementioned it--is the state and local sector in a context in which theunderlying thrust of fiscal policy is probably on the restrictive sideas well. The state and local [data] have all kinds of smoke andmirrors in them and it's hard to know what the real picture is. Butit's hard to dismiss the possibility that there could be a greatermeasure of difficulty there, especially because these problems are sopervasive. There are darn few states and certainly few major citiesthat don't seem to have pretty hefty fiscal problems. Again, thesmoke and mirrors makes it a lot harder to judge how difficult thatmay be. But, as I said, I would associate myself with those who feel-14-5/14/91the risks in the forecast probably are more symmetric than they were,in part because of the changes in policy that have been made.On the anecdotal side, we clearly hear report after report tothe effect that the residential construction market is looking muchbetter. In your old neck of the woods of [northern] New Jersey,Tommy, one of the thrift people was telling me the other day that inthe first three months of the year the stock of existing unsold housesin Summit was cut in half. That's one little community, but thatcommunity is not a trivial piece of the puzzle up there in northernNew Jersey. The commercial side is lousy. And in the industrialsector, the comments that I get from big manufacturing companiescontinue to be sour across the board. Of course, a lot of these guysare sour all the time so you don't try to make [much] of that. Butone comment you do get from these guys who are sour all the time isthat there is a higher sense of anxiety about the outlook for theirexports over the next four to five quarters.It's also important at this point to note--and several peoplehave touched on various facets of this--that we can now see severalareas in which some good things are happening that are not entirelyunrelated to the kind of policy that we've been following. Forexample, balance sheet rebuilding even in the face of the decline inthe saving rate in the household sector is making some real progress.And what we're beginning to see in the corporate sector is alsonoteworthy. Indeed, if you look at some of the things that were goingon in the second half of the '80s, particularly for the companies thataren't already bankrupt, this reverse of the old phenomenon is notentirely inconsequential. Taking a longer view, I think this balancesheet rebuilding, while it may temper the recovery, could turn out tobe a very healthy development for the intermediate term even though itmay dampen things a bit in the near term. Somebody mentioned--DickSyron, I guess--that restructuring is taking many forms and includesstate and local governments. I think that is now more than straws inthe wind and that's beginning to pay off. I'm trying to remember,Mike, when the last time was that we had a 2.8 percent decline in GNPand a 1 percent rise in productivity; I'm sure it has happened, butnot very often. And that in itself may be symptomatic of some ofthose things.A number of people have mentioned the inflation situation,and I have to say that in this area there has been a change in mythinking. For the first time since the so-called core inflation rateplateaued at around 4 to 4-1/2 percent in 1984, I think we have a popat penetrating that 4 to 4-1/2 percent core inflation rate. I'venever felt that in this entire period. Now, like Gary Stern, I'm notready to bet the ranch on it, but I do think that the inflationoutlook is distinctly better. I still have to wait a little to see ifwe can get through that threshold. My hunch is if we can get throughit, we might have a reasonable chance of staying through it.So, I think the outlook is still murky; there are plenty ofuncertainties. But on the other side of the coin, I can see in anumber of areas things that might bode well for the intermediate term.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I haven't heard much change in the kind ofanecdotal information we've been hearing for the last couple of-15-5/14/91months, though there is a somewhat more positive tone to it, withstrength in the obvious places but no evidence in those comments ofnew areas of strength and no new areas of concern. One other commenton the anecdotal side I would make is that Jerry mentioned the sourcomments from manufacturers and I wonder--and it's too early to tellnow because I suspect their orders are still pretty lousy--whetherthey're going to be expecting too much out of this recovery. They maybe thinking of more traditional recoveries. My guess is that it'sstill going to be a very difficult environment in which to dobusiness. On this point I was amused that when Alan was in St. Louisa month ago we heard one manufacturer who heads up a very well-managedcompany fussing about the margin pressures. He said he hadn't seenanything this bad since '74-'75. But subsequently, having seen theirfirst-quarter earnings, there was another increase--maybe a record.So, there are some people who like to tell us how tough it is.As for the numbers themselves, as was noted before, thepositive information we're receiving is mostly anecdotal and it isn'tthere in the numbers. In our District it's starting to show up in thenumbers through the first quarter. We actually had nonagriculturalemployment growth at about--not quite--a 1.5 percent annual rate.Manufacturing is still weak; that's primarily in transportation, autosand aircraft. And in nonmanufacturing and services, there wasstrength across the board with most of the contribution being fromwholesale and retail trade and services. We also had growth in theconstruction sector. The previous four quarters all had declines, sothis was the first positive quarter in nonresidential constructioncontracts in over a year.On a broader basis, one comment I want to make is on thisinflation question. I'm somewhat troubled the more I hear commentsabout and see in the press good reported inflation numbers. When Isay in the press, I mean comments from market observers--I don'tassociate this with what Jerry was saying before about better reportedprice numbers in the short run--that somehow that gives policy room tomove. I have two reactions to that. One is that I think the numberswe're seeing now are the result of actions taken many months ago, ifnot years ago. And in that sense I don't think they justify anyaction on our part in the short run if policy is in the properposition. The second aspect of that, and the more important, is thatthese are declines from unacceptably high levels to somewhat lower butI think in a longer-term context still unacceptably high levels. WhatI'm saying is that if the policies we've put in place over a longperiod of time are working, we're going to go through a fairly longperiod where we're going to see better price numbers, but that in andof itself shouldn't be a justification for easing. There is thisrather simple-minded concept sometimes in the financial markets thatsomehow that gives the Fed room to ease and I just don't buy it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. There are indeed mixed signs out there. But Ithink we should note that the three major forces that took us into adownturn are no longer there. We no longer have any energy/oil priceescalation that is eating up purchasing power; most of that priceincrease is now out of the system, as we've seen. The housing pricesituation, whether it's deflation of disinflation, has changed;whatever it is has slowed down. We're in an environment in which we-16-5/14/91have improved affordability of housing, and I think that going from aminus to a plus is a rather significant factor. And we're alreadyseeing what is happening in regard to the autos--at least theinventory adjustments that already are there. That leaves us, then,with [a question of] what it might be that would take the economyanother leg down. And I frankly do not believe that the risks of thathappening are symmetrical. I suppose it certainly is true that if netexports were to falter, having been as strong as they've been, thatwould be an offset to some of these other areas of improvement. Butit seems to me rather unlikely that we'd get that much movement in netexports with the time lags that generally exist in the net exportsector. Now, I think we should note that bond supply always tends toincrease during a periods of downturn, which impacts governmentrevenues. But what happens to the financial markets is that loandemand generally falls off as much; so during most recessions we get atypical downward movement of long-term interest rates that exceedswhat we've had this time. We can do all the talking we want about whyit is that the financial markets do not see the improvement that wesee; and yet there are people who are making bets with real money andI don't think they have any reason to want to be biased. As long aswe maintain money growth above the [bottom of the ranges] that we haveadopted--and certainly we've maintained it around the midpoint--itwould be conducive, it seems to me, to an increase in nominal GNP, ifnot quite as robust as you have it, Mike. Nevertheless, I wouldexpect nominal GNP to increase rapidly enough that this improvement ininflation that everyone is anticipating thereby provides that kind ofgrowth. It may very well be time for us to be patient with regard tobeing willing for that phenomenon to take place. What is wrong withnominal GNP growing 1 percent less than we have projected if thatmeans that we're going to make that much more progress on pricestability? When the bond market really sees that [progress], then Ithink we'll get the additional stimulus that will come from a normalcyclical decline of long-term interest rates. That has not happenedin this cycle.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Not a lot has changed around the District sincethe last meeting. There has been no drastic drop-off in anybody'sorder book that I can find and no drastic increase either. Really,very little has changed. We're running at an unemployment ratesomewhat higher than the nation. And the same comments that othershad about pessimism apply to the District.In terms of the national outlook, I have some discomfortperhaps even with the way we structure the meeting. We talk in thesemeetings about the forecast as if it's something that we can control;we can control the forecast but not the outcome very well. There area number of real events that we simply are unable to anticipate thatwill change the actual outcome from the forecast. So, we almost setit up in some sense to lead us toward more of a fine-tuning approachthan I think is warranted by the knowledge that we have aspolicymakers or as economists. That leads me back to Tom Melzer's andWayne Angell's comments in terms of what we ought to be thinking aboutin the future, and that is not to be making tradeoffs for inflationand employment. It seems to me that that's nothing but a potentialproblem for us. Because the inflation rate is low by the standards ofrecent history that is no reason not to continue to press forward with-17-5/14/91what I think is the right thing for a central bank to do, which is toeliminate inflation. We can look at long-term interest rates all wewant but there's not much we can do about them unless we get rid ofthe uncertainty about inflation. And the way to do that is to have acredible and predictable policy. I think at this point the FederalReserve's credibility will be tested and it's very important for usnot to err in that test. I'll save the rest of my comments for the[policy discussion].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I have been very disappointed inthe fact that a rather aggressive pattern of moves toward ease overthe past several months has not really resulted in much more stimulusto the economy than the refinancing of existing debt. That leads meto the conclusion that perhaps we have a somewhat different kind ofphenomenon here, namely that we have a real crisis of confidence thatdoesn't necessarily get cured by repeated signals of monetary ease. Iguess I'm convinced that the number of things that are acting againstrenewal of confidence in the economy is very significant. First ofall, we have genuine concerns about the health and the future of thebanking system, which I think are very widespread. We have corporateprofits that are very disappointing. We have a very heavy debt burdenremaining for consumers, for businesses, and for governments--to theextent that the fiscal problems of state and municipal governmentsreally have taken away their ability to have any stimulating effect onthe economy. In fact, there's an overhang of apprehension on the partof both businesses and consumers that these problems of state andlocal governments can only result in higher taxes or reduced servicesor a combination of both. We have press reports of layoffs andrestructurings and bankruptcies; we have lackluster performance in neworders that certainly has damped business enthusiasm for expansion.And the stubborn resistance of long rates to respond to lower rates onthe short end is a reflection, I think, of inflationary expectationson the part of the public. I believe that, until confidence picks upin some fashion, the economy is likely to remain sluggish. Therefore,that leads me to conclude that the risks in the forecast reallycontinue to be on the down side. But for the life of me I don't havea good solution as to how to stimulate that recovery in confidence.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I'm hopeful that the economy is pretty much ontrack for bottoming out this summer or in the third quarter. Theevidence does suggest that it is contracting at a slower pace. We seethat in the industrial production numbers, employment data, thepurchasing managers' report, and maybe even in the retail salesnumbers. There continue to be things that bother me. Parallelingwhat Mike did, I have a list of moderating influences on the strengthof the upturn; it started out with only the debt overhang andcommercial real estate as the two factors. I've added financialfragility--although maybe I can retire that one--higher unemployment,state and local government problems, the higher dollar, weaker foreigneconomies, and now some inventory concerns in some sectors. So, theweight of these moderating influences is becoming a bit heavier.It also seems to me that the Greenbook story this time in Mayversus March is a little less satisfying; it may be more accurate.-18-5/14/91But it is unlike the old story, which had a starring role for theconsumer to lead us out of the recession--propelled by increases inreal income as oil prices dropped, a wealth effect out of the increasein stock prices, and a rebound in consumer confidence. It has beenfour months since the market rebounded, four months since oil pricescollapsed to pre-war levels, and two-and-a-half months since consumerconfidence rebounded. And now in the May Greenbook we're projectingconsumer spending to grow not nearly so fast as we were projecting itin the March Greenbook. Obviously, consumer spending grew a bitfaster in the first quarter. The saving rate remained low butpersonal income didn't grow. Governor Angell asked what will take theeconomy a leg down; I guess I'm wondering what will take it a leg up.I wonder if there's enough impetus in this new story to get us moving.In the new recovery script, the consumer takes a less prominent roleand we project these three factors to lead to the recovery:homebuilding, inventory accumulation, and capital spending. It seemsto me that each one is promising and each one has some question marks.There's every reason to be optimistic that the housingrebound is real. The issue remains that of translating housing salesinto housing construction. I think there's reason to be optimisticwhen one sees the volume of debt and equity issues by commercial banksbolstering their capital positions. It is clear that banks are goingto apply higher standards in lending to homebuilders, but maybe withimproved capital conditions they will not extinguish the housingupturn. I'd say there are still some questions, though, on thetranslation of the home sales into homebuilding.On inventory accumulation, I wonder how much we're going toget out of this. Companies either have moved or are in the process ofmoving to a fundamentally different philosophy of inventorymanagement; they now have improved information technology to implementa philosophy involving very tight management of inventories. I thinkbusinesses will seek to maintain very lean inventories when theeconomy turns up. There has to be some contribution from inventoryaccumulation when they stop cutting inventories, but even when there'sa little wind in the sails from some other source, I wonder how muchcontribution we're going to see out of inventories.I feel about the same with respect to capital spending. Isee little in the orders data to suggest optimism or little fromtalking to the sour executives that Vice Chairman Corrigan talks with.I think we're more likely to see capital spending in response to arecovery lag the recovery rather than lead it or be coincident withit. It is encouraging to see the volume of stock and long-term debtissues by corporations. Most of that, though, is going into shoringup balance sheets, which is a good thing; not much of it is gettingthrough to capital spending. Still, the availability of ample long-term funds on good terms should encourage some capital spending forthe competitiveness reasons that Mike alluded to, or at least limitthe decline in capital spending. I tend to think we'll have to see apickup in demand first before we see much [impetus from] capitalspending.So, it does seem to me that the story is a little lessconvincing than last time. I have a little less confidence in theupturn since we have no reliable lead actor to replace the consumer.Again, it may be more accurate, but it's not quite as simple a story.-19-5/14/91And I think waiting around while the consumer flunked his screen testfor this recovery may be one of the reasons why there is someincreased gloominess, at least in the business community. It may bejust the executives of large companies that Governor Seger mentionedat lunch on whom the international situation--the higher dollar andweaker foreign economies--is having an impact. I think therecontinues to be the worry that as we wait around for this [upturn]there will be some atrophy in consumer confidence as it retreatstoward the real numbers rather than spending rising to meetconfidence. The discount rate move a couple of weeks ago was usefulin injecting a little optimism into the picture and in demonstratingthat the Federal Reserve is still in the game. And I thinkprecipitating the prime rate reduction was a help. Still, when I lookat the markets, I'm pretty reassured. The markets still seem inpretty good shape, although they may be down a bit. And theyrepresent not only a forecast of recovery but a contributor to it--notonly with the elusive wealth effect but also, as Jerry mentioned, wesee them freeing up debt capacity, including short-term debt capacity.That means companies will be in good shape to respond to increaseddemand, should that demand ever arise.We've also absorbed a fair amount of bad news in the market:another round of bank insurance fund bad news and some insurancecompany bad news among those companies that specialize in high-yieldbonds. There continues to be some skittishness in the long-term bondmarket. It made some progress and then drifted back some, although itis still off a bit, obviously, from the peak of over 9 percent in thefall. I tend to think that if you invest in 30-year bonds, you needsome real convincing on the inflation side. The people who bought 30-year bonds in 1965 at 4 percent own them today or were fired and thenew portfolio manager owns them. So, it's not surprising that afterseven years of core inflation at 4-1/2 percent it will take some time.I agree with the sentiments expressed that we have thepotential for substantial progress in reducing core inflation and thatwe should be careful on that front. There has been some decelerationin the monetary aggregates, which Don was talking about. Some of thatwas warranted to bring them more in the middle of the ranges. When Ilook at the interest-sensitive components of M2--money market depositaccounts and savings accounts--they are still growing at a very rapidclip and, if anything, at a too rapid clip. Of course, time depositshave been dead in the water ever since I've been here. Thedeceleration in Ml is accounted for by currency and demand depositsand there are plausible explanations--special factors associated withApril. I don't see at this stage a serious risk of M2 growthdecelerating to an unacceptably slow rate, but in this environment weought to keep that in mind just as we should the other side as well.We still have a good bit of stimulus in the pipeline. We see itseffects in the buoyancy of markets and the rebound of residentialhousing. And as the prime rate has been reduced, I think we may seeit more broadly.Overall, I guess I'm a little more concerned than last timeabout the path of the real economy; I swallowed the March Greenbookwhole and this one is a little less digestible. However, the marketslook pretty good and I think the policy looks pretty good, despite myqueasiness. This is probably a time for patience, but it's also atime for vigilance as well. I think we should stand prepared to keep-20-5/14/91things moving in the right direction if necessary. The lengtheninglist of moderating influences--the reduced forecast of consumerspending, somewhat slower M2 growth--suggest to me less risk of anovershoot in the current environment. And the current environmentreminds me of a sailing analogy: When you're sailing and you try totack, which means to turn in a very light wind, what you do is pushthe tiller over to the other side of the boat and you shout asconfidently as you can "hard-a-lee," which means "we are turning."Then you wait and wait and hope a little puff of wind comes along andgrabs the sails and moves you off in the right direction. I think wehave pushed the tiller and we are in the waiting phase. The onlyreason I hesitate to use the sailing analogy is that I'm a notoriouslypoor sailor and, when I try to tack in light wind, about half the timeI end up dead in the water drifting backward. But we have a much moreexperienced crew on this ship, I'm sure!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Want to make a bet?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLY. Well, Normand, will you please make a note forthe next meeting that whenever Governor Mullins signals he wants tospeak, put me down immediately ahead of him!There's isn't much left to say, Mr. Chairman. As I read thestatistics that are available to us, and more particularly as I listento the reports from the Districts, it may well be that the bottom andthe recovery are at hand, but they sure aren't in hand. I'm confidentthat they will be and that we are reaching the bottom. I'm not thatconfident about the outlook thereafter. I'm not sure what kind ofstrength we're going to get out of a recovery or how sustainable it'sgoing to be. I don't think those are sure things. I continue to haveconsiderable concern about the drag that's going to be present with usfor a while from balance sheets. I'm sure Jerry is correct thatbalance sheets are beginning to recover both at the household and thecorporate level. But I also wonder if that doesn't have a long way torun yet. And I wonder, as that process does run its course, what theimplications are more broadly. I don't see where our real strength isgoing to arise from. There are some good straws in the wind but noneof them look to me as if they're of the nature that they have thestrength to push or that we can be very confident as to theirsustainability. The exception to that is probably the inflationoutlook, which I think ought to help in a lot of ways that are bothvisible and invisible. And, of course, there is a natural buoyancy tothis economy that, as Mike and others have pointed out, usually leadsto better results than one can see at any given point in time. But Icontinue to think that perhaps the risks are not yet symmetric. Forthe short term at least, they do seem to me to continue to be on thedown side. Confidence is the biggest fragility I see. As John LaWaresaid just a moment ago and as Ed Boehne said earlier: If confidencedoesn't continue to improve and begins to deteriorate, it could leadto some potential real problems down the road. But as far as our workgoes, I do think that policy has provided us with a good deal ofinsurance against these gloomy possibilities. It seems to me from apolicy standpoint that it's a time to wait and see how things develop.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much. Let's break nowfor coffee.-21-5/14/91[Coffee break]MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Are there questions for Don?If not, let me get started with an anecdote that I was confronted withat the meeting of the Business Council last Saturday. They had me ona panel on Saturday morning with the Chairmen of IBM, Penney, MorganGuaranty, Chemical, and Monsanto. And a gloomier set of forecasts youwill scarcely hear. It makes the most dour view of this afternoon[that of] a raving optimist. At the end of the discussion, it finallygot to me. They all looked at me as if to say: "Well, what are yougoing to do about this?" And I turned to the audience and said "Thissounds the way it always sounds right at the bottom of the businesscycle." And the truth of the matter is, it did. Now, that is not thesame thing as saying that if that's what it sounded like, therefore,it is the bottom of the business cycle! But it is true that when theeconomy is at the bottom of the business cycle that is what it soundslike.In a sense I think the evidence is very clearly fallinggradually into place in that respect. The problem that we're havingin evaluating it is in part the consequence of two things that haveoccurred, and they have been mentioned previously. One is thestructural change in inventory policy, which has limited the extentthat inventory accumulation is followed by massive liquidation, withproduction levels substantially under consumption levels. The totalsystem finally drains out and pops back. The second is the issue thatDon was raising: namely, that as far as monetary policy and thecredit aggregates are concerned, we didn't have the counterpart to thetightening as the economy since the peak [turned] into the break, theliquidation, and the reversal. What we're seeing at this stage is afar slower [than ususal process of adjustment], where in effect thecontraction follows the very heavy and excessive debt creation of the1986-87 period, the subsequent gradual retrenchment of debt growth andM2 growth, and basically, deleveraging beginning to occur, arriving ata point where I gather we had record equity issuance in April. Andthe effects of this are very obvious. We're seeing that the qualityof balance sheets, as Mr. Corrigan points out, is improved. Despitethe fact that the banking sector is still fragile, there is noquestion that the difference between the banking sector today and thebanking sector six months ago is really quite stark. The structuralweaknesses that we saw back then and the yield spreads and thedifficulties to borrow relative to what we have today I think indicatethat we have a much sounder [banking] system now.I think the inflation numbers at this stage are reallycredible. If you look at them in detail, if you look at them in anhistorical context and in an overall credit sense, unless inflationhas ceased to become a monetary phenomenon, something fundamental ishappening. And I think it is extremely unlikely to reverse. We'repicking up the benefits of several years of fairly substantialimprovement in all relationships of money, debt, and prices. But inthat context I think monetary policy gradually defused the overheatedeconomy and slowed it down to a point that in effect what I washearing at the Business Council was not that their orders weredeteriorating but that they were absolutely dead. Nothing was moving;everything was just absolutely frozen. The only problem with that is-22-5/14/91that it appears, unless our data are just all wrong, to be allegedlyfreezing at a point in which production, fortunately, is well belowconsumption levels. And that has to run out. It's not a question ofan inventory pickup; it's basically the end of inventory liquidation,which has been the classic element to turn around the economy in everypickup after recession that we've seen in the post World War II periodand I'm sure earlier. So, when somebody says "What's the spark?What's going to move us?" the implication is that everything is inbalance. The problem at this stage is that it's not in balance.Unless the data are all just wrong, we are undergoing a rate ofliquidation at this particular stage, despite the fact that we havethis structural change [in inventory management], that cannot persistvery much longer because businesses are running out of stocks. And atthat point production begins to move, real income begins to move--theclassic Keynesian stuff, to whatever extent it works--and that's whenit works. We get the multipliers working and the whole economy beginsto move. The problem is that it's happening very slowly.I think John LaWare raised the relevant question here. Thisis a confidence issue. We can sit at this level for quite a while andeventually everyone will get discouraged and pull the plug on thecapital goods market. Even though the capital goods markets have comein below our forecast, it does not appear from talking to a lot ofpeople that what we are seeing are cancellations and majorcontractions. What we're seeing fundamentally are stretch-outs in thecapital goods markets because we can see the appropriations backlogsare holding. Everything is holding. The only thing that has changedis the fact that instead of doing it today, it's "manana;" but it'sstill there. The danger is that they will become so discouraged thateventually everyone will start to contract and pull in their horns;and then we will get a secondary double-dip in the recession. At thisstage, even listening to all the gloom that I did on Saturday, I don'tget the impression that there is a widespread initiation ofcancellations of projects, as distinct from stretch-outs. So, I thinkwe have a little time. The trouble is that everything is going insuch slow motion because of the inventory and the credit [situations]that it may be too slow to get us out of this in time. But theelements are here. The basic [issue] is that we cannot sit witheverything as it is now because the levels of production are too lowrelative to consumption, and something has got to give.One thing that disturbs me, which disturbs a lot of you, isthat we are uncomfortable about where long-term rates are. Obviously,should bond rates back up, then the mortage market will back up and wecould abort [the recovery] in the residential real estate markets,which are still healthy. But I suspect that the difference betweenthe analysts and the managers, as Ed Boehne called them--and it wasthe managers that I ran into on the Business Council--is that themanagers are operating as though they are serving the level of demand;the analysts are saying they're not. And we're about to find outwhether or not the data really tell us anything.All this suggests to me that we probably just ought to xeroxthe last directive and rerun it, because I can't see any argument thatI at least find plausible to push us on one side or the other. So, Iwould just put out as an initial recommendation, "B" symmetric.Governor Angell.-23-5/14/91MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I agree.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So do I.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. That's two.SPEAKER(?). I do too. Three.OTHERS. Four. Five. Six. Me too.MR. KOHN. Norm, it will be fun writing the policy record onthis one!MR. GUFFEY. I have just one [comment]. I happen to agreewith what you said with the exception that if the aggregates--inparticular M2--do not come in as projected over the next couple ofmonths, I would have some concern about the outlook.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know, Roger, I would suggest thatthat is probably telling us that the capital goods markets arebeginning to fade. It may be one of the early signals the Committeegets about the need to be very watchful. Who was it who said we oughtto be vigilant? Was it Governor Mullins? I think the money supplymay be a very weak tool, but I suspect in the current period it may befar more serviceable than it has been in a very long time.MR. GUFFEY. I think there's some informational value overthe next couple of months.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. And we also need to take a look atthe weekly asset side of the intermediary system, which reconciles tothe money supply--disaggregate it into real estate loans, businessloans, [and so forth] and in a sense try to see what the obverse ofmoney supply elements is. Right now the data indicate a definiteweakening in business loans, but I suspect that's being offset byissuances of securities in the long end of the market, so it's not acontraction. But if we get what you're concerned about, I think we'regoing to see it on the asset side of the intermediary balance sheetand it would be quite suggestive of the type of problems we worryabout.MR. FORRESTAL. I'm perfectly willing to xerox the lastdirective, Mr. Chairman. But for the record I'd like to indicate thatwhile I believe the risks are somewhat more symmetrical than theywere, I would still prefer an asymmetric directive simply because Ithink that if we do move between now and the next FOMC meeting, it'sgoing to be a move toward ease. And I think we ought to have thatreflected, but I don't feel that strongly about it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's probably factually correct, but Ithink the tone of the balance of risks is symmetric. In fact, I thinkyou put it exactly right: The balance of the risks is probablysymmetric even though the policy risks may be asymmetric. Si.MR. KEEHN. I agree exactly with what Bob Forrestal has said.I have a slight preference for asymmetric language, but I don't feelstrongly about it. And I do absolutely agree with both the currentsituation and with [policy] as you see it. It's a fairly long time-24-5/14/91between now and the next meeting, and a question comes up in my mind.Presumably, we have now established that you have the right to movepolicy, and by that I mean the fed funds rate, by some amount. Idon't want to get into that but what would cause you to make a changeas you look at the data that may be coming up in the next few weeks?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, do you mean on the down side orthe up side?MR. KEEHN. The down side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would say on the down side that themajor issue would be the money supply. If it's beginning to show akickback from the weak April and all of a sudden it starts to dip downagain, I think we had better be careful. Don did mention that.I think the data had been [unintelligible] but in the lastloan officer survey even though the rate of tightening is much less itis still tightening. And in a sense there are liquidity questionsbecause it's very hard to figure out how in the world we would getsignificant interest rate reductions in the context of very subnormalmoney supply growth and an exchange rate that is firming not onlyagainst the European currencies but against the yen as well. In otherwords, there are some people, and I have a certain sympathy for this,who are saying in effect that those are indications that monetarypolicy may be too tight. However, if the money supply is movingadequately, I would say it's a hard argument to make. But if we endup with a situation in which the money supply is beginning to shrinkand/or the dollar is beginning to firm very extraordinarily, or if weget some really weak [economic] numbers--and that I would say at thispoint is unlikely unless something cracks--we need something. I thinkthe Committee has actually created enough of a bottoming here thatsome new force has to come on stream to knock the economy down. As Isaid here the last time, the danger is really the capital goodsmarkets. If the capital goods markets hold up, I think we're out ofthe woods. But as I think all of us are saying--that's right, Jerryraised it and I forgot all about it--the real issue here is that ifall of a sudden the stock market falls on its face and breaks businessconfidence, then we ought to be prepared to move pretty quickly.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. [Then] we've got problems.MR. KEEHN. Well, I haven't looked at the calendar of thedata that will be coming out over the next three or four weeks, butI'm simply saying that if there were some indication of basicweakness, I would hope there would be an opportunity to move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If it is of the form that's cumulative.But if it merely reflects what anecdotally already is in the system,that probably is not new information. Look, durable goods orders forApril I assume are going to be down. If they're down by huge amounts,then we've got to look at it; but if they're just moderately down, Idon't see that that is telling us anything new.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think what President Keehn ishinting at, if I may, is that it might not be a bad idea to haverather firmly in mind a consultation in the first week in June orsomething like that.-25-5/14/91MR. KEEHN. Thank you!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why didn't he say that! It'sinconceivable to me that we can get through the next three weekswithout something happening that is not important to talk about. Iwould assume, even if there's nothing to say, that we ought to meet.Does anybody else want to comment?MR. MELZER. I just want to explore the stock market issue.We talked to some investment managers a week or so ago and my sense isthat some are expecting some sort of a correction.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We just got it today.MR. MELZER. Oh, we did? How much?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Down 37.MR. MELZER. Well, I'm not sure that's what they had in mind![Laughter]MR. KELLEY. Are you talking about 2600 to 2550 on the Dow?MR. MELZER. Maybe this is a peculiar circumstance at thistime, but I think it's a little tricky to tie monetary policy into astock market predictor. I just don't know what the linkages are.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Don't misunderstand; I wasn'tsuggesting that kind of rigid linkage. What I was saying is that ifwe had a major "tanking" in the stock market, I think that wouldrather quickly show through to other things.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Suppose the market goes down 180 points?Isn't that what monetary investors have in mind?MR. SYRON. In one day or over, say, a period of a week?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, in one day.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Tommy, if we had a very substantialcorrection in the stock market, I think it would feed right into thekinds of things that Don was talking about in terms of the confidencefactor and the double-dip factor.MR. ANGELL. I guess I'm a little uncomfortable with theconversation. The bulk of the conversation is agreement over the M2growth and that seems to me a very good thing for us to be watching.Quite frankly, the stock market has behaved rather robustly and wedidn't say that that means the recovery is going to be robust.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would bet you that it had an effect instabilizing this.MR. ANGELL. Oh, I think it did, too. That's why some of uswere pretty confident about it. Clearly, there would be a change inconfidence in our [unintelligible] if the stock market turned up at2450.-26-5/14/91MR. MELZER. Well, for the record, I would be in favor ofwhat you proposed as the policy prescription.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anyone else before we vote? If not,there is a correction.MR. BERNARD. Yes, to catch up with what has been happeningin the foreign exchange markets, the staff is proposing a change inlines 35-36 from "increased somewhat further on balance" to "showlittle change on balance over the intermeeting period."MR. BLACK. This is in the Bluebook, Norm?MR. BERNARD. This is in the draft directive, line 36.MR. KOHN. The one that was distributed.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The one that was distributed.MR. BERNARD. The whole sentence reads "The trade-weightedvalue of the dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies showedlittle change on balance over the intermeeting period."MR. ANGELL. Fine.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd like to propose that we repeat thedirective, but obviously it requires some changes.MR. BERNARD. [It would read:] "In the implementation ofpolicy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain theexisting degree of pressure on reserve positions. Depending uponprogress toward price stability, trends in economic activity, thebehavior of the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreignexchange and domestic financial markets, somewhat greater reserverestraint or somewhat lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable inthe intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions areexpected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the periodfrom March through June at annual rates of about 4 and 2 percent,respectively."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Mullins YesPresident Parry YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next meeting is July 2 and 3, but[in the interim] we will have one or more telephone conferences.END OF MEETING-27-