Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeAugust 20, 1991A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 20, 1991, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice ChairmanMr. AngellMr. BlackMr. ForrestalMr. KeehnMr. KelleyMr. LaWareMr. MullinsMr. ParryMessrs. Guffey, Hoskins, Melzer, and Syron, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents ofthe Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and EconomistMr. Bernard, Deputy SecretaryMr. Coyne, Assistant SecretaryMr. Gillum, Assistant SecretaryMr. Mattingly, General CounselMr. Prell, EconomistMr. Truman, EconomistMessrs. Beebe, Broaddus, R. Davis, Lindsey,Promisel, Scheld, Siegman, Simpson,Slifman, and Ms. Tschinkel, AssociateEconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account-2-Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Division of Monetary Affairs. Board ofGovernorsMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Hoenig, andRosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of St. Louis. Cleveland,Kansas City, Kansas City, and Dallas,respectivelyMessrs. McNees, Meyer, and Miller, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia,and MinneapolisTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofAugust 20, 1991CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. Would somebodylike to move the minutes of the July 2-3 meeting?MR. BLACK. So move.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Cross, will youbring us up-to-date on the Foreign Desk?MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Cross? If not, wouldsomebody like to move to ratify the transactions as requested?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll move it.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Sternlight, theDomestic Desk.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Sternlight?MR. PARRY. Peter, has the equality of the discount rate andthe federal funds rate presented any special problems or opportunitiesin terms of the conduct of operations by the Desk?MR. STERNLIGHT. It has not presented any undue difficulty,President Parry. I anticipate that it could make for slightly morevolatility in the funds rate. And if the Committee were to adopt acourse that had a lower funds rate expectation than the discount rate,I would look even more for possible difficulty on that score. But inthe present situation, there is no particular difficulty.MR. PARRY. Would you expect that to be a serious difficultyin terms of complicating operations?MR. STERNLIGHT. If we were expecting a lower funds rate thanthe discount rate?MR. PARRY. Yes.MR. STERNLIGHT. I wouldn't think it would be a terriblyserious problem even then. I think you'd have to be reconciled tosomewhat greater fluctuation in the funds rate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions for Peter? If not,would somebody like to move to ratify the transactions of the Desk?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Move it.SPEAKER(?). Second.8/20/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We now move to anissue we have discussed previously, which is alternative operatingprocedures. We have considered it on innumerable occasions and we'rerevisiting it today with a memorandum from Don Kohn.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At the last meetingseveral members of the Committee requested that the staff look atalternative operating procedures. The Committee seemed to bemotivated by concerns about the announcement effects that we get foreach change in policy these days, and in particular in the context ofa possibility that at some point--perhaps later this year or nextyear--policy would have to be firmed to keep the Committee on tracktoward price stability. The Committee was sent a memo by Dave Lindseywith an attachment by Al Broaddus and a cover by myself. [SeeAppendix.] I'll summarize the issues very, very briefly.In his memo, Mr. Lindsey mentions two types of related, butpotentially distinct, alterations in operating procedures. One wouldinvolve somewhat looser targeting of the funds rate than the verynarrow targeting around a single level that has become the practice inrecent years, without necessarily any implications about how thistarget is arrived at. Allowing some ambiguity for System intentionswould tend to diffuse reactions to a change in policy partly becauseit would take some time for any such change to feed through into themarket. It would allow Peter to drain or add reserves more freelythan at present, perhaps damping some of the end-of-maintenance-periodvolatility that we have now because [earlier in each maintenanceperiod] he is constrained [in his operations] by the level of thefederal funds rate. It would allow demands for reserves to showthrough a bit more. It might allow the Desk to "test the waters" withrespect to a policy change, without necessarily committing to it. Onthe other hand, ambiguity does have its disadvantages. It does riskthat the market would get the wrong idea from time to time, and thatputs extra volatility in the funds rate. It risks that there would bedelays in having the market recognize changes that the Committee feltdesirable. And additional ambiguity risks additional calls--fromCongress, for example--for us to be much more explicit about ouroperating targets.The second strand of change in operating procedures that Davecovered was a shift toward an operating procedure that was keyed atleast semi-automatically to changes in reserves or monetaryaggregates. This would introduce a greater automatism, and the fundsrate would then be seen as falling out of the shifting demands formoney and reserves relative to the Fed's supply, much as in the 1979to 1982 period. We would be seen as targeting the funds rate muchless. The problem here is to identify something to which you want thefunds rate tied automatically. There were sufficient concernsexpressed when we were using Ml; the Committee gave up on that becauseof the volatility and changes in M1 velocity. That would seem tothrow some doubt on reserves--nonborrowed or total reserves--becausethey're tied now exclusively, really, to Ml. And even though M2 hasbecome a more prominent target for the Committee, there is still a lotof doubt about the short- or even intermediate-term relationship ofmovements in M2 to movements in the variables the Committee caresabout--nominal income or prices--in the short or intermediate term.So, as you undoubtedly noticed, the staff didn't come up with anyconclusions about where to shift to. There seem to be pros and cons8/20/91on all of these alternatives. I would ask whether Dave or Al hasanything to add to my summary. Dave indicates that he does not. Al?MR. BROADDUS. I would just point out that I used the term"reserve target" pretty loosely in my letter. What I really had inmind is total reserve targeting--alternative 6 in Dave's memo--notnonborrowed reserve targeting, which I think is under 4 and 5. We'renot saying that we think the case for using total reserve targeting asa [policy] instrument has been made yet. We're simply saying we thinkthere's a strong case for additional research on it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions from the Committee? I don'tknow what to make of that long pause.MR. ANGELL. Do you want comments?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I started with questions, assumingI'd get comments. Now I better ask for comments. Comments, then.MR. ANGELL. Well, having been something of an advocate of adifferent procedure, I must admit, Don, that in going through youranalysis I really don't find anything there about which I can say "Ireally want to do that right now." Theoretically, I'm very muchimpressed with what Al Broaddus had to say in his letter. I'm veryimpressed with the notion that pegging the fed funds rate and keepingit steady does not necessarily mean that policy is in neutral, and Ithink everybody agrees with that. But the recent experience we've hadwith M2 causes me to have more doubts than I have had in previousyears, and I suppose I am not quite as ready as I was four years agoor two years ago to introduce some automatism in the program. At onetime it seemed reasonable to me that if we erred in our estimates ofthe demand for money, all of the error should not show up in the moneystock and that we ought to let part of the error show up in a move inthe fed funds rate. Now, I'm still somewhat of that opinion, but I'mnot ready to advocate any of those other alternatives, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'm glad you gave us a chance totake a look at this. I don't think it would surprise anyone who haslistened to what I've said that I would favor such a study. And now,like Governor Angell, I don't know where the answer would lead; and AlBroaddus certainly doesn't know exactly where it would lead. But I'venever really been comfortable trying to control the aggregates bymanipulating the federal funds rate because I think the demand formoney for any given level of income in the short run fluctuates toomuch to do that. I have some sympathy for those alternatives thathave a degree of automatism. But I remember that when we had theprocedures in 1979-82 and we were supposed to adjust the level ofborrowed reserves by half the amount of any miss in the aggregates,about two-thirds of the moves we made were also discretionary. So,I'm not under any illusions that we're really about to put [policy] onautomatic pilot. But a lot of things have come along in the way ofstudies on this since we last looked at it. All I would advocate isthat we use the System's considerable research resources to examinethis question because I think all of us feel some dissatisfaction withthe way we do it. But I don't believe there's anybody here who reallyfeels that he knows the answers as to exactly how it ought to be done.8/20/91It was simple in my mind when we wanted to control Ml; but it's notsimple when we're trying to control M2 and only a small fraction of M2is reservable. And we're not paying interest on required reserves,and that encourages further innovations. So, where this will lead, Idon't know. I suspect we probably won't get far from where we are,but we ought to take a good hard look at it. And I think Don and Davehave done us a good service in providing us these variousalternatives.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. In terms of the first three alternatives inDave's memo, allowing more fluctuation in the funds rate reallydoesn't appeal to me very much. I don't think ambiguity would serveus very well. The point about pressure on us to divulge more aboutour targets if there's ambiguity about what policy is I think is apoint well taken. In terms of automatism, if you will, it doesn'tappeal to me to tie anything to M2; in other words, those fourth andfifth alternatives don't appeal to me at all. I guess I still havesome affinity for looking at reserves or the base. I don't think weshould write off Ml for all time. There's a possibility that in amore stable environment in terms of inflation and inflationaryexpectations M1 perhaps is going to be more meaningful. So, I wouldsupport Al's and Bob's suggestion that we do more work on that. But Idon't think we're anywhere near being able to go to an operatingregime that targets reserves. Something that might be possible in theshort run--and this was in your summary memo, Don, not in Dave's--would be this idea of continuing to do what we do but having somebroad constraint based on some short-run aggregate that may modifybehavior as we approach the limits of that constraint. I really thinkof that as a trade-off. We've talked about this concept before in thecontext of the directive; when we had monetary targeting we had thatcaveat in terms of funds rate fluctuations. Now we have funds ratetargeting and I think it would be quite appropriate to have some kindof constraint in terms of aggregate behavior. But I don't think wecan look at a period as short as an intermeeting period; we've got tolook at much longer-term behavior of some reserve or monetaryaggregate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. The suggestion of introducing greater funds ratevolatility under existing operating procedures is not something that Ifind very attractive. And re-establishing an inflexible borrowingreserve target I don't find appealing at all. But it seems to me acouple of the things in the papers are really quite [helpful]. Thereare some interesting points conveyed in the examples in Dave Lindsey'smemo with regard to a greater role for deviations of M2 in affectingour policy in the intermeeting period. I also found Al Broaddus'sarguments interesting. And in the past we've gotten some [worthwhile]suggestions from Tom Melzer. We've done some work looking at BennettMcCallum's monetary base procedures, which are linked to nominalincome targeting, and they seem to provide some [promising] proceduresas well. It seems to me that there are enough things of some interesthere that maybe we ought to heighten our look at possibilities.Perhaps the System Research Advisory Committee could look at some ofthese possibilities or we could even have some studies done by theFOMC itself. There are some things here that could be useful. What8/20/91we're trying to do is to find an approach that is better than thecurrent procedure, not one that is necessarily perfect in an absolutesense. So, I think these papers are very useful.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, as I look back at policy overthe last couple of years, I think we've done a reasonably good jobwith the present regime, so I don't feel any compelling need to makeany change, particularly at this time with all the uncertainties thatwe have. I do think that some flexibility in the funds rate isprobably desirable. And if I were pressed to do something today, Iwould marginally favor the first option in the Lindsey paper. Theother thing that occurred to me is that over the time we've beendiscussing this, I at least have picked up an inference--and I may bewrong--that having some flexibility in the funds rate would somehowprotect us from political pressures when we have to move on the[tightening] side. I don't really buy that. If there is thatinference, I think it's an incorrect one; we're going to get thatpolitical pressure notwithstanding what we do with the funds rate. Iwould be interested, if it's not unduly putting Peter on the spot, toask whether from an operational standpoint he has any preference or,to put it another way perhaps, if he has any problem with those firstthree alternatives. Would any of those give you difficulty?MR. STERNLIGHT. I would welcome, I think, some greaterflexibility in the funds rate, although I recognize some of thecounter arguments that Dave's paper referred to. But I can think ofinstances where we have felt somewhat constrained by what washappening in the funds market from doing the reserve injection orreserve extraction that we thought ought to be done from a reservemanagement standpoint.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, I would just add one final point. Ithought Al Broaddus's letter was very interesting and I certainlydon't think we would lose anything by embarking on the kind ofresearch that he has indicated.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Peter, may I just follow up and ask youwhat you feel are the consequences of the [funds rate constraints] onyour [operations]? I would presume that as a consequence you end upperiodically with either a collapsing funds rate or an acceleratingfunds rate on a Wednesday afternoon at the close of the maintenanceperiod.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How often does that occur during theyear, either way?MR. STERNLIGHT. Several times, I would say.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Three or four--something like that?MR. STERNLIGHT. Something like that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you sense that there are anydestabilizing occurrences as a consequence of that?8/20/91MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think long term it has any reallyserious impact. If a very big, unfilled need or a very big excessdeveloped, it might cast its shadow over our operations in the nextreserve period and, if there had been a desire to effect some policychange, it conceivably could have delayed that change. I can't thinkof a specific instance when that occurred, but that's the kind of[situation] where I could imagine it having some undesirable effect.But I don't regard it as a really serious impediment. Just from amanager's standpoint in dealing with reserve positions, it has been amild or moderate frustration at times to feel that we're hemmed in bythe funds rate. But I've gotten used to it. [Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. If we're to serve [the needs of] economicpolicy, then we ought to have a monetary policy that is credible andconsistent. Putting more fluctuation in the funds rate doesn'tprovide the markets much information with respect to either one ofthose goals. I would be in favor of trying to link the funds rate toa broader target like M2, but even tying ourselves to an aggregatestarget without any explicit long-term objective in mind seems to me torun the risk of introducing some uncertainty with that target as well.So, just to follow up on what Bob Parry suggested: Although Iwouldn't go for nominal income targeting, I would like to link thefunds rate a little more tightly to a broad aggregate like M2, butthen I would like to have a multi-year price level objective in mindso that we don't introduce more uncertainty by focusing more on themonetary aggregates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think you largelyasked my question. I'd just like to add, Peter, to the question theChairman had, and ask about how you feel in a situation in which youbelieve--of course it may not be possible to forecast this--that theconstraints that you're under would have an effect upon the outcome ofthe ultimate variables that we're worried about. I presume there areprocedures that you could follow now in consultation with the Chairmanand others to deviate from a tight funds target [constraint] for ashort period of time.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, I guess so. But we feel that the fundsrate is a constraint at this time. The reason we feel it is aconstraint is that we don't want to mislead the markets.[Unintelligible] I presume an approach that I might develop inconsultation with Don Kohn and the Chairman.MR. SYRON. My overall concern, as other people have saidbefore, is dissatisfaction with the current system--understandably so.But life is an imperfect situation. And at least in this situation, Isee more or as much volatility or lack of stability in the financialsector as in the real sector. That makes me concerned about doinganything in the short- to intermediate-run to change the approach thatwe're taking. I completely agree with the concerns that people haveabout the lack of desirability of introducing greater ambiguity.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further comments? I appreciate the[difficulty] of trying to [develop] a study that approaches this8/20/91question. If I knew all the things we were to study that we don'tknow--. I'd be curious to ask Don and David: Is there anysignificant, unexplored statistical or analytical area from which wemight focus on this issue that would be a productive use of theresources of the System?MR. LINDSEY. Well, I think you could answer "yes" to thatquestion without the results of that research necessarily having anyimplications for a change in FOMC operating procedures. I think Al'sletter raised some interesting research issues that ought to be givenmore attention by the staff of the nation's central bank. But I guessin my own mind we have a sufficiently close handle on the Committee'sdesires and on the relationships at work that it wouldn't imply,therefore, that the Committee ought to alter its operating procedures.On the other hand, I would support--this is my personal opinion and Aland Don may disagree--additional research, which to some degree isongoing in any event. We could add a bit more emphasis to it. ButI'm not sure in my own mind, whatever the results of that work withinreasonable boundaries, that it would have any real implications forour operating procedures.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Al.MR. BROADDUS. Well, I don't disagree with that. It seems tome that there is enough room for long-term improvement in the way wedo things to at least do a substantial research project on this. Idon't think we really know how a total reserves operating procedurewould work. We would have to study that in the context of the overallstrategy and situation. We'd have to ask questions like what would wetie that instrument to in the way of the longer-term goal and whetherwe should still have intermediate targets. But it seems to me there'senough out there that we need to understand to justify a fairlyfocused research effort within the System. And I think we have theresources in the System as a whole to do that.MR. KOHN. I agree with both Al and Dave. I think what I'mhearing from the Committee is no sense of urgency for coming up withsomething new, partly because of the skepticism Dave expressed as towhether there really is something new out there that would solve ourproblems or appreciably [lessen] the difficulty we see with thecurrent procedures. What I was going to suggest, Mr. Chairman, isthat I consult with Al and other research directors around the room tosee whether we could at least have some ongoing research on theseissues. The McCallum research on targeting the base, which keepspopping up in every conference I go to, for example, and some of theseother things are areas in which the System ought to be doing work. Itdoesn't mean that something has to be done by the next FOMC meeting.We ought to be able to focus our resources in a way that at leastanswers some of the outstanding questions or approaches. I think thatwould be the right thing for the central bank to be doing.MR. BLACK. One of the big reasons reserve targeting has beenopposed in the past has been the feeling that it would cause morefluctuations in short-term interest rates. And as Al indicates in hisletter, there is some evidence now that that might not be the case forlong-term rates. That could be an important factor, I think.8/20/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we're all acutely aware thatholding steady with the funds rate is not the same as a stablemonetary policy. Even though we focus on that as an instrument, Idon't think there's anyone around this table who believes that a flatfunds rate is equal to a stable monetary policy.MR. BLACK. It's awfully hard, even if you know what you wantto accomplish, to pick the [appropriate] fed funds rate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, it may not be a bad idea to expandour insights into this area. It may not be directly usable but Ithink if we learn something, the payoff is very large.MR. HOSKINS. Well, that gets back to a thought that I hadwhen Dave was speaking. It's not clear in my mind what you mean aboutresearch. It seems to me that we've done a lot of research; more canbe done. Are you getting at the idea that the problem of implementingsome of those research findings has more to do with the Committee'sview about multiple objectives rather than focusing on a singleobjective? Are you saying that we have some research to date--MR. LINDSEY. Well, I wouldn't draw as tight a link as youdid between many or only one ultimate target and the procedures forintermediate targeting and operating targets that might get us there.I think one could essentially have the Neal resolution passed, haveprice stability as our ultimate objective--period, and still end upthrough a deliberative process deciding that our current operatingprocedure is probably the most sensible way to get there. So, even ifthere were a clear decision to move to price stability with no ifs,ands, or buts, there would still be these issues as to whether or notthe way to get there is more or less doing what we're doing now butwith that end in mind.MR. BROADDUS. Could I just--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Go ahead, Al.MR. BROADDUS. There is some evidence that that might not bethe case. We may well wind up there, Dave. But there are at leastsome models that suggest that long-run price stability simply may notbe consistent with the procedure we're using now.MR. LINDSEY. Well, it's true that if you're not takingseriously that long-run objective, then you're not going to get toprice stability. Lee wouldn't disagree with that.MR. HOSKINS. That's right.MR. LINDSEY. On the other hand, if you are taking thatseriously, I'm confident that you could move the funds rate in amanner over time that would get you there.MR. MULLINS. I think it would be useful in this second stageof research to define the problem pretty carefully in terms of whatwe're trying to achieve. It is true that everyone recognizes a stablefunds rate is not a stable monetary policy. What has been difficultto convince people of is that a change in the federal funds rate maybe an unchanged monetary policy. That is a bit more difficult.8/20/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It logically follows the first.MR. MULLINS. Yes, everyone buys the first.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the second is directly derivablefrom the first; it should not be difficult to convince--MR. MULLINS. We haven't been able to write QED after thesecond one. It does seem to me that we also lose some informationwhen we don't allow markets, in some range, to tighten and loosen ontheir own. So, part of the research should be to think about, at avery practical level, how we've achieved what we think is a mistakenow. I feel pretty uncomfortable picking a fed funds rate out of thedark and also with this process of two types of changes in the fedfunds rate, one being a change in policy and the other not being achange in policy. With that narrow sort of definition of the problemas well as the broader definition of the policy of [unintelligible]the question of reserve targeting and targeting to price levels at abroader objective level.MR. ANGELL. Well, when David Lindsey speaks about thepresent procedures, I think he's correct that none of us really had inmind a year ago that we wanted to get the fed funds rate to 5-1/2percent. No one really seems to have in mind the fed funds rate thatis driving us. What has been driving us in a sense has been a kind offeeling our way in all of the procedures [on the basis of] all of theinformation that we have; and we find ourselves with a 5-1/2 percentfed funds rate. So, I don't think that the [current] procedurenecessarily means that we're really hooking on to some predeterminedfed funds rate. I think in a way many of us are surprised to findourselves at this juncture with a fed funds rate of 5-1/2 percent.And since we're surprised, then it must be that we have considerationsthat are driving us other than the fed funds rate.MR. BLACK. You'd be surprised as to what the aggregates aredoing with that particular fed funds rate, which we thought would besomething very different.MR. KELLEY. That's right.MR. BLACK. And therein lies our frustration, I think.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But in a sense, therein lies what policyis all about. It is, in effect, what we have endeavored to do just tobalance two--in fact, a lot more than two--variations from ourintermediate expectations. Any other comments? If not, unless I hearany objections, I assume that Don's suggestion probably does capturethe general tenor of this discussion and I would ask him to go forwardwith that. And we shall wish him well, because I'm not sure what--.[Laughter]MR. ANGELL. And there may be Federal Reserve Bank researchdepartments that might wish to take on some additional tasks relatingto what has been done at the Board.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's what we intend.8/20/91MR. KOHN. Well, I would intend to coordinate with Al andother research directors.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Another round.MR. KOHN. I didn't intend to make it just a Board staffproject at all--as little as possible! [Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Shall we move on then? Anotheritem that has come up previously and was deferred to a study relatesto the directive language concerning intermeeting adjustments. Thisis an issue that Governor Kelley has raised and he in conjunction withDon Kohn has brought forth a memorandum. [See Appendix.] Governor,would you like to chair us through this?MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. When you say that astudy has been done on this subject, that's giving it much too muchcredit. We haven't done a study but--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You have given it some thought.MR. KELLEY. Yes, some thought. As I indicated to you in mymemo of May 20, it seems to me that the Committee might well reviewthe language that we employ in the operational paragraph wherein weindicate the areas of concern--theoretically, in rank order. Thatorder has not changed now for 38 months, and certainly [the economic]conditions and the nature of the discussions that have taken placearound this table have changed over the course of that period. Torefresh the Committee's memory: We established that language on June30, 1988--or at least we established that rank order ofconsiderations; the rhetoric has changed some. Since that time therehave been 5 tightening moves, 1 discount rate move in an upwarddirection when we went to 7 percent in February of '89, and thedirectives have had 6 tilts toward tightness. We reversed directionin June of 1989 and since then there have been 17 easing moves, 3discount rates changes in the direction of ease, and 9 directives thattilted toward ease. And sprinkled throughout that whole period inboth the upward and downward direction, there have been 9 symmetricdirectives. So, a lot of water has passed under the bridge whilenothing has changed here. And it appears to me that we may want totake a look at that.In my view, either alternative 1 or alternative 3 in my memowould be preferable to what seems to be our current practice, which issimply not actively managing it. I think [the current practice] isprobably viable because it has become pretty much meaningless, butit's not very desirable for exactly the same reason. If we don't feelthat we want to manage that language actively--or more positively, ifwe decide that it's simply not very useful any more--then I think weshould consider dropping it, or changing the rhetoric perhaps, oremploying Don Kohn's additional thought that appears as number 4 inhis memo, which I appreciate having. The latter would change therecitation of the factors; it would keep them in there but blur theirorder of presentation.For what it's worth, I think that active management of thatlanguage is useful. I know in my own case it's a useful pre-meetingdiscipline to think through that. It seems to me that for the-10-8/20/91historical record of the activity of this Committee it has real value.So, I personally would like to see us keep it and come up with asystem where we review it in a way that will keep it fresh and currentbut still not be an undue burden on the Committee. I would appreciatevery much having some other members' thoughts. I'd like to ask DonKohn first of all if he'd like to add anything.MR. KOHN. I don't have anything to add to what you said.Obviously, we would try to be helpful and come up with suggestions forimplementing whatever the Committee decided it wanted to do.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions?MR. HOSKINS. I think there's some merit in focusing on ourlonger-term objective right up front and consistently saying what itis. The question is whether we can agree on it. I guess we can aslong as we don't put a time frame around it. If we start to say we'regoing to do it in three years or five years, then I think disagreementwill arise. But I think highlighting that as the major policy thrustover time is important.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd just like to add that it doesn'tnecessarily follow that holding that list of objectives constantthrough that period of ups and downs is necessarily a contradiction.MR. KELLEY. No, absolutely.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You can create that type of phenomenon.The issue is: Does that occur consciously or has it just become amantra of some kind for us.MR. KELLEY. Well, one rationale by which it could have beenactively kept that way is for this Committee to have decided that itpermanently wants to keep absolutely preeminent under any conditionsthis focus on price level stability. And if that's what we want todo, then to me there is a better way to express it rather than tocontinue to imply that there's a rank order and that somehow or otherprice stability inevitably comes first. We can do it in a differentway and still make due allowance for that price level stabilitypreeminence to be expressed.MR. ANGELL. You mean have a separate sentence that indicatesour commitment to price level stability?MR. KELLEY. Yes, and then deal with the others.MR. ANGELL. And then deal with the others. Well, I thinkthere's certainly some merit in that approach.MR. KOHN. Governor Angell, there is a sentence already inthe directive. If you look on the last page of the package withGovernor Kelley's memo, there is a copy of the July meeting'sdirective. The first sentence at the top of the page that precedesthe discussion of the long-run ranges does, in effect, do that. Wecould change the wording of that sentence.MR. ANGELL. What sentence are you talking about, Don?-11-8/20/91MR. KOHN. "The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetaryand financial conditions that will foster price stability and promotesustainable growth in output." It's page 2 of the directive.MR. KELLEY. Right. It's one paragraph up from the one I'mtalking about.MR. KOHN. Now, we could play with that. The issue is howthe intermeeting directive fits into those already stated goals.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. To pick up on a point that you made,Mr. Chairman, I'm not inherently troubled by the fact that the rankorder stayed the same over this whole period, despite Mike's cleverrecitation of all that took place in that period. On the other hand,if you look at this table, there are at least a few cases in which thechange in the rank order did mean something. For example, around thetime of the stock market crash in October 1987, there's no questionthat that change really meant something. Whatever we do, I think wehave to preserve some flexibility to take account of things like that.On the other hand, I fear that if we got into the practice of managingthe rank order as part of the normal deliberative process of theCommittee, it could be disruptive to the policy process. For example,I think it would be terrible if we ended up with a situation in whichthe Committee couldn't reach a reasonable conclusion about the thrustof policy because of a great debate as to what should be number twoversus what should be number three or number four versus number two.If we were going to move in the direction of what Mike Kelley hascharacterized as an active management of the rank order, the only wayI can see that that can be done without running the risk of disruptingthe normal consensus-building process within the Committee would be ina context in which there would be a consensus on that point after thepolicy directive itself had already been voted on. The thought ofinviting dissents over what is number three versus number two I thinkcould be very disruptive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the problem there is that justprocedurally, if you have, let's say, a list of five items and aCommittee this large to make a judgment, the time frame required tosolve that matrix--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's my point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. --goes way beyond lunch, dinner, andwhatever else. One possibility is that we can alter this list in avery generic way once a year or something of that nature as we do themonetary aggregates when we're looking at them in a sense as aseparate policy orientation for the period ahead rather than at everymeeting. Were we to do that, we could actually do that almostindependently of the deliberation process of a specific directive inthe same way that we do the monetary targets. I'm not certain that weneed to change these every meeting. But I do think that we shouldeither freeze them permanently--meaning that this is the Committee'sformal set of objectives in the order of our priorities, which isinvariant to specific economic conditions that we're confronting--orhave some greater flexibility where they might change over a period oftime or in cases where there was a very specific indication such as-12-8/20/91the stock market crash or, as we'll be discussing later, this verypeculiar M2 problem that we're running up against. [In the lattercase] there are potential recommendations to alter the directive withthat characteristic being in a sense a specific short-term type ofadjustment for a specific meeting. I don't know how that strikes you,Governor Kelley, as a recommendation; it sort of comes to grips withthe problem you raised but hopefully doesn't get into the problem thatJerry Corrigan raised.MR. KELLEY. I totally agree with Jerry's concern. It mayindeed be insurmountable and, thus, we may want to look in otherdirections. I would have no problem going in your direction, and Ithink that Don's [proposed] change could be a way to get at that. Andif we have another event of the magnitude of October '87, we canchange the language on that occasion.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I like that suggestion. If wewere to do that, say, at the December meeting, that would be a "goals"meeting, which could then precede our establishment of the ranges atthe February meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As part of the discussion?MR. ANGELL. As part of the discussion. But I think weshould leave open the opportunity for some intra-year moves that mighttake place when events occur during the year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I guess I'm not as enthusiastic about thatsuggestion. It seems to me that an approach that would solve ourproblems and in addition enable us to highlight things that we thinkare important when important events occur is what Don indicated in4.b. on page 3 and a slight variation of 4.c. on page 4. That doesinvolve repeating the long-term objectives, but it states them thereand then just indicates the kinds of things we want to put in at ameeting that are of particular importance. If we don't go througheach meeting ordering the four or five elements, this just focuses onthings that at that particular meeting were important. To me this hasthe flexibility and also the emphasis on the longer term, and I thinkit's very constructive and preferable to what we have.MR. BLACK. Well, I think Governor Kelley has done us a realservice in pointing these things out. I've been uncomfortable for along time with the way we've handled this thing. And even though weourselves don't pay much attention to this, the Fed watchers do pay alot of attention to it and they think it's an indication of ourpractice. More importantly, if we do change them, they think thatmeans we've changed our emphasis. So, if we continue doing that,there's a strong argument for doing what is almost the unthinkable, asyou and Jerry have pointed out, of debating this and maybe reaching animpasse at every meeting. So, I've concluded that what I think youare all moving toward is that we should eliminate this language andtake another route. Changing this list, even infrequently, tends topromote the perception already held by many that we are constantlychanging our objectives and we're trading off one objective againstthe other. And I don't think considering the list at each meetingwould add anything to our policy deliberations; that could hamper us,-13-8/20/91as Don pointed out, and you and Jerry also have mentioned. So, mypreference would be to adopt what is Governor Kelley's point 3 andDon's example under 4. Don gives three examples and I like the onelabeled 4.b., which is at the bottom of page 3 in his memo, because itputs long-run price stability at the head of the list. And needlessto say, I'd want to retain the reference to the aggregates becauseright now I think that is the best route to get to long-term pricestability, although our views may change as a result of this study wetalked about earlier. But adherence to that approach doesn'tnecessarily bind us to that every time. If we have a particularsituation like we have now, with extreme weakness in the aggregatesfor some unexplainable reason, or like the stock market crash inOctober of 1987, then we could certainly change it. But I would liketo start off with saying something about price stability. As Donpointed out, there is such a reference in the previous paragraph, butI don't think it would hurt to put it at the beginning of theoperational paragraph too and make it a generic reference. I wouldvery much favor doing that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. The more I listen to this discussion, the more Ithink that maybe we ought to do away with this listing. That's partlybecause the table presented in Governor Kelley's memo reminded me thatI've seen that table in certain research where people try to figureout what the Fed is doing. That sort of scares me because, as Jerrypointed out, sometimes we consciously change [the items in the list]and sometimes we don't think about them at all. And it seems to methe purpose of that language is really guidance to you, Mr. Chairman,and to the Desk in the intermeeting period. I personally haveconfidence in your having listened to the discussion in the meetingand in your interpretation of that, and I'm not sure you need thatguidance. And I'm not sure that guidance adds any value to public[understanding], really. These are sort of boiler plate things thatany central bank is going to take into account in setting policy. So,I'd be in favor of doing away with that recitation myself.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I think Tom raised an interesting point. Ifyou look at the context here, this is not a recitation of long-termgoals; it is the implementation of policy for the immediate future--inthe intermeeting period--that we are focusing on. And that's why it'sso useful to have the flexibility to signal that there's a near-termconcern like the stock market or, if the dollar should collapse, thatin the near term there is special emphasis on that. That's a fairlyrare circumstance, but it's nice to have a device already in place todeal with it. In thinking of what to do in default when we don't havethat, I like the notion of considering it once a year with the targetsto establish what sorts of things we look at in the intermeetingperiod in normal times. But I think we'd have less flexibility if wedidn't have language here to guide the intermeeting period focus; andthen when we have one of these events, it's a more jarring changesomehow just to interject exchange rates or credit market conditionsand the like [in the directive]. So, I guess I would prefer having astandard list that we would consider for the next year, i.e. whatwould be the kind of default issues we would look at. Price stabilitywould be number one, but we then also have there the mechanism for-14-8/20/91signaling concerns. It is different, though, than the longer-termobjectives because we're really talking about what we might focus onin the immediate future.MR. MELZER. Dave, wouldn't you think the policy record wouldreveal that, though? Wouldn't it reveal our particular concernwithout restating that in the operational paragraph of the directive?That was my main point.MR. MULLINS. Yes, we could just write it out. I think itmight be useful first to state what in normal times are the issuesthat we look at, and this would be a nice simple concise way. If wehad a clearly conceptualized approach to this, it wouldn't bother meif this showed up in tables. I think it's a concern if it shows up inFed watchers' tables when we aren't focusing on it and don't have itclear in a gut sense.MR. MELZER. Yes.MR. KELLEY. That's it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, along with what everyone has said,I think we have to be careful not to try to send too many messages tothe market. We're having people see three messages, perhaps, forevery one we're trying to send. In that regard [I like] yoursuggestion for [reviewing this] once a year. And I think David[Mullins] is absolutely right that we want to retain it and make it anextraordinary event to some extent when we change these things. Inwhat we present in a once-a-year approach such as you suggested it isimportant that we get in there that while we're focusing on pricestability, we're focusing on price stability for a reason. And thatreason is that it's not an objective by itself; it's an objective inorder to maximize real economic welfare. Sometimes--fortunately notin this group but outside--there can be some confusion about that.MR. HOSKINS. I think we're trying to serve two purposeshere. One is to provide information. And the second is procedural:to help us conduct our policy affairs and make sure we're gettingthings right. Where I come out on the information question is thatthere's not much informational content because what these five or sixfactors that we list tell people is that we have multiple objectives.We can say price stability and long-term economic growth until we'reblue in the face; but if we list those, we're signaling to the marketthat those things are important to us and we'll shift them around whenwe feel like it. I don't like the list personally because I don'tthink half of the items should be in there. So, I'd go essentiallyfor Bob Black's and Tom Melzer's suggestion and reduce the list. Iguess that's 4.b. on page 3 of Don's memo.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further comments?MR. BLACK. I think this point bears on the one that youraised earlier about our not thinking of a change in the federal fundsrate as a change in policy and yet the market, or most of the market,does. If we had this overall summary statement as in Don's example4.b. on page 3: "In the context of the Committee's long-run-15-8/20/91objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth,somewhat greater reserve restraint..." then we can go into thesethings. But we have said that that is in our judgment compatible withour long-run objective and I think it would reduce the tendency of thepublic to think of that as a change in policy when it really isn't.That's one of the main reasons I lean toward a reserve base measurebecause if we had that, we could have interest rates go this way orthat way and we wouldn't have any better idea as to which way theywould go than anybody else. I don't know if they would tend to beinterpreted that way, but it is just the natural fallout of trying toseek a long-run objective; it may involve lower rates or it mayinvolve higher rates, and that can change all over the place from timeto time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further comments? It strikes methat we've made considerable progress on the issue that you've raised,but we haven't resolved it yet. If I may, Governor Kelley, I wouldrequest that for the next meeting if you could perhaps get views insomewhat greater detail from all the Committee members and thenonvoting presidents, you may find that there is a much more solidconsensus than may appear here. But I think there was a growing viewsomewhat in your direction on this question. If you can queryeveryone with respect to their specific suggestions, you may be ableto bring before us at the next meeting something capturing thisdiscussion with alternative recommendations. Clearly, item 4.b. isone alternative; the one that I mentioned is another; and there may bea third, or something else you can come up with. Get it down to twoor three specific things and we may be able to resolve the issue atthe next meeting. So, if you wouldn't mind, I'd--MR. KELLEY. I'd be happy to do that, Mr. Chairman. My senseis that there is a large common core of thought here among Committeemembers as to whether to do this, although there probably are nuancesfrom every seat around the table. We'll come back with some proposedalternatives.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One possibility being to eliminate itcompletely.MR. KELLEY. Sure.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Or change it to something different.MR. KELLEY. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. We're now up to [our review of]the economic situation. Mike Prell.MR. PRELL. Statement--see Appendix.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mike?MR. MULLINS. Where do we stand on our inventory scenario?What happened in the second quarter and what do you think is happeningnow?MR. PRELL. Well, what happened in the second quarter wasclearly a liquidation of stocks in the nonfarm business sector. We-16-8/20/91believe on the basis of the data that came in after BEA's advanceestimate that that liquidation will be, in all likelihood, deeper inthe revised numbers but perhaps still not quite as sharp as we hadanticipated in our June Greenbook forecast. Looking ahead, while onecan see in the June data--if one wants to read them very closely--somehints of a diminished rate of liquidation, basically our view is that,in light of the anecdotal evidence and our anticipations of whatbehavior would be at this point, we are probably still in a phase ofinventory liquidation but at a slower pace than earlier. And probablywe are not swinging toward stability or accumulation quite as rapidlyas we had thought we might be in our prior forecast. As I indicated,businessmen just seem to be very cautious and not at all confidentthat the recovery and the demand are there and will remain there. So,I think this process is likely to be stretched out some relative toour earlier forecast.MR. MULLINS. You have in the Greenbook for the secondquarter a negative $21 billion [for inventories]. What was in theadvance number--negative $16 billion or something?MR. PRELL. What is in the Greenbook is the BEA number. Wethink we're likely to have several billion dollars less inventoryinvestment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any biases in the inventorychange numbers as a consequence of the [change in the] price base? Inother words, do real inventory levels change or will they besignificantly altered with the move to 1987 prices in the Novemberbase revision?MR. PRELL. I would think that oil would be the major item ofinventory that would be significantly affected, but obviously otheritems could be affected to a lesser degree.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do we know the direction of the effect?MR. PRELL. I have not seen estimates and I don't think weare able to replicate those estimates at that level of disaggregation;we could not really pin that down.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One of the things about which therecould be a concern is that we are viewing the outlook in the contextof a set of homogenous goods--units from which we interpret there isliquidation of a certain dimension--and it could conceivably turn outthat a goodly part of our presumption is wholly the result of thearbitrary choice of a price base.MR. PRELL. Well, there are always risks that the inventorynumbers could be significantly revised. History provides verydiscomforting examples of this kind of thing. The evidence--in termsof surveys and in terms of what we see going on in industrialproduction and orders and so on--is consistent with our impressionthat, indeed, inventories have continued to be liquidated. But thedimensions are important here. So, if there are errors in thesenumbers, they could be misleading us.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would suspect that the forthcomingdurable goods order series is quite crucial to this in the sense that-17-8/20/91if the rate of liquidation is what it appears to be, that figureshould be moving up, not sideways or down.MR. PRELL. We would like to see firmer numbers than the Junefigure. The June figure wasn't particularly a surprise, in astatistical sense, coming after the pretty good gains we had seen inthe prior months. At this stage of what we think is a recovery,erratic movements without a clear-cut, month-by-month upward thrustare not uncommon. But, as I said, the major areas in which we becamesomewhat more insecure were how rapidly the inventory turnaround wouldoccur and how much spending on business equipment would improve. I'dsay those figures will be of considerable interest.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. The assumption made in the forecast with regardto the dollar is that it remains constant. Is that an exogenousdetermination? And if it is, what, for example, would the MPS modelgive for the dollar and what would be its implications?MR. TRUMAN. Well, viewing the forecast as a whole, it is notan assumption that is part of the projection process. It isendogenous to our outlook for interest rates here, which is where westart from, our outlook for interest rates abroad, and what else isgoing on in the forecast. The MPS model has a slightly differentexchange rate equation than most others, none of which does very wellthese days. Basically, since the forecast for interest rates is flathere and flat abroad, the unchanged dollar, at least [to the extent itis] driven by interest rates, is consistent with that. To the extentthat one wants to add in some view of what is happening in the currentaccount, which some other equations do--that's a feature that hastended to do very poorly in the models recently--the fact is that thecurrent account is continuing to be in the negative. It is quitemodest, at least taking the judgmental forecast. Again, I don't thinkyou can find any particular downward pressure on the dollar from that.MR. PRELL. Just to clarify something stemming from anearlier question from Governor Mullins: Our guess is--just readingthe data that we can see on manufacturing and retail/wholesale trade--that the inventory liquidation that was put at $3 billion in theinitial GNP estimate will be more like $11 billion. So, it's asignificant change.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Say that again, Mike.MR. PRELL. We think that the manufacturing and retail andwholesale trade data imply a downward revision of roughly $8 billionin the inventory accumulation rate in the second quarter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mike? If not,would somebody like to start the Committee discussion?MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, we have been forecasting a modestrecovery and it seems to me that at best that's what it seems we havebeen getting. Our forecast has been a little weaker than the staffforecast and with the passage of time I'm afraid the difference seemsto have narrowed.-18-8/20/91With regard to the District, I think overall conditions arecontinuing to show improvement, but certainly this unevennesscontinues. The auto sector remains the key uncertainty, with thechange in models. Recent sales trends have been encouraging at leastbut still far from strong, and the numbers are really confused byfleet sales. It's very difficult to get at those numbers and reallydetermine just what the underlying retail demand for cars is. The '92models have been introduced and the introduction hasn't gone quite aswell as had been generally hoped. Indeed, attitudes in our Districtare a little more negative than just a month ago. In fact, onemanufacturer is concerned enough about the way the '92 sales are goingthat they are going to put out a nationwide sales pitch of anunprecedented level in September. Having said that, the retail dealerinventory is very low; no correction there is necessary. But despitethat, the production risks, looking at the third and fourth quarters,are still viewed as being on the down side. Of course, the three maindomestic manufacturers are reporting big losses. And heavy trucknumbers continue to be very weak; sales forecasts for '91 areestimated at about 90,000 units for the Class A trucks and that's downsome 25 percent from 1990, which itself was a weak year. Therecreation vehicle business, which is very important--particularly toIndiana--also is pretty weak. That business continues in a three-yearslump now; [it's down] as much as 25 percent for some individualmanufacturers. The steel business, though, is doing a bit better.Those manufacturers supplying the auto industry are operating at aslightly better level; 80 percent of capacity is the overall industryaverage. And the current level of orders is responding to the slightpickup in car production; the current level of orders of thosesupplying the auto industry is at about 150 percent of capacity, butthey do caution that those steel orders are subject to cancellation.Nonetheless, they are forecasting for this year shipments of about 76million tons and the initial forecast for '92 is 82 million tons.In the agricultural sector, the drought, as I commented thelast time, is beginning to have some negative effect on the outlookfor crop production. So far it's not nearly as severe as the 1988drought, and we do not expect this to move into the banking sector andcause the kind of problems that we had before. Nonetheless, in termsof our District--and I think we are perhaps a bit more impacted by thedrought than some other parts of the country--corn production will bedown about 15 percent from last year and soybean production will bedown about 4 percent. But because the drought conditions are recent,prices haven't risen as much as one might expect and, therefore, farmincome will be adversely affected. That is beginning to show up inthe weakness of sales of agricultural equipment, and the mainmanufacturers of ag equipment are beginning to pull back theirproduction schedules for the remainder of this year.On the inflation front, I must say I continue to be impressed--really almost surprised--by the very, very heavy and continuingpressure on prices. Competitive conditions out there are very intenseand price increases at least from a [unintelligible] just aren'tsticking. Manufacturers are able to get a [price] reduction on theirpurchases of raw materials and other parts and products. Some of thereductions really are quite impressive, so they've got a very goodcontrol on their costs. Offsetting this, and Mike alluded to it,there has been some recent shift in labor contracts; some of the morerecent contracts are not coming in quite as favorably as they were-19-8/20/91 -20-earlier in the year. I would point out that Deere and Caterpillar arejust starting their negotiations. These are very important contracts.And certainly, the caps in their discussions particularly are startingoff badly. They can't even agree on the sites where they're going tohold the negotiations.With regard to the credit crunch--and I must say here I'mcertainly speaking from a Midwestern perspective--the problem, atleast in our part of the country, doesn't seem to be as bad as inother regions. I think there is a slight shift taking place. Thoughbanks have raised and continue to have pretty high credit standards,for those companies and borrowers that do meet these standards there'splenty of credit available. A CEO of one large regional bank told methe other day that for any good credit that goes on the table, fivebanks are coming after it pretty quickly. In the consumer creditarea--and we do have a director who follows consumer activities prettyclosely--I must say the level of personal bankruptcies is getting alittle worrisome. The numbers are up very significantly this yearover last year. And this seems to be showing up in increaseddelinquencies in [banks'] consumer portfolios.The recovery still seems to be on track but it's certainlymodest and uneven and very, very susceptible to shocks such as what weexperienced over the weekend. From a policy perspective, continuingease is the best policy to facilitate the continued recovery and seemsto me an appropriate course of action. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Following weak activityin recent months, the Twelfth District economy shows few signs ofrecovery at the present time. California's economy, which contractedsomewhat less than the nation's throughout most of the recession,remains sluggish. Payroll employment has been flat since March;manufacturing and construction employment continue to contract andcutbacks planned for state and local government sectors are expectedto weaken employment further. I might also add that we're likely tosee greater weakness in the aerospace industry primarily located insouthern California as well. If you look outside California, theconditions are really quite mixed. States such as Washington, Oregon,and Nevada have experienced employment declines in recent months andthat's a bit of a change from what their experience had been a fewmonths ago. Also, as in California, the weakness in their employmenthas been primarily in construction and manufacturing. Three states--Idaho, Utah, and Arizona--remain relatively strong, with ratherimpressive increases in employment. Nonresidential construction isobviously quite weak; residential real estate construction is showingsome signs of recovery. Sales activity and median prices are abovetheir year-ago levels in California and in the West in general.Permits for new construction are up as are housing starts, at leastfor the month of June. This renewed activity, however, has yet to bereflected in increased construction employment, and we do have quite afew builders reporting difficulty in [obtaining] financing. I mightnote that the banks in general seem to be talking much more aboutdifficulties they are having with the examination process and theimpact that is likely to have on their lending decisions. I mightalso point out that it seems to me reasonable to assume--and this wasalluded to in the Bluebook--that given some of the major mergers8/20/91throughout the country and particularly the one in our District, it'slikely that the enthusiasm with which these banks approach new andexisting business in the six-month period when they're puttingtogether their mergers will be considerably less.If I can turn to the national outlook, our forecast is notgreatly different from that in the Greenbook, if one assumes that thevalue of the dollar remains constant. I think that is a criticalassumption. In the near term I would assume that the main sources ofthe strength in the economy would be household outlays on such thingsas durable goods and also housing. Next year perhaps we can lookforward to something of a turnaround in business spending forequipment. Obviously in this forecast, as has been mentioned by manyothers and certainly by Mike Prell, there are both downside and upsiderisks. Clearly, the recent slowdown in M2 and concerns aboutfinancial fragility do raise the prospect and the risk that therecovery could turn out to be less than that in the Greenbook. But Ialso have to take into account the chance of a more typical post-recession pickup in expenditures. It wouldn't be the first time thatwe've been surprised by the strength of the recovery. While I'moptimistic about inflation and I think it will decline over the nextyear and a half, the recent behavior of wage costs is certainly aconcern. And those concerns were adequately expressed in theGreenbook. I might note in closing that we do have a model forecastwhere the dollar is treated endogenously. In light of what hashappened in the last 48 hours, the discussion of a lower dollardoesn't seem as relevant. But that forecast includes the possibilityof the dollar declining between now and the end of next year at a rateof about 15 percent. The impact on real growth in 1992 is verysubstantial; it adds more than a percent to growth and adds about 0.3of a percent to inflation. I have to admit that I am more comfortablewith the assumption of a constant dollar, but most of the models I'velooked at have a tendency to cause the dollar to decline somewhat.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. The Eleventh District continues to lag thenational economy. Therefore, it has weakened since the last meetingand is probably a drag on the national recovery at this point exceptthat one source of Eleventh District weakness, which is low naturalgas prices, is probably helping the national economy somewhat.Another source of weakness locally is the slowing in the building ofpetro-chemical plants in the Gulf Coast region. Geographically, theHouston area has accounted for 40 to 50 percent of the job growth inthe last year or so and that has now stagnated somewhat.Turning to our view of the national economy, the staff is nottoo worried about a double-dip, based on their review of past double-dips and the characteristics they had. They find that inventoryexplanations are largely present that are not relevant now. Also,they expect net exports to gain strength and there have been fiveconsecutive months now of a rising index of leading economicindicators. Recession in that context is fairly unprecedented. Thestaff is not as worried as I am about the recent decline in thebroader measures of the money supply. They tend to view it as afairly benign disintermediation process away from depositories intostocks, bonds, and other types of instruments. But I do believe it'simportant to get money back on track, regardless of the explanation-21-8/20/91for the slowdown and the decline. And in the context of the previousdiscussion, I believe that the will to do so is more important thanthe way or the method to do it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we're very, very close to thestaff, as we usually are, and maybe even closer this time thanordinarily. We'd be very happy if we got the outcome that they thinkis most likely, but from the standpoint of policy the relevantquestion is where the risks lie. I think the staff concludes as we dothat the risks probably are on the down side, when you think about theinsurance problems--and now we have the casualty insurance companieshit by hurricane Bob--the so-called credit crunch, and the weakness inthe aggregates. We ought to keep in mind some other things, too.There's always doubt when you're in a recession as to what it isthat's going to take you out of it. I remember that in every singleone we've had. Mike just enumerated three major factors that hadcaused the staff to think that maybe this forecast ought to be revisedslightly upward: the behavior of consumer expenditures, residentialconstruction, and net exports. The thing that worries us most of all,I think, is the behavior of payroll unemployment and employment. Wewent back and looked at the behavior of this for all the postwarupturns in the first three months following a trough. If you look atthat and compare the first estimate that we have now for the lastmonth, it really doesn't look very different from what we've had inthe other postwar upturns except in one case. So, this may not bequite as alarming as it looks on the surface. With these things inmind, I don't think it's time yet to push the panic button. But Ithink we have to be very, very alert to the risk to the near-termoutlook that is being posed by the behavior of the aggregates since wesimply can't explain by econometric models or otherwise all of thisweakness that we've seen in them. And that makes me worry somewhatthat monetary policy could have been tighter than we really meant itto be.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, as to the situation in New England,there certainly isn't anything new to report, at least of a favorable[nature]. Talking to directors and businessmen more broadly, there'san increased sense of pessimism that is definitely palpable and afeeling that the region is still deteriorating. While the pace of thedecline may be abating, there's certainly no sense of an upturn. Theonly bright spot for now is continued activity generated by mortgagerates and existing home sales and also by [housing] price adjustments.There is some slight improvement in new home construction. Given theinventory overload that we have, particularly in the condo market, itis going to be very interesting to find out just how many watersidecondominiums were fully damaged by the hurricane that went through! Ithink the insurance industry inspectors should be quite careful [indetermining] just what did cause the damage.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The only problem with that is thatthen the burden is on all your insurance companies.MR. SYRON. Exactly, which brings me to the next point. Interms of looking at local markets, the employment situation certainly-22-8/20/91in the life companies and in the property and casualty companies hascontributed further to this great feeling of pessimism, which is beingreflected in soft retail sales and also in continued concerns aboutinflows and tax revenues of state and local governments and what thatwill mean later on.As far as the U.S. economy goes, the concern that we have isthat there may be an asymmetry of risks in the forecast toward thedown side. There is information one can go through that would explainmuch of the softness in the Ms and that alone might not be a cause forconcern if the softness in the Ms wasn't happening in an environmentin which there seems to be increasing causes for concern about thereal sectors of the economy. Also, what has been referred to as[funds] moving out of banks into other areas, I think does have someimplication for credit flows. We do see continued concern aboutcredit availability. I recently have spoken to the chief executiveofficers and the chief financial officers of all of our large lifeinsurance companies and their standard reassurances suggest a thinveneer [covering] a sense of great concern; in a couple of cases it isalmost in the panic stage or very close to it. There is an enormouscaution in their lending and a great desire to increase liquidity.One very large company which is in both the life and property andcasualty businesses was saying that it wanted to be in a situationwithin a few months where it could liquify one-third of its portfoliovery quickly if it had to. It's not quite clear to me how that'sgoing to happen. I think many of the banks feel--and I think some ofthis is the result of over-reaction by some of the regulators--thatthere's a whole generation of commercial loan officers who may not beable to function in the future because they have been through suchtrauma in this whole aspect. It is too early to know the impact ofthe hurricane on the property and casualty companies but at thisstage, based on a few phone calls, it doesn't seem to be very great.We generally agree that the Greenbook forecast is the mostprobable outcome. But I think, as Mike said, the probabilitydistribution has widened, and I would guess the tail on the negativeside has increased somewhat. We're very dependent on a few thingsthat come back to confidence, including what happens in the autoindustry. And in this environment, the shocks that we have going oninternationally as well as domestically increase the concern on thenegative side. It's something for us to take into consideration inthe next [portion] of the meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, conditions in the Southeastpretty much parallel what is happening around the nation; the plusesand minuses in the national economy that Mike outlined are present inour [regional] economy as well. We are seeing some modest growth inretail sales along with some indications of increases in orders inmajor industries. Housing is picking up a little--at least housingstarts are. But I must say that there is a continuing sense ofpessimism among virtually all of the business people I talk to,including directors. They are really afraid now of another downturnor a double-dip. People generally are also very concerned about thebank mergers and other business consolidations that are moving alongso quickly and about the potential for unemployment in their ownsituations and among their families. It seems to me that business-23-8/20/91investment is virtually on hold for 1992 as a result of this pessimismamong business people.On the other hand, there are some positive signs. Forexample, industrial parts of the region appear to be a bit stronger; Iwouldn't say it's great, but it is a little better. Increased autoproduction has helped Tennessee; the Saturn plant there has picked upits production. The commercial construction area seems to have hitthe bottom, according to our contacts, but as we all know the vacancyrates are such that it's going to take a long time for that area toimprove, and we see no evidence that the improvement is acceleratingin any sense. We have budgetary restraints in virtually all of thestates in our District and that's leading to spending cuts. And thedepressed level of natural gas prices is causing cutbacks inproduction and layoffs in that area.The credit crunch continues to confuse me; I get differingreports from different people. But cutting through all of the chaff,I think creditworthy customers will be serviced by the banks. Thebanks, in fact, are out looking for good loans but they're not findingmuch demand. In summary, as far as the District is concerned, peoplekeep asking the questions: Where is the recovery? And if there is arecovery, why aren't business conditions better than they seem to be?On the national side, our forecast is very similar to theGreenbook, although we do show somewhat slower growth in the fourthquarter of this year and the first quarter of next year. And evenwith that slower growth, our inflation number is not quite asoptimistic as the staff's; we're in the range of 4 percent versus thestaff's 3 to 3-1/2 percent. For reasons that have been indicated byother people, I think the risks are clearly on the down side at themoment. Like other people, while I don't ordinarily pay a great dealof attention to M2, I think this persistence in its weakness istelling us something that we have to be very careful about. Certainlyif it continues to grow at these rates, we could have some seriousrepercussions. The financial sector also continues to concern me. Wehave news of financial stress constantly in the newspapers. Added tothat now are scandals as well in the insurance companies. And whileit's too early to tell, if the situation in the Soviet Union continuesto cause uncertainty, I think that is going to cut into consumerconfidence as well. Altogether, I think the risks are very clearly onthe down side and we need to take that into account a little laterthis morning.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, with regard to the national economy, I dothink the incoming data taken together are consistent with a modestrecovery of the type described in the Greenbook. I would add that I'malso a bit more encouraged about our prospects for disinflation assuggested in the Greenbook as well.There's not much going on in the District that would make medoubt this general kind of forecast--I suppose that's not the mostpositive way to put it--except for some signs of strain anddisappointment in some businesses that may have thought the recoverywas going to be a little stronger than it has to date. But if youlook at the other data, nonfarm employment in the District is up8/20/91relative to a year ago and the agricultural sector outside of thedairy industry is in pretty good shape. So, things seem to becontinuing to move along reasonably well. Having said that, as manyhave already commented, there are reasons to be concernednevertheless. Some comments have already been made about commercialreal estate. We know we had a drop there and values are in theprocess of adjusting. But it seems to me that the spillover there isperhaps even greater than I, at least, had anticipated--not only forthe financial sector and creditors in general, but for state and localgovernments on the revenue side. And those governments are alreadystressed. So, we're getting some restraint there in addition to allthe other factors that we can talk about. And assuming nothingterribly unusual comes out of the situation in Russia, we're gettingsome restraint from the Federal budget as well. So, when I add allthat up and couple it with the weakness in M2, I think there arereasons to be concerned as to whether this is going to play out inquite the positive way that the Greenbook would suggest.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I don't think there's anyquestion that the anecdotal side of things has gotten quite shakyagain. Some of that is because the typical CEO of a company neverreally believed his or her own economists or other economists in termsof the outlook, going back two or three months ago. And I think a lotof business executives have interpreted recent data to mean that theywere right and the economists were wrong. My own sense of thesituation is that while things are not as good as they would like themto be, they're not as bad as they think they are either. I believethe truth still lies somewhere in the middle. Now, having said that,and as someone who has been sensitive to what I'll call financialjitters for a long time, I do think it's fair to say that confidenceon the part of both consumers and business people is being furthershaken by the cumulative effects of financial jitters. And financialjitters, as some people have already said, take a lot of forms here.There are new questions about insurance company scandals, and consumerdelinquencies are rising. All of that is having a little impact, orperhaps even a lot, in an insidious way on confidence in general. Oneimplication is that the economy at large is probably even morevulnerable to any kind of financial surprise or shock, even thoughI've believed it has been vulnerable for a long time.There are also two things of a more intermediate nature thatworry me a bit relative to my earlier expectations. One has alreadybeen touched on and that is that while the inflation outlook in somesense is better--and certainly I still think we can break that so-called core inflation rate of 4 percent that we've been living withfor most of the decade--I, too, look at that second-quarter data onwages and so on with some concern. While I can readily see how we'llbreak the 4 percent, I'm not nearly as sure as I was some months agothat we can do a lot better than that. Indeed, it seems to me that inorder to do a lot better than that one of two things has to happen.One is that overall compensation has to bend down, and I'm getting alittle skeptical that that can bend down in any significant way exceptin the context of an economic outlook that would be horribleotherwise. Or, we have to get some real recovery [in] productivity,which doesn't look so [likely] either. So, again, I feel a little-25-8/20/91less sanguine than I did before about the intermediate-term outlookfor inflation.The other intermediate-term thing that has gotten worse isthe budgetary deficit outlook. If you look at these new estimates--whether you use OMB's or CBO's and whether you put the S&L [bailoutcosts] in or out--there really is a material deterioration in theintermediate outlook for the budgetary deficit. And that's a worry.Now, as Mike said, even against the backdrop of those short- andintermediate-term variables, one can conceive of a wide range ofpossible outcomes over the forecast period. I think the saving rateis a very large wild card; indeed, in the context of Bob Black'sremarks about employment and wages and so on in other cycles, one bigdifference is that in other cycles we didn't have a 3.5 percent savingrate like we have right now. It's a little hard to see how that allwill play out, especially if one is assuming implicitly that the rateof increase in nominal wages and compensation has to come down a lotand inflation is going to have to come down a lot. So, there's a bitof a conundrum there; again, I think the saving rate is a wild card.Just a brief word if I may, Mr. Chairman, on M2--not so muchas a policy indicator but more in terms of what it may be telling usabout the economy. In looking at all the work that the staff did, Icome away with the view that M2, at least in informational terms,seems to be saying two things. One is fairly benign, and that is thatthis reach-for-yield [behavior]--in a context in which people are alot more sophisticated and alternative outlets are a lot easier andcheaper to get at--is an important factor here. That, in and ofitself, is not something that I worry a lot about, if at all, inpolicy terms. But in looking at the staff's work, I come also to theview that the credit crunch is indeed a factor. Now, I can't quiteyet sort out the demand side versus supply side influences thatconstitute the credit crunch. But I do find very revealing the tablefollowing page 6 in the staff memorandum where they try to look at therelationship between core deposit growth, capital positions of banks,and loan positions of banks. That table to me, which admittedly onlycovers the very short period of June 3rd to August 5th, is a veryrevealing table. Again, it doesn't tell us whether it's demand orsupply, but I think it does tell us an awful lot: that this creditcrunch [phenomenon] is quite real and that that aspect of the way thedisintermediation process is working does matter for policy. As Isaid, the reach-for-yield [phenomenon], I think, is rather irrelevant.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, this does suggest supply as therelevant issue.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm not sure I feel I can go quitethat far. Clearly, it says that supply is at work here.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's what the matrix is tryingto suggest.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, it clearly says that, butthere are ways in which demand forces could also be producing at leastsome of this result. Certainly, I don't think one can say it's 100percent supply. But to me it's a very revealing table and, unlike thereach-for-yield phenomenon, does have some policy implications--thoughnot in terms of whether M2 should be used as a target. That's another-26-8/20/91issue altogether. If anything, it says M2 shouldn't be used as atarget; but I don't want to get into that debate. What it does say tome in the context of these other considerations, and in particular theemphasis on financial jitters, is that while there is a broad range[of risks, they are mostly] on the down side. Having said that, Ithink we're probably okay in terms of Mike's forecast or somethinglike it. But the cumulative [impact of] all this financial stuff is areal overhang on the whole outlook.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to theGreenbook forecast, our staff forecast is very close to it butcontinues to be, as it has in the past, a bit weaker in the latterhalf of '91 and therefore all of '91 and a little stronger in '92; itis really a shift, I think, of some of the component parts of theforecast. So, the Greenbook forecast, as far as I'm concerned atleast, looks to be the most likely outcome, and I think that the risksare basically balanced on either side at this point and that there'snot a greater risk on one side than the other. As a matter of fact,we took a look at the double-dip scenario, which Bob McTeer mentionedbefore, and we could not see anything that resembled what thehistorical experience has been on double-dips. So, we believe thatthe projection for continued slow growth over the next six quarters isthe most likely outcome.With respect to conditions in the District, the economy seemsto be slowing somewhat from what was observed before. It is due to astalling in the [production of] natural grains in the agriculturalsector and the sluggish energy and manufacturing sectors. We'reprojecting somewhat weaker export markets. And now this new event hastaken place. You will recall that the President did agree to provide$900 million of export guarantees to the Soviet Union; that has beenput on hold as I understand it or has been or will be withdrawn,depending upon the [political] outcome in the Soviet Union. If thatis the case, then the crop prices that we're concerned about,particularly corn, would be weakened somewhat simply because themarket has been diminished. And that's notwithstanding the droughtconditions that we still have; that may not be quite as broadly spreadas in the Chicago District, but it is nonetheless real; it is spotty,and its [impact in terms of] diminishing crops is uncertain. At theDistrict automobile manufacturing plants, production remains weak,although each of them has come forth with a increased productionschedule starting in September. For example, in the Kansas City area,a second shift will be put back to work in a GM plant that has been onlayoff now for six to eight months. The outlook for constructionactivity in the District continues to improve, mostly because of gainsin residential and the non-building contract awards; the latterinclude infrastructure improvements on the table now for bidding,which will be concluded over the upcoming period. And despite arecent modest increase in the number of active drilling rigs in theDistrict, energy activity remains sluggish and well below the level ofa year ago. That's largely because of the uncertainty in the cost ofimported crude, and there's a very weak market in natural gas. So,there's not much to encourage somebody to do any exploratorydevelopment or drilling at the moment.-27-8/20/91With regard to the agricultural financial sector, the loan-to-deposit ratio in those banks is only at about the 52 percent level.They're looking for loans. In the whole District the loan-to-depositratio is at fairly low levels. There just is not the demand; there'splenty of liquidity, apparently. Lastly, our quarterly agriculturalsurvey indicates that land prices have stabilized after coming offvery low levels over the past two to three years. Prices are nowabout 35 percent higher than they were at that low; we had seencontinued increases in agricultural land prices until this pastquarter, when they essentially flattened out.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. What I sense around the table is that most of usare still keeping the faith about a modest recovery, but we haveincreased doubts about it and see more downside risk. I certainlyagree with that. What one would like to see at this point is moreconvincing signs of a cumulative upturn--self-feeding kinds of factorsin the economy. Yet in every one of those critical junctures, I thinkcaution and doubt are diluting their effect. What we count on is theinventory kick and yet what we find there is a great deal of caution.People are more into a "just-in-time" kind of inventory policy. We'restill getting liquidation; surely, at some point we will getaccumulation but it just doesn't seem to have the potential thrust tothe economy that one might expect. At the next juncture, at thehiring juncture in this linkage, we see the same kind of caution.Most of the jobs have been created in the services sector in recentyears and we're already beginning to see much more caution and layoffsin that sector. The next linkage is the consumer spending area; wesee caution there. A linkage further out is investment. I must sayin talking with the business community that I hear more and more talkthat '92 is going to be an extension of '91, and there's more cautionthere. So, what bothers me about this emerging recovery is that Ijust don't sense that these cumulative self-feeding forces are goingto have the [usual] impact. Add on the financial fragility andperhaps that's part of the explanation. So, I share the view thatwhile a modest recovery is still likely, the downside risks haveincreased significantly in recent weeks. Also, whenever you see moredownside risk I think you have to ask yourself what the consequencesare. And while I don't think a double-dip is likely, I think that avery slow recovery or something that approaches a double-dip reallycould have some major consequences on getting the economy goingbecause basic confidence is in need of healing with these financialfragilities. So, I think we're in a situation now where the risks arefairly significant and we have to deal with them.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I just ask: How do you reconcilethat now with the continued strength in your manufacturing survey?MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think what that survey is showing is thesame thing that we're seeing in industrial production. A lot of thatseems to be auto-related and auto supply. I find that we get thosesurvey results--and they are very accurate if you look at them overthe last 20 years--and yet if you talk to people who run the companiesyou would get a different story. I find it difficult to reconcilethat. That survey shows more optimism than any other anecdotalinformation I'm picking up. I can understand that early on in arecovery but that survey is in its fifth month now of showing some-28-8/20/91increases, which is consistent with the national industrial production[data]. But it doesn't fit the mood that one senses. It doesn'ttranslate into hiring, for example, and it's not translating intoimproved capital spending plans.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Have you matched the actual report thatyou get against the rhetoric of the individual who is associated withthat [company]?MR. BOEHNE. Well, I haven't gone back and done that detaileda look. We have called back a number of these companies to verify thenumbers. And, you know, it is a diffusion index; it doesn't actuallymeasure the level of output. It just is another example of this gapbetween people who are running firms, and--. I think Jerry may havesaid it right: Things are not as bad as the business community thinksthey are, but they're probably not as optimistic as their economistsare forecasting things are going to be.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. On this issue of concerns about the economy, wedo pick up the same concerns when talking with business people. Butwhen one pokes at their order books and asks them what is going on,really it's a matter of perception in that they [anticipated] theywere going to get a stronger kick than they have gotten and theirorders are either flat or up only marginally. So there is this lackof fulfillment of their expectations about what a recovery is allabout. There are a couple of points to make about that. I didn'tlook at the numbers, but I suspect that going into a recovery in pastcycles there was a lot more monetary stimulus in place, whichultimately led to some problems. So, I would tend to argue that thisought to be the kind of recovery one should have rather than the otherkind. In terms of the risks that the economy is facing, I prefer tolook at it the other way around: Namely, that a major mistake--ifthere's one being made or the risk of one being made--is thatinflation expectations are too high relative to the policy that we'vebeen delivering. And it's crucial right now in the [wage and price]setting processes that people recognize the kind of policy that we'vedelivered because if they don't and they set prices too high, thenanother adjustment will have to be made. People's [sales]expectations won't be fulfilled in terms of their price increases.And it seems to me that the only way to convince people, given that wedon't tie ourselves more explicitly to a price level target, is simplyto wait it out. The problem with waiting it out for better numbers--and I'm confident that we're going to get those because I think we'veput a policy in place that will generate a lower rate of inflation inthe near term--is that we're in the business of trying to changeexpectations and get people to adjust their price setting to reflectthe policy we've delivered. Yet we could be in a position I think, atleast I hope, of trying to boost monetary growth at the same time.So, this is a long-winded way of getting back to the idea that weprobably ought to tie ourselves to multi-year targets and they oughtto be associated with the price level so we don't end up in thiscircumstance again.The Fourth District hasn't changed much. [Business activity]didn't go down a lot and is not coming back very strongly. Theconsumer side is picking up a little. The capital goods side is-29-8/20/91rather mixed; some people feel they're at the bottom; others showslight improvements in their order books. Overall, the District isholding up pretty well because it didn't go down much.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. The numbers for our District show a littledifferent pattern. These would be for the three-month period ended inJune, so they're somewhat dated. But this is the first time we'veshown overall employment declines in recent months. Manufacturinghasn't really changed much; it has been declining slightly. What hashappened is that we haven't had the offsets on the non-manufacturingside. There is particular weakness in mining and construction. Inmining it has to do with the Clean Air Act and the high sulfur coaldeposits in Illinois and Kentucky; in construction, it's a reflectionof [the nationwide slump that] we're all familiar with. I will say,though, that contracts in both residential and nonresidentialconstruction show growth, so I think there's some improvement in storedown the road there. Just one piece of anecdotal information on thisinventory story: a large cottongrower, and he mentioned that the consumption of cotton in the textileindustry is at the highest rate in 15 years. Mills are running flatout 7 days a weeks and it's basically--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [That's] the reason the crop is so huge;I gather they've got the supply to use.MR. MELZER. Right. But the other comment he made is thatthe inventories have been run down to a [low] level. His instinct,anyway, is that we'll be seeing a turnaround in the inventorysituation in that particular industry.On a more general note, having listened to all thecommentary, I think we have to caution ourselves at this point not toget whipsawed too much by the incoming data. We're all familiar withthe lags in policy, and this is going to be a time when expectationsare going to be very volatile. And at least in terms of how I look atpolicy, I don't think M2 is a very good indicator of the thrust ofpolicy; I think we have to look at something narrower. On that basisthe thrust of policy has continued to increase throughout this year.We just have to bear in mind, for example, that the growth rate of M1over the course of 1991 has accelerated. I certainly can't pretend totell you whether a 7-1/2 percent growth rate in Ml is too muchstimulus. I'm just saying if we look at that as an indicator of thethrust of policy, we've been pumping more and more in. And at somepoint we have to have the confidence that the actions we've taken aregoing to have the desired effect and not [let ourselves] get whipsawedby incoming data on the real economy. To me that's a very dangerousguide for what monetary policy ought to be.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I'm having trouble getting used toa kind of newfound optimism, and I don't quite understand why I shouldbe optimistic when the majority seem not to be. I suppose there aretwo reasons. One is that I had the lowest forecast for real growthamong the Committee members; and I had the thought that given whereMike [Prell] is now I'd almost be willing to meet him half way. So,-30-8/20/91maybe I had a lower forecast to begin with for '91. The second reasonmay be more strange, and that is that I've been in Colorado, andColorado seems quite different than it has been for many years duringits very long recession. When I look in Colorado, I see runways andrunways and runways being built; I've never seen so many runways underconstruction--both in Colorado Springs and Denver. But there's a newatmosphere there. And it shows some of the ways that our systemworks. When house values are where they are in a place like ColoradoSprings compared to California, people start to move from Californiato Colorado Springs. The kind of values there are just ratherunbelievable. And there's certainly a definite pickup. But that'stoo minor a factor to explain much about the U.S. economy.What is it, then, that gives me more optimism? And this isan optimism for 1992 maybe more so than for 1991. The optimism, Iguess, comes from a reluctant realization that I'm closer to TomMelzer in regard to M2 than I am to Lee Hoskins. I'm just not asworried as I was earlier about those M2 numbers. Don's paper was anexcellent paper; it was very helpful to me to mull over what is goingon in M2. And I think there's a realization that M2 is both theoutcome as well as the cause. It just seems to me that M2 probably isnot going to respond as much as the members of the Committee wouldlike. But it may not have much to do with the outcome in the realeconomy.Maybe my optimism is also due to the fact that the realestate price event may be almost over and that should bode well forthe banking system, which I see recovering and which I think will giveus a different result in 1992. But at the same time commodity pricescontinue to be pretty weak and rather inconsistent with a strongrecovery. So, I think that means we should take a little off of ourestimates for the third quarter. But if the third-quarter estimatesare a little softer, that seems to me an environment in which maybewhat has happened to long-term bond prices can continue if theCommittee is willing to be patient. That is, if we continue to getthrough this quarter and into the next and the PPI numbers areconsistent with what commodity prices are showing, then it seems to methat with patience we may have opportunities for additional, perhapsminor, steps to be taken in time, and long bond prices would respondas favorably as they did in this last move. Now, we not only havelong bond prices for Treasuries down to 8.10 percent but we've hadeven more of a gain in mortgage-backed securities; and those spreadsover Treasuries are narrowing considerably. And it seems to me thatthat bodes well for the housing recovery--which is a very gradualrecovery, but I think it still adds quarter-to-quarter to the kind ofresults that we want to see.The final reason for my optimism is optimism with regard tothe net export picture. It seems to me that as Mexico moves more to amarket-system economy with more sound monetary policy it earns theright to be a capital importer and, indeed, it is becoming a capitalimporter. Policies they have in place will earn them an increasingright to be a capital importer, which will be very helpful to them intheir development. But I see also throughout Latin America and SouthAmerica a desire to follow that mode. And if these countries becomethe capital importers that I expect them to become because of improvedmonetary and fiscal policies, then it seems to me that that bodes-31-8/20/91better for our export industries. So, I look for a somewhat betteroutcome there than even the staff has forecast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I had a great temptation just toassociate myself completely with President Corrigan's remarks, but Ican't resist the opportunity to make a few additional comments.Obviously, the United States is probably less susceptible to whateverthe events in the Soviet Union will bring forth than other countries.At this stage it's very difficult to quantify that, but it certainlymuddies the crystal ball a little regardless. In spite of theseglamorous mergers that were recently announced and in spite of thefact that I share Governor Angell's view that the banking system willlook better in the fourth quarter and going into next year, I believeit is still fragile and still very defensive in its attitude. I thinkthere will be further large failures and that the effect of that couldbe to make the others, the survivors, even more defensive than theycurrently are. Business profits remain very poor; they'redisappointing. And I think restructuring among business firms willcontinue in order to improve their ability to handle debt morecomfortably. And that's hardly the climate for an improved outlookfor business fixed investment.I'm still convinced that the basic problem with the pace ofrecovery and the sustainability of recovery is one of confidencerather than the level of interest rates. That is to say, I believeconsumer confidence is reining in the growth in retail sales. I thinkthat business confidence is responsible for the slack demand forbusiness credit. And lender confidence is responsible for the lack ofaggressive lending on the part of the banking system. The creditcrunch, whether it is due to a reluctance to lend or a reluctance toborrow, is a reality. And it's the greatest threat to the recovery,which I believe is clearly underway at this stage of the game. Ithink banks are enjoying their new margins and I think they intend toenjoy those new margins rather than lower rates in order to attractmore business, even if policy is eased further. If the banks arereluctant lenders and are well stocked with securities, they are notgoing to be very competitive in bidding for [retail] time deposits,and that may account for some of the recent dynamics or lack ofdynamics in M2. The M2 phenomenon is not well enough understood topersuade me that it is terribly important to this whole equation andthat' its current behavior would justify further policy accommodation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Coming into this weekend I [would have] agreedwith much of what has been said around here. We had a pretty weakrecovery, one with clear upward impetus in the industrial sector andin residential housing, but one that in some sense had not taken rootin the way that Ed Boehne described with his cumulative reinforcingprocess and one characterized by this dissonance between the anecdotaldata and the industrial production data. If you think of the dynamicsof this recovery, you can understand some of this dissonance becauseif you talk to a manufacturing plant executive, he or she isincreasing production not because sales have jumped but really becauseinventory is too lean. At some stage the cessation of inventoryliquidation is going to cause manufacturers to start increasing-32-8/20/91production even though sales haven't improved very much. That's notlikely to make that executive feel very comfortable. In spite of thefact that the industrial production numbers are going to look betterand are going to give thrust to the economy, that increase inproduction is not responding to an immediate, visible upturn in sales.And I think we're not likely to get good anecdotal data in spite ofthe fact that the industrial production numbers show that [production]is going on.The second stage, of course, is that the higher productionshould give rise to higher income and then to higher sales and thenthese folks should cheer us some. It's pretty clear from theanecdotal data that there's not a lot of evidence that the secondstage, which I would consider the reinforcing self-feeding process, isreally taking hold. So, there is reason for concern. The argumentthat the industrial production numbers indicate that things are goingpretty well is easy to make from our marble enclave here in Washingtonand harder to make if you're on the front line. But this is the toneI would currently whistle while walking through this graveyard.[Laughter] My view is that we're not far off track; we may bemarginally off track. But there is concern about this process takingroot. There's also concern about the waves of bad news that hiteveryone about the financial system; even the BCCI and SolomonBrothers publicity contributes to the climate, though it probablydoesn't have much of an impact on too many people. We continue tohave weak credit growth. Money growth has been weak for over a year.I wouldn't be concerned by 3-1/2 percent M2 growth at this stage. Butit seems to me that in the last couple of months the bottom has reallyfallen out and I am concerned about that rapid deceleration; even Mldecelerated pretty dramatically in July. I think Don's analysis didsuggest that money matters, and I believe the central bank should takeresponsibility. I agree with Jerry that a prime concern is the supplyside or the intermediation side. You can add the insurance companiesto the list of sources of finance that are not likely to be helpful tobelow-investment-grade businesses. So, there continue to be concerns--in my mind concerns that perhaps [extend] a bit [beyond] the realeconomy.Now, when you layer this weekend's events in the Soviet Unionon top of this, it seems to me that those events are also clearlycontractionary. When I go down my list of channels of influence, wehave the possibility of reduced confidence by consumers andbusinesses. The Iraqi invasion last August was met by a historicallylarge collapse in consumer confidence. [The current situation] is abit different, but at least at the margin it can affect confidence,which can affect spending by consumers on durables and capitalspending by businesses. It's going to have to hold the possibilityfor lowering export growth, as the European economies are affected.We've already seen a higher dollar--maybe a little less higher todaythan it was yesterday--and this again is a contractionary factor.[There may be] higher oil prices with the possibility of a reductionin Soviet supply; and a marginally higher long-term rate, which we sawat the end of the day yesterday, is a response to increaseduncertainty. The world is a riskier place to invest long term for 30years than it was at the beginning of the weekend and there are moreincentives to stay short and liquid and there may be marginally lowerstock prices as well. Defense spending might be a plus; it's also-33-8/20/91true that the political process involved in increasing defensespending has some risks of its own to the budget deal.When I total up this list, it's clearly contractionary onvirtually every component. But compared to the Iraqi invasion, theevent is clearly a lot less dramatic in virtually every component. Inconfidence the Iraqi event confronted Americans with the immediateprospect of the commitment of U.S. troops and also revived thememories of the oil shocks of the '70s. The Iraqi event also producedmuch more dramatic increases in oil prices, in the long bond rate, anda much larger decrease in stock prices. Though the events of theweekend are clearly contractionary, their cumulative weight addsprobably only marginally to the outlook; it is more likely to producea downward deflection in the slope of the recovery rather than tippingthe economy into recession as the Iraqi affair did. The resilience ofthe financial markets in absorbing this shock yesterday is consistentwith this assessment. Of course, when I say it's going to deflect theslope of the recovery, I have to admit we don't have much slope towork with, and I think it does heighten some of the downside risks.The real risk is that this is only the assessment of act one, and thisis not likely to be a one-act play. Indeed, this is only thebeginning. The episode is not over and we're virtually guaranteed tohave future shocks as the situation is resolved or at leaststabilized. When you consider the critical condition of the Sovieteconomy, the possibility of civil war, the still formidable militarystrength of the Soviets both in conventional forces and with 30,000nuclear devices, it's pretty clear that this has the potential todeteriorate into a situation which is at least as damaging to oureconomy as the Iraqi war.So, from the [perspective of a] first analysis, these eventsseem clearly but only marginally contractionary. It does has thepotential for more serious consequences. When we add it all up, Ithink we have a pretty problematic situation to begin with and thisadds somewhat to the downside risks and increases the tail of therisks on the down side. It is worth noting, as I mentioned, that themarkets over here at least responded quite well to the first roundyesterday. It's not clear the markets need our help at all inresponding to this. As people mentioned, long rates also have comedown almost 50 basis points in 2 months in the face of good but by nomeans very impressive inflation numbers and this should help theeconomy. We made a move a couple of weeks ago, which should alsohelp. But as Governor LaWare noted, it has yet to dislodge the primerate. It could be that this event might actually increase the growthof M2 by increasing the demand for liquidity, but I would not be anysurer how to interpret that than I am the current improved situation.The big factor is that events are just beginning to unfoldand it's very important to assess the shape and pattern of events asthey start unfolding very rapidly. I don't think we should wait untilwe have hard evidence of a faltering economy before we consideranother move, given the lags involved. We have to anticipate; itwould be nice to get ahead of some of these contractionary forces.But I think it will be most useful to see the early returns out ofthis episode: the confidence surveys, the new orders for capitalgoods surveys, the stock market behavior, and the money figures aswell. There's certainly a lot of noise in the system now. And eventhough I do feel that the downside risks have been marginally-34-8/20/91 -35-increased and the potential for larger problems has been increasedpretty substantially, I think it's useful to wait until the noisesettles down a little and then anything we decide to do might be moreclearly heard.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, it has all been said and thehour is getting late. I would just add one quick thought. Icertainly share all of the downside concerns that have been expressedaround this table this morning and all of the nervousness not onlybecause I get it from this group but from contacts outside as well.But I do think it's a little early to make any judgments. While we'regetting an awful lot of anecdotal evidence that is of great concern--and that needs to be given a lot of attention--I would also try tokeep in mind that we have a good many economic series that arebeginning to come along fairly well. Some pretty slow but pretty firmtrends are beginning to fall in place in industrial production,housing, retail sales, the purchasing managers survey, and others.And certainly all of economic history and the thrust of analysis willtell us that a double-dip is unlikely. Obviously, it could occur, butit appears unlikely. As I try to formulate my own thinking, I keep inmind Tom Melzer's caution of a few minutes ago that we not getwhipsawed by the data. We also have to be careful that we don't getwhipsawed too quickly by the anecdotal information. So, I think it'sperhaps a time to be a little cautious and see what emerges, along thelines that David just summarized.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much. I'm informed thatcoffee has arrived. It's probably cold now![Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Military forces have surrounded theParliament] building [in Moscow], but there are also 150,000 peoplearound the building and the crowd is growing. This is a confrontationthat is obviously growing [unintelligible]. The stock market, whichwas up over 30 points, is now up 8; it's still up. It's anextraordinary historic event in the process of occurring. I hope wecan finish up so we can go and participate.SPEAKER(?). Or watch.MR. BLACK. I want to be a spectator, not a participant.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Don Kohn.MR. KOHN. In that context, Mr. Chairman, it's awfullydifficult to talk about M2, but I thought I'd do it anyhow. It's notperhaps at the top of everyone's mind right now. [Statement--seeAppendix].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Lee.MR. HOSKINS. I have two questions for you, Don. One is onthe P* chart. Have you run that out any further in terms of assuminga monetary growth rate in the middle of the target range and seeingwhat you would get for the inflation rate in 1993?8/20/91MR. KOHN. Not since the July Bluebook.MR. HOSKINS. We did it and it comes out to be 1-1/2 percent.MR. KOHN. Since it's already down in the 2 percent areathere is not--MR. HOSKINS. But my second question to you is: Do you haveany sense of what kind of deviation from trend growth in M2 for aperiod of time has an impact on the economy?MR. KOHN. Well, we tried to look at that in a sort ofreduced form way through the various ranges of causality tests in theVAR models. In the case of the more extended VAR model it had aneffect but a fairly small one. That is, once you took account ofinterest rates and stock prices and so forth, a 1 percent deviation ofM2 took about 1/4 point off of real growth for the next year and ahalf or so. So, there was an effect in that model, anyhow; it wasfractional. But even taking account of all those other financialvariables, there was a significant relationship between M2 leadingincome.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Don? If not,let me get started on the discussion. Incidently, one of the problemsI think we're having is that when a recession is over, by definition,the economy is at the lowest point in a cycle and it feels awful. Theanecdotal reports we're getting from a lot of people are a reflectionof the fact that the levels of orders, activity, etc. areexceptionally low. It's very interesting to get a sense [of theviews] in the political realm; there is a confusion as to whether "therecession ends" means the receding has come to an end or that theeconomy is back up to normal. I think the overwhelming evidence isthat it's the latter [view] that we run into. So, we observedifferent views, as Jerry points out, between economists andeconomists' bosses. I think we're all talking about different things,basically, and that's an issue that is going to continue to confrontus.The issue that concerns me most--the one that Jerry alsoraised with respect to the saving linkage--means in effect that thereis a personal consumption expenditure restraint on this expansion.And although residential construction is obviously moving moderately,nonresidential is not; capital expenditures are not; and export demandis moving but not exceptionally. So, the whole dynamics of a recoverybasically falls on the inventory dynamics. There what we are clearlyseeing is something that in a way is unusual. With the measured rateof [inventory] liquidation that we are getting--assuming the numbersare correct--one would expect to begin to see the historic dynamicsstart to emerge here. The way it has tended to run historically isthat as liquidation begins to ease and production moves up toconsumption, the lead times on the deliveries of materials begin tostretch out as we begin to get some squeeze on [production]facilities. And the increase in lead times has created an increaseddesire for inventories on the part of the purchasing managers. Theystart to increase their orders to reach their new inventory goals,which in turn puts still greater pressure on production facilities,which in turn is what that self-feeding process from the inventoryside is all about. However, if we look at the lead times in the-36-8/20/91National Association of Purchasing Managers [survey], it's prettyclear that for production materials especially it is dead, flat. Itactually has been easing down recently. And it is consistent with thenotion that "just-in-time" has really taken over the whole inventoryprocess. But unless and until we begin to see some of that pressureemerging and the dynamics of new orders beginning to move in thehistoric pattern, we will have this very extraordinary concern thatthis [recovery] may stall on the final demand side before the dynamicstake hold. I doubt that that's going to happen; there is no reason tosuggest that. As Governor Angell points out, the commodity prices aresoft and are in fact reflecting this very process, but they're notcollapsing; indeed, the steel scrap price has even gone up a littleand that, as Wayne knows, is my favorite commodity price. There aregood reasons for that. It actually has been telling us a great dealabout the durable goods part of the system. In any event, while I dothink that the odds still strongly favor the ignition of the dynamicsand the acceleration [of the expansion] and, indeed, the likelihood isthat the next Greenbook forecast will be revised up, the riskstructure has nevertheless clearly increased.So, while there is clearly no policy purpose that I can seein moving rates lower immediately, I would suggest nonetheless thatwith a directive without change--the "B" version--we ought to beasymmetric toward ease with the recognition that if events continue todeteriorate, we would move. But we ought to be careful to make surethat that is in fact what is going on and not be whipsawed by thestatistics as they go back and forth. At the moment it is verydifficult to make the case that the economy is falling back into adouble-dip recession. The recovery is slow, sluggish, andfrustrating, but it is still plus. And it could very well become asignificantly larger plus than any of us senses, certainly from theanecdotal evidence.If we get to the point where the evidence suggests thatfurther easing might be necessary, I suspect that would require adiscount rate move. I think we'd have to be prepared to do that ifevents move in an adverse direction. In any case, I would like to puton the table as a suggestion that we adopt variant "B" asymmetrictoward ease. And frankly, I would prefer version II of the text thatDon suggested [in the Bluebook] with respect to the language of howthe money supply concerns are evolving and are affecting policy asthey very obviously are. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your conclusions andprescription, which is "B" asymmetric toward ease. On the margin Iwould be reasonably comfortable going to version II in the currentcircumstances. I must say that in a lot of other circumstances Iwould have a concern about moving the aggregates up to that level ofprominence. But given the weight that has been assigned to theaggregates by many in the public arena and in the markets, I thinkit's worth doing. My concurrence with your view is based on thenotion that it's not just an immediate double-dip that is my concern;I'm really concerned about a prolonged period of weaknesscharacterized by no growth or very slow growth rather than a double-dip and the potential impact on the financial system. That could leadus potentially to a situation that, unlike the forecast, causes adownturn later on that would lead us to have to take moves that are-37-8/20/91inconsistent with our longer-term objectives. So, I think less now isbetter than more later.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Mr. Chairman, I can live with your suggestion.I would prefer to move now--not because I'm so wedded to M2 that I'lllive and die with it, but because it's the instrument that we've beenusing. In terms of our targeting, it's the one we've been telling themarket that we were going to deliver on, and we're running the risk offalling outside the target range. It also seems to me to be theaggregate that better affects the future. I don't know what we can doabout the economy today or tomorrow; I don't think we can do much.But we can do something about 1992. And if we've erred and M2 comesback, then I'm perfectly prepared to reverse course. But I judgepolicy essentially by rates of change in the monetary aggregates, andwe're deviating from trend [M2 growth by] perhaps as much as 2percentage points. What we think we know about that is that it'sgoing to slow the economy--unnecessarily, I think--in 1992. So, Iwould urge you to move sooner rather than later.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, in most cases I would agree withLee, but I think there are some special factors at work here. So, Iwould buy all three of your recommendations--"B," asymmetry towardease, and version II.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I would agree with yourrecommendation on alternative B. It does seem clear that the economyis likely to undergo a moderate recovery and that--also similar to theGreenbook forecast--we'll see modest gains with regard to inflation.However, I do feel that there are risks on both sides of the forecastand I'm not so sure that they're all that unbalanced. So, if I had apreference, it would be for symmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I agree with the "B"recommendation. Like President Parry, I would prefer the symmetriclanguage. I guess I'm not persuaded that we have enough certaintyabout the behavior of M2 to think that we can push the button and makeit happen. I don't expect that the projection on the growth levelsunder the different scenarios is necessarily going to happen just thatway. So, I would prefer "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman. Itseems to me that whatever the explanation for M2 may be--and I don'tknow that we'll ever have a fully satisfactory one--this is not thetime to let it either fall below the target path or deviate verysignificantly from its performance over the last four years or so.So, I think we should pay some attention to it. And we probablyshould go with the language in version II, giving M2 somewhat greaterprominence in these circumstances, which I think is appropriate.-38-8/20/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your recommendationon "B," and the version II [language] is okay. I'd have a slightpreference for symmetric language but with you at the switch I don'tsee that the meaning is any different. [Laughter]I would like to suggest that what we're going through hereis, of course, painful. But it's less painful to me than what Iconsidered to be of some possibility six months ago, which was thatwe'd be through this event and back out and never get the rate ofinflation down. It just seems to me that we do have to have a littlepatience here. I think we're entering a period in which we're makingmore progress toward price stability than during any of the periodthat I've been here. And there's so much joy in that to me that I'mable in a sense to endure a little of the agony. But that doesn'tmean that I want it to continue into another year. I'm very open tothe Chairman's suggestion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, given the risks as I see them--Ithink I heard some comments of the same nature around the table--Iwould prefer to do a bit more now. But having said that, I find yourrecommendation entirely acceptable: namely, alternative "B" withversion II language. [Nevertheless], I hope it would not take theaccumulation of an awful lot of negative data before we make a move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How would you go on the directivelanguage version?MR. KEEHN. Version II.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I certainly concur with your "B"asymmetric toward ease recommendation, but I would prefer the languagein version I. I don't want to quarrel about it; I'm not going to vote"no" over it. But in the light of our long inertia, as we discussedearlier this morning, and the factors that we've discussed around thistable that surround M2, the situation just doesn't seem to me of anature that it would call for a departure [from wording] that we havebeen using for a long, long time. So, I would prefer staying withversion I but can accept version II.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think one can make a fairlypersuasive case for easing now. I would make it more on the basis ofa boost to confidence and getting a little ahead of the risk and alsowith some element of M2. But having said that, I don't think it's acompelling argument, and I would be satisfied with the prescriptionyou have outlined, which would be "B" asymmetrical. I have a slightpreference for version I, but I can certainly live with version II.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.-39-8/20/91MR. MELZER. I prefer "B" symmetric, but were I voting Icould certainly live with what you suggested. With respect to thelanguage, let me just raise a question. It's possible that M2'sbehavior has nothing to do with what the real economy may be doing,and I question how we would be reacting to it. Let's say that we'resitting here a month from now and M2 is still not performing and we'remuch more comfortable about what we see unfolding anecdotally on thereal side; I think that language could trap us. I'd be much morecomfortable if, when we refer to the monetary aggregates, we werereferring to them very broadly--in other words, including Ml. I thinkwe're getting ourselves into a trap in terms of too much focus on M2and M3, which we can't directly control. We would have much moreopportunity to keep ourselves out of a corner that we may be paintingourselves into if we thought about M1 a bit. I'm not saying we shouldtarget Ml; but if we thought about it a little more, it might helpkeep us from getting painted into that corner. So, for that reasonand because I presume we're not really looking at Ml, I'd favorversion I in the language; I don't want to be painted into thatcorner.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I think there is a legitimate case for making amove now, but perhaps there's a somewhat more persuasive case to stayasymmetric toward ease and assess the impact of the last move. Thelower long rates may have some impact, and if we can get some returnsfrom them as events unfold, our moves may have a bit more impact lateron. So, I would support asymmety toward ease, although it seems to methe way things are shaping up that the probability is pretty high thatwe will have to move again. I would also marginally prefer version I,under the same logic that Governor Kelley and Tom Melzer mentioned.We have a strong tradition of no change in this directive, as youpointed out. But it does reduce our flexibility marginally. I couldeasily live with version II, but I would have a marginal preferencefor version I.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "B" asymmetric is okay with me. Onthe language, I seem to remember that at the end of the last meeting Isaid something along the lines of "The worst thing I can think of insome sense is an economy that appears to be recovering and M2 is deadin the water." And that's what we've got. I don't trust M2 and Itrust it less today than I did six weeks ago. For that reason, Iwould favor version I. I think Tommy's point about getting trapped bythat is a concern.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's the obvious problem. PresidentMcTeer.MR. MCTEER. I have no problem with your recommendation. Iwould have a slight preference for alternative A and version II,primarily because I think the economy could use some lower interestrates. And if we can believe the menu that has been presented beforeus, we have an opportunity here to get some lower interest rates withvery little acceleration of money growth rates. If we have a choicelike that, I don't think we ought to turn it down. But your-40-8/20/91recommendation would be fine and I would urge you to use yourasymmetry quickly.MR. MELZER. Like Wayne did. [Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think your recommendation makes sense.I came to this meeting, before the Russian developments, thinking thatwe ought to ease now; but there is something to be said for waiting.But I wouldn't be overly patient about using the asymmetry. I have aslight preference for version II but not a huge one.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. I would opt for "B" with a symmetric directive,given the fact that you have the authority under the procedures tomove without consultation of the Committee. I would marginally favorversion II.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, after hearing Mike and Tom, Ithink I would really prefer version I.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I want to split the vote because Ithink that's an important difference. What we'll do is voteseparately on the language because, as I read it, we have a fairlysubstantial consensus on alternative "B" asymmetric but not on whichversion of the language. And I think it would be best if we votedseparately.MR. ANGELL. Do you want a recorded vote in the minutes, Mr.Chairman?MR. KOHN. Why don't you just have a show of hands orsomething?MR. ANGELL. Why don't we just recount?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What's wrong with having a recordedvote?MR. KOHN. Because then people who dissent may have to writedissents!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, good enough. [Laughter]MR. KOHN. More accurately, the Secretariat would have towrite dissents for people.MR. BERNARD(?) I could live with a dissent or two.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Since he has the official scorekeeping,I can [check] the score. I have: Corrigan I; Angell I; Black II,Forrestal I; Keehn II; Kelley I; LaWare--MR. LAWARE. I.-41-8/20/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mullins I; Parry--MR. PARRY. II.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is very slightly in favor ofversion I, so I would propose for a vote alternative "B" asymmetrictoward ease and version I with respect to the language. Could youread that?MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. Depending upon progress towardprice stability, trends in economic activity, the behavior of themonetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and domesticfinancial markets, somewhat greater reserve restraint might orsomewhat lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in theintermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expectedto be consistent with a resumption of growth of M2 and M3 in the weeksahead; but in view of the decline already posted since June, theCommittee anticipates that M2 would be little changed and M3 would bedown about"--do you want 1-1/2 percent?MR. KOHN. Well, make it 1 percent.MR. BERNARD. --"down at an annual rate of about 1 percentover the period from June through September."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Will you call the roll?MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Mullins YesPresident Parry YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Our next meeting is on October1st. And we have 9 minutes until we begin our 1:00 p.m. luncheon.MR. BERNARD. Dining Room E.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Dining Room E, a celebration.MR. BLACK. Celebration?END OF MEETING-42-