Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 5, 1991A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, November 5, 1991, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice ChairmanMr. AngellMr. BlackMr. ForrestalMr. KeehnMr. KelleyMr. LaWareMr. MullinsMr. ParryMessrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents ofthe Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Bernard, Deputy SecretaryMr. Coyne, Assistant SecretaryMr. Gillum, Assistant SecretaryMr. Mattingly, General CounselMr. Prell, EconomistMr. Truman, EconomistMessrs. Broaddus, R. Davis, Lindsey, Promisel,Scheld, Siegman, Simpson, Slifman, andMs. Tschinkel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Madigan, Assistant Director, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Division of Monetary Affairs, Board ofGovernorsMessrs. Hendricks and Salvaggio, First Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and Dallas,respectivelyMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Ms. Greene,Mr. Lang, Ms. Munnell, and Mr. Rolnick,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banksof St. Louis, Cleveland, Kansas City, New York,Philadelphia, Boston, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMr. Judd and Ms. White, Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of San Francisco and New York,respectivelyTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofNovember 5, 1991CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We need to approve the minutes. Withoutobjection. Today, in lieu of Sam Cross, who as all of you know isretiring on December 2, we have Gretchen Greene. I suspect that wereSam here we all would have wanted to wish him well and, Gretchen, ifyou wouldn't mind, by proxy please give him our best.MS. GREENE. I certainly will. And I'm sure that I speak forhim when I say that he has enjoyed working with you and will miss theassociations he has had by being in this job for the last 10 years.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think Sam is going to be quotedaround here for quite a long time. He has made an impression, whichis quite rare for somebody at the FOMC. And it's not superfluous tosay that we will miss him. Having said that, I can think of no onebetter qualified to sit in for Sam today than you. Would you start?MS. GREENE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Questions for Ms. Greene?If not, it would be interesting to us if Ted would discuss the mostrecent events regarding our relationships with the Soviet Union andcertain pending negotiations.MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Ted? If not, Gretchen,would you update us on the annual extension of the swap agreements?MS. GREENE. Certainly, Mr. Chairman. As you know, this isthe time of year when we start the process of discussing our swaparrangements with other central banks. We have no changes in theterms and conditions to suggest at this time and would request theCommittee to give us the authority to begin those negotiations. Theswap arrangements actually will come up for renewal at various timesduring the month of December and should be completed before year-endwhereupon we'll come back at the first meeting in 1992 to bring youthe results of those discussions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions? Would somebody like tomove authorization?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Let's move on to theDomestic Desk. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.] That concludesmy report, Mr. Chairman. I do have a request on the intermeetingleeway.11/5/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Peter? We have a veryuncurious group this morning! Why don't you go forward, Peter.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Secretary's note:Mr. Sternlight recommended a temporary $2 billion increase in theleeway. His remarks are included in his statement in the Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions? Would somebody like to movethe authorization for the [leeway] increase?MR. SYRON. So move.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We also have toratify the transactions since the October meeting. Would somebodylike to move those?SPEAKER(?). So move.MR. FORRESTAL. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Let's move on now tothe economic situation and Mike Prell.MR. PRELL. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions?MR. SYRON. Mike, I have two questions. Is it fair to say,looking at the probability distribution in your forecast now, that youstill would consider the negative tail fatter, even after yourrevision?MR. PRELL. Given the direction things have been going, mygut reaction is to say "yes." But I think also that the tail isn'tquite so long and so thick as before. As I said, what we've done nowessentially is that we have realized some of the risks we perceivedearlier [by lowering our forecast] and I think the risks may besomewhat more balanced in this forecast than before.MR. SYRON. And just a clarification question: Did you saythat in putting together the [forecast] for this Greenbook you changedthe procedure regarding your assumption on where the funds rate wouldbe? Was that before the most recent confirmation?MR. PRELL. That's right. Our strategy normally is to takethe prevailing funds rate as a neutral base for the projection. Whatwe were looking at with that funds rate path, though, was an economicforecast that in our judgment strayed farther perhaps from theCommittee's objectives than one might like in terms of presenting youwith a reasonable framework for discussion. Indeed, the unemploymentrate at the end of next year might have been a shade higher than it iscurrently rather than the level we have. So we returned to aprocedure that we have used in the past of putting in policyadjustments so as to try to get closer to something we thought wouldbe acceptable to the Committee.11/5/91MR. SYRON. Well, I thought it was very useful. But aquestion came out of it, in a sense: Since you assumed a 50 basispoint cut, essentially--MR. PRELL. That's correct.MR. SYRON. --and we have gotten 25 basis points of it sofar, do you consider the forecast that you have now as centered,leaving the previous question alone on the tail, with another 25 basispoint cut? [Would that be] your answer as compared to another 50basis points?MR. PRELL. Right, but obviously 25 basis points is a veryfine reading. But that is [the thought] we went into this with.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Looking at the forecast once we get beyond thenext two quarters, short rates certainly would be consideredacceptable, I think. It seems to me that one of the things that haschanged rather dramatically is the thinking with regard to inventoryinvestment. I wonder if you could comment on how you reached theseconclusions because, clearly, if you had some of the previous thoughtsabout inventories, you probably would have shown a bit more strength.MR. PRELL. Well, there are two things, I would say. One isthat the swing in inventory investment in the quarter just ended inSeptember was considerably larger than we had anticipated. And withthe potential revisions of those data, it goes even further. In asense we got ahead of the game that we were anticipating businesseswould play here. The second factor is that as we look at theprospects for final demand and what we think businessmen might beanticipating at this juncture, we have a hard time conceiving ofbusinesses wanting to move further in the direction of inventoryaccumulation at this point. So, we stretched the process out here.We have an inventory/sales ratio path that is downward through thisforecast. We think that implies that at some point in the comingyear, if we can just get through this period and sustain growth, thereis going to be some further movement in the direction of inventoryaccumulation. And by the end of next year we have businesses addingto their stocks at a gradual pace. This might be regarded as a quiteconservative inventory forecast. Certainly, we have model resultsthat would suggest that that is so. But we think businesses are beingvery conservative in their inventory management. And to the extentthat there is still stringency in credit markets affecting somebusinesses, I think it just encourages them even more to try to keeptheir inventories down to avoid having to finance a lot of stocks.MR. PARRY. Did you suggest that there would be a possibilityof that third-quarter number being revised?MR. PRELL. Right. As I mentioned, the manufacturersinventory numbers were much higher for September than we had expected.They were also much higher than the Bureau of Economic Analysis builtinto their estimate of third-quarter GNP. Relative to theirassumptions, there were additional manufacturers inventories of about$10 billion, in 1982 dollars at an annual rate. And that inventoryinvestment in the third quarter is essentially equivalent to a11/5/91percentage point of GNP. Whether that will be the ultimate adjustmentof the GNP numbers and whether we'll see some weaker wholesale andretail figures than they anticipated, one can't say. But, clearly,it's a substantial surprise for BEA.MR. PARRY. I would assume that they would have incorporatedfairly fully what happened in the auto industry in September. I thinkauto inventories were very high in August; I had assumed they'd bedown somewhat in September.MR. PRELL. Are you talking about auto dealer inventories?MR. PARRY. Yes.MR. PRELL. Well, actually, they've been running very low,for autos in particular. Truck inventories were heavier, but theyundoubtedly came down in September with the big surge in light truckfinancing.MR. PARRY. But wouldn't they have taken that into [account]?MR. PRELL. It's always a bit murky as to exactly what datathey are using in estimating the retail auto component of inventories.But, yes, presumably they had a handle on what was happening invehicles.MR. PARRY. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Yes, a couple of things, Mike. I have theimpression that one of the things that may be going on here is a lackof pent-up demand relative to previous recoveries, particularly inautos and in housing, in part because of the strength of the '80s. Isthere anything to that?MR. PRELL. Well, I think I showed in a chart show earlierthis year our estimates of the number of unoccupied dwelling unitsduring the '80s. The buildup was much more marked in the multifamilyarea than in the single-family area. But those are housing units andpeople can choose among these. I think there is something of anoverhang in the housing market. Certainly, at this point with the newhomes sales at the pace they're running, the months' supply of newhomes on the market is very sizable. So, yes, that is a factor.Sorry, I forgot the other--MR. STERN. Autos.MR. PRELL. Auto sales were quite high through much of the1980s and the stocks looked to be fairly sizable per household, forexample. In the last couple of years the average age [of the autostock] has leveled out; it's fairly long. As I look at the forecastgoing forward, I think perhaps we're beginning to develop a movementback in the other direction. If car sales stay as low as we have themin this forecast, as we look ahead another year or so the demands maybegin to reflect some pent-up buying desires. But at this point wedon't think those desires are very intense.11/5/91MR. STERN. My second question: Do you have a reaction tothe report on the news last night and in The Wall Street Journal todayabout expected downward revisions in the payroll data?MR. PRELL. Well, Janet Norwood called attention to this inher testimony before the Joint Economic Committee last year. This isa procedure that is followed routinely every year to utilize theunemployment insurance data to benchmark the payroll employmentseries. The data evidently did show a very abrupt drop relative tothe payroll employment series estimates early this year. Shecautioned against taking this as gospel at this point; these arepreliminary readings. But it is conceivable that ultimately, when therevisions are made, payroll employment growth will appear less robustthan before. I think the feed-through to GNP that has been implied bysome of these reports is a bit tenuous. Certainly, in the short runwe expect that BEA when it has a lot of data missing may give someattention to the hours input, but I wonder how important that would belooking back at history. It could be, if the employment is slower andhours commensurately lower, that productivity growth will look betterthan it currently does.MR. STERN. Thank you.MR. PRELL. It could also be that this will lead them tolower their estimates of labor income until the data from tax returnsare available.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mike, you substantially lowered your forecastfor this quarter and the next couple of quarters and you haveexpressed in the last few minutes a concern that that still may be abit too strong. If for balance you wanted to sketch out a possiblecase on the up side--that the situation could develop a little morestrongly than you have in the Greenbook now--what would be theelements of that positive case?MR. PRELL. Well, I wouldn't want to leave the impressionthat we feel there aren't any upside risks here. We continue toreturn to the notion that, in the absence of absolutely clear evidencethat we are back into a second dip, recoveries often surprise one intheir strength. So there could be unexpected areas of greaterincrease in expenditures. It is conceivable that the decline inmortgage rates, which seems to be inspiring a lot of refinancing--suggesting that people think these are good rates--perhaps willstimulate some additional home buying beyond what we have. My concernis, though, that people are just so worried about whether they aregoing to be employed that that [rate decline] may not be as powerfulas it might otherwise be. It's a possibility. We don't have anyclear index of what desired inventory/sales ratios are in varioussectors of the economy. We can guess by the historical patterns andapparent response what that is. But maybe this goes to the earlierquestion: Getting a more rapid buildup of inventories could be anindication that we underestimated where businesses want [theirinventories] to be and that they won't continue this kind ofliquidation but rather will stay even or move into some accumulationin the near term. That could be worth a point or two, conceivably, onGNP growth in the short run. Business investment is another area,11/5/91conceivably, that could be stronger, but the orders and anecdotalevidence just don't seem to suggest a lot of upside potential there.And we have consumers not spending a whole lot in the quarter. Thepersonal saving rate ticks up. Maybe consumers, despite the worriesthey're expressing, will behave as they seem to have behavedthroughout this recovery and spend practically every dollar they gettheir hands on. Maybe that's simply because many of them have theirbacks to the wall and they really don't have a lot of leeway, and ifthere is this additional income, it actually will flow into thespending stream. Those are possibilities, and cumulatively they wouldadd up to a materially different picture.MR. KELLEY. Let me ask, Ted, with the dollar having fallenrecently: Could that be reflected in time in further recovery of netexports?MR. TRUMAN. Well, we have incorporated into the forecast adollar at essentially the level that we have today, though therealways are uncertainties, as Gretchen has said, about how that willend up playing out in terms of the fundamental competitiveness andperceptions thereof and, therefore, export sales and import purchases.So, there is certainly some looseness to the translation between theexchange rate and everything else that goes along with it and the netexport picture. And, of course, there is some uncertainty on bothsides--on the up side as well as on the down side as far as growthabroad is concerned. We have a modest expansion abroad; it wouldcertainly be easy to sketch out a scenario that is weaker than that.It's also possible to sketch out a scenario that is stronger either inits own right or to some extent stimulated by maybe a somewhatstronger picture here than we or others are currently thinking about.But there's some [uncertainty] on both sides, I'd say.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I have two questions, Mike. One has to do withlayoffs and quarterly earnings announcements. I don't know whetheryou ever look at that, but often those two actions might be linked.Is there a possibility that this spate of bad news we have gotten onthe job front in terms of certain layoffs is simply a seasonal thingassociated with the announcement of the third-quarter earnings?MR. PRELL. Well, I suppose there could be something there.My sense is that this is an ongoing story. It may be that managementsfeel the ongoing negative earnings reports require some action toconvince the security analysts that this is not going to be repeatedin the future. Some people have noted that there seem to be a lot oflayoff announcements pertaining to the fourth quarter and that thiscuts against some tradition in business of not laying people off justbefore Christmas. My sense is that a lot of restructuring is going onin industry where this recession has revealed the need for some cost-cutting in order to get reasonable profit margins in an environmentwhere inflation is not going to offset any looseness of management.There's this sense, too, that the layoffs are occurring in placeswhere people thought jobs were once fairly secure. And thatundoubtedly adds to the feeling among many people who would seem onthe face of it to be in pretty good shape that even they could bevulnerable to some structural adjustment that seems to be going on,particularly in the service-producing sectors.11/5/91MR. MELZER. My second question relates to the statement youmade about real interest rates. Just as a general matter I'm somewhatskeptical about our ability really to set those over time. In anycase, I was surprised to hear you say that you felt there wasconsiderable scope for further reduction. I'm curious as to howyou're measuring that. A look that we took would indicate that on anex ante basis using, say, [unintelligible] the CPI and a 3-monthTreasury bill rate, we're beginning to get to levels that, ifsustained, were associated in the '60s and '70s with periods of risinginflation. I just wanted you to expand on that if you could.MR. PRELL. I think that's a fair statement. The rough cut Imade, just looking at short rates, was perhaps the conjecture thatinflation expectations might be viewed as a little less tenuous thanthinking about 10- or 20-year horizons. By this assessment the short-term rates have come down considerably. One calculation I have looksvery similar to the general level during the 1960s. My point reallyrelates more to that cyclical stage typically reached toward the endof a recession when real rates quite regularly have been decidedlynegative. The point is, though, that perhaps there wasn't a movementto tighten soon enough as the expansion progressed to avert thatbuilding up of inflation pressures. This isn't to say that a sharpmove of the sort I suggested might be necessary in order to achievethe Humphrey-Hawkins central tendency as a rate level you want to holdfor a long period. There might well be some need to move back upwithin a year or so. But historically, the lows in this cycle don'tlook at all like the lows we have seen in short-term real rates inprevious cycles, certainly in the postwar period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions? Tom.MR. HOENIG. May I ask a follow-up to Tom's question? As youdescribed the economy, there were some fundamentals in terms of realestate and some adjustments in leverages and so forth that are goingto be constraining. If we ease now, what in your judgment is the riskof pushing inflation [up] and compromising our ability to bring itdown in the future, given these fundamental adjustments that probablyshould continue regardless?MR. PRELL. The real estate is an easier factor to consider.The leveraging gets to be a little more difficult to pin down--i.e.whether firms really are cutting back their investment because oftheir debt loads. There's some anecdotal evidence that would suggestthat, but I don't know how powerful a force that is. And we can see asignificant amount of restructuring going on, with some of the firmsthat have leveraged themselves up to the hilt being able in thecurrent environment to reduce their interest burdens and to altertheir debt/equity ratios in ways that ought to give them a little moreroom to maneuver. I think the real estate problem is going to bethere for some time and will weigh against a strong surge in theeconomy. The fiscal policy picture--just the total setting aside fromthe current budget program--will remain less than stimulative, ofcourse. So, there are some things that [appeared] in the past inrecoveries and early expansions that aren't going to be there thistime. But the higher the growth rate, the lower the unemploymentrate; and the less slack in the economy, the greater the risks arethat you're not going to make the kind of progress toward lower ratesof inflation that we have in this forecast. And that even might just11/5/91be cut off entirely if we get a strong enough [trajectory]. So, theseare the risks one has to weigh at this point as to whether the economyis going to prove weaker than is acceptable and whether the inflationrate might be more stubborn than we've anticipated. I must say thereseems to be a lot skepticism among forecasters with outlooks foreconomic activity that don't differ greatly from ours about whetherthe disinflation trend can be sustained well into the expansionperiod--say, getting out into 1993. There is a sense that in the pastthe decline in inflation has stopped or has become very meager aspeople have sensed that the economy was on a solid growth track. Andthat might be a concern.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Mike? If not,would somebody like to start the Committee's discussion? Bob Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, economic conditions in the TwelfthDistrict reflect widespread weakness. Recent employment data for thewestern states have been disappointing. Total employment fell at anannual rate of 1-1/2 percent in September. California continues toshow particular weakness: Employment in California fell at an annualrate of 4-1/4 percent in September and at a 1-1/2 percent rate inOctober. I might note parenthetically that this issue about thereliability of the payroll series is a very controversial one inCalifornia. The Department of Finance is estimating that the peak-to-trough decline in employment in California is in excess of 300,000 asopposed to the published data of 100,000. So, it's a very hot issue;and politically it's quite an issue because tax revenues are coming inat a very low level and seem to be more consistent with the morepessimistic outlook that we have for employment. Even in states wheregrowth has been robust in the recent past--particularly I'd cite Idahoand Utah--employment has shown lower growth or even declines in recentmonths. Weakness is also widespread across sectors of the westerneconomy as well as in states. Manufacturing and construction continueto lose jobs in the District. In addition, the growth in the servicessector, which has been the region's primary source of strength inrecent months, has slowed to a crawl.Anecdotal information also suggests deterioration, aspessimism about poor economic conditions has spread from California tomost other parts of the District. We conduct a business sentimentsurvey which, among other things, asks whether or not a recession isanticipated during the next year. The last time we conducted itbefore this most recent period, 7 percent said they thought therewould be a recession in the next year; that has risen to 17 percent.If I can turn to the national outlook, the data that we'veall seen since the last meeting have certainly led us to revise downsignificantly our forecast for real GNP for this quarter and the next.Our forecast for growth in the fourth quarter is that it will beslower than in the third quarter, although we do not have a double-diprecession and we don't think that is likely. Like the Greenbook, weexpect growth to rebound to a much more satisfactory rate throughoutmost of 1992, and the major sources of strength are the interest-sensitive sectors of the economy and inventories as well. As far asinflation is concerned, I'd have to say that the news on that front issomewhat encouraging. The low fixed-weight GNP price index in thethird quarter and the moderation of the employment cost index,especially wages, are encouraging. Overall, our expectation is that11/5/91there will be some reduction of inflation in 1992 compared to thisyear, which is a bit of a difference from the Greenbook. Thank you,Mr. Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Could I ask Mr. Parry a question?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Bob, just in the past few weeks I'veheard a couple of people, including a really large national realestate developer, sounding very dire about the real estate outlook onthe West Coast and in California particularly--much more so thananything I've heard before. Is there anything to that?MR. PARRY. In the commercial real estate area there is.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, this is--MR. PARRY. And I think if you were to focus on southernCalifornia, particularly Los Angeles, there's quite a serious problem.Vacancy rates are quite high and they're going to rise over the nextyear because there is an awful lot of building that will be coming online in the next 12 months. Another area is Orange County, which issuffering as well. Those two areas are significant enough to make thegeneral picture of the state with regard to commercial real estatelook quite negative. When you look at some other areas, such as SanFrancisco, it's not nearly as bad. They put a moratorium on building,which has kept building at very moderate levels for the last severalyears; so I don't see that [area] as a problem. The other point isthat the [situation in] residential real estate is quite differentfrom the commercial. Residential, at least in terms of prices, hasheld up quite well, although clearly the sales of new houses are weak.It's a problem.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, in the District some signs ofweakness have developed since the last meeting. Attitudes havecertainly deteriorated. Anecdotal reports are coming in very much onthe negative side. As always, the auto sector is the major swingelement in the District and in that area the news seems to be comingin more negatively. The company that I've talked to has reduced itsfourth-quarter production schedule by 8 percent from the time of ourlast meeting, and the production risks are still on the down side. Inpart, the fourth-quarter production rate is based on a dealer orderrate of about 66,000 units a week. The order rate is in fact comingin substantially under that; it has averaged 52,000 units over thelast five weeks and most recently it was only 43,000. In the retailauto sector, inventories are turning out okay and maybe a little onthe low side. If this gap between orders and production [widens] aswe get into the quarter, we're probably going to get some furtherproduction cuts. In turn, that will result in cuts in orders from thesuppliers. While earlier we expected that the auto sector might havea positive effect on fourth-quarter GNP, perhaps by as much as 1-1/2percentage points, it now seems much more likely that the sector willbe flat at best and perhaps a bit negative. The production of mediumsize and heavy-duty trucks in September of this year was down 2211/5/91percent from last year. And in terms of a comparative year, saleswere pretty weak last year.District employment has moved sideways since April; it's up abit in manufacturing, offset by a decline in nonmanufacturing. Retailsales came in very much on the weak side, particularly in Detroit.And one Chicago retailer told me that sales of autos in Chicago sinceLabor Day have begun to trail off and currently are running about 7 to10 percent under the same [period] last year, particularly[unintelligible]. Sales of new and existing homes in the Districthave declined quite substantially and housing starts have dropped aswell. Plant closings in the District--and I'm not talking about justtemporary shutdowns but permanent closings--are continuing at whatseems to me to be disturbingly high levels, with announcements day-inand day-out.Offsetting what may seem like gloom, here and there are somebright spots. The steel business, for example, is something of amystery. The industry is now running at about an 80 percent rate [ofcapacity utilization] and the estimated shipments for the year havebeen increased a little--from 77 million tons at the time of the lastmeeting to 79 million tons now--and the outlook for 1992 is even a bitbetter. Though the steel companies do expect some more cancellationscoming out of the auto industry, steel inventories of manufacturersand also in the steel centers really are very, very low. It shouldmean that even if there are some cutbacks in orders from the autocompanies, the steel production levels ought not to be hit too hard.On the price front, the outlook continues to improve. Ithink the better conditions are centered perhaps in the manufacturingsector; the major manufacturers are able to hold down the cost oftheir purchases. Indeed, in some cases they really have achieved somegood reductions. I have no sense that direct labor costs areincreasing more than productivity gains. Deere, for example, veryrecently settled their contract; financially it is a little moreexpensive than they wanted. Nonetheless, they got very good work rulechanges and they feel that they can overcome the financial aspectsthrough productivity. And a word of caution: Caterpillar is in theirnegotiations and those have broken down. It looks as if they mighthave quite a tough strike and the settlement of that could setsomething of a pattern for the UAW at least [unintelligible].Turning to the national economy, the Greenbook revisions plusthe staff forecast for this year are much more in line with where wehave been. But the staff forecast still seems to us to be a bit onthe high side as we get into 1992. The main difference, first of all,is in consumption, particularly for durables. While the increases inthe staff forecast are in reasonable alignment with the historicalrecord, nonetheless in a current context they still seem to be alittle on the high side. Net, I think we have something of a[unintelligible] on our hands, which I think we will need to addressas we get into the policy deliberations.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think the best descriptiveterm to use for the Sixth District economy is "quite soft," althoughthere are still some signs of recovery out there. Several-10-11/5/91manufacturers have added to their inventories intentionally. Activityon the export side continues to be fairly good, although it's off alittle from what it had been. Textiles have improved, and we've alsoseen some evidence of a few new capital projects. Retailers, on theother hand, are reporting flat to only very modest increases in sales.Caution by consumers, of course, is very much in their minds and theyare very, very pessimistic and fearful about the Christmas season;they don't expect business to be good at all. Tourism and businesstravel were up slightly in October and in fact are running even alittle ahead of a year ago. Our bank contacts are reporting very weakloan demand; on the other hand, we have potential borrowers who arecontinuing to complain about difficulty getting credit. We continueto receive that information from people on our small business advisorygroup, for example.But overriding all of the statistical data about the economyis the anecdotal information, which continues to be very, very poorindeed and is quite worrisome. Everywhere I go both in businessmeetings and even at social affairs--cocktail parties and so on--thereis a real sense of doom and gloom. In fact, I went to two functionsover the weekend and I was sorry I went because people are justdescribing business as terrible or dismal, or words of that kind.Interestingly, though, if you ask a lot of these people if they thinklower interest rates would help their business or help the economygenerally, you don't get a uniform answer that "Yes, [the FederalReserve] ought to be lowering rates." Some people think that is notthe answer. They don't have an answer, but they don't necessarilythink that lower interest rates are the solution. There is, ofcourse, continuing concern about job loss, concern about consolidationin the services industry. And while unemployment hasn't risen in theDistrict, companies are reporting an unprecedented flood ofapplications and resumes from people who are anticipating layoffs intheir business.On the inflation side, there's no evidence of any priceincreases in the District from the people we talk to. Theagricultural side looks fairly good and that probably is the onlysubstantially bright spot in the District. This confidence issue isvery perplexing to me; I'm very confused about it because it doesn'treally seem to stack up against the statistical data and the hardfacts that are coming in. So, I guess the question that we need toask is: Is it just disappointment that business is not as good aspeople expect or does it really indicate that there is a slowing inthe economy and we need to take that into account?With respect to the national economy, our forecast is a bitstronger in the near term, that is, for the fourth quarter and thefirst quarter of next year. But then we have growth decelerating abit and are somewhat below the Greenbook forecast for the balance of1992. If there is going to be a faltering in the economy, it seems tome that it's going to come on the consumer side as opposed toinventories. That is, I think consumers may well attempt to shore uptheir savings and to reduce their debt throughout 1992, given theirconcerns about the employment situation. So, in general, Mr.Chairman, I think the Greenbook forecast is not a bad forecast, givenall of the uncertainties in the economy, but I continue to think thatthe risks are on the down side and that the economy is subject to somevulnerability. And for that reason, I would be in favor of some-11-11/5/91immediate easing of policy, though not anything dramatic. But we canget into the details of that a little later on.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Both in terms of theDistrict and nationally, I think that in the midst of all theseproblems we're on the edge of some really favorable long-termdevelopments. I don't think we should panic in the midst of the veryworrisome intermediate term, but there are a lot of reasons to beconcerned.In that regard, I said last time that New England had a levelof pessimism that bordered on panic. I think it's fair to say that ithas passed over into the zone of panic now. One is tempted now whengoing to a social event to say to folks [unintelligible] becausepeople start to berate you so much about the employment situation ifyou tell them what you actually do.MR. KELLEY. Some think you haven't got a job!MR. SYRON. That's right, and then they sympathize with you!I'm not sure that the fundamentals have changed that much butconfidence seems to have fallen just dramatically, as other peoplehave said. When one talks to the relatively small number of majornewspapers in our District, one hears about a very interesting andunfortunately worrisome trend in year-over-year retail sales--and lastyear was not a good year in New England. Our major newspaper isseeing a 30 percent decline in their normal ad lineage for retailersgoing into the [holiday] season. If you follow that up by calling afew of the larger retailers, they have had quite weak performancesrecently and they expect a weak Christmas. I think the long and theshort of it is that they're trying to cut their expenses and cut theirway through this whole period; they figure that a lot of theircompetition isn't going to make it and they want to be there on theother side but they're not going to try to boost sales in the shortrun by advertising. That's very true in the auto sector where autosales have been very poor. Inventory levels generally are notsomething that people express concern about but, coming back to whatMike said, we really don't know a lot about the desired inventory-sales ratio now because of these just-in-time changes. Loan demandcontinues very weak at our banks and even in the mortgage refinancearea there has been some weakness as people expect that the economywill continue to slide and that rates will decline, so they arewaiting to refinance later. Actually, in terms of fundamentals, ifyou look at the rate of deterioration of employment in the District,things are not getting worse as fast as they were earlier. In fact,even in the computer sector there has been some slight sign ofoptimism, although that is offset by weakness in manufacturingelsewhere. There is a great deal of concern in the defense sector,particularly in three of our large firms: Raytheon, UnitedTechnology, and General Electric. Wages have been very well behaved.We still have a real benefits cost problem, which is an inexorablerise in medical care costs.As far as the national outlook goes, I agree with theGreenbook and also with Mike's characterization of where the riskslie. On that score, I must say in talking to a number of money-12-11/5/91managers in the city that one does start to have a concern, with thesedisappointing corporate profit figures, about what would happen if inthe midst of all this we were to have another 10 percent break or soin the stock market. People are talking about that as not being atall out of the realm of possibility. There is continued concern aboutbanks but, as I say, I think a lot of this is on the edge of a long-term favorable trend [stemming from] restructurings and, while it istemporarily a drag, we're going to see more productivity later on.So, the bottom line is that in many ways this fear that has beengenerated by a lot of people is partially because of the decline inasset values but also it's a cumulative awareness by corporations andeven more so by individuals that their consumption levels of the '80swere not consistent with their long-term income prospects. And thisis an attempt to make up for that in a quite short period of time.That is being reflected in what producers are saying as well, which isthat this is a correction that we have to go through in the economyand we have to hunker down to get through it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, the Eleventh District remainssluggish--"stuck in the mud" is a phrase one hears, or phrases similarto that--although in the third quarter we actually experiencedemployment increases. That's primarily the result of state and localgovernment employment increases. We have the same fiscal problems aseverybody else, but a number of our areas are under court mandate toexpand and to raise taxes to do that. The Dallas Fed's index ofcoincident indicators has been declining fairly steadily but ourleading indicators have been fairly flat. I don't have an explanationfor that. Low natural gas prices continue to depress drillingactivity in the District. A national retail chain headquartered inDallas expects a weak Christmas, following a weak Christmas last year.Prospects for defense industry spending are adding to the uncertaintyin our area, given all the concentration that we have [in that area].Our directors and other local business people perceive the economy tobe weak, but we don't hear as much as we used to about the need for aneasier monetary policy. A typical comment is that it's not the levelof interest rates that is causing the problem; it's the inability toborrow any money from banks at any interest rate. I believe BobForrestal mentioned that. Texas, of course, has had a credit crunchlonger than the rest of the economy and, therefore, just abouteverybody you meet knows someone personally whom they consider aworthy and dependable borrower who cannot get credit. And some of ourdirectors have had fairly close experiences with that. So, they'revery preoccupied with the fact that banks are not making [any] loans.We actually, at their request, have scheduled a special meeting at thetime of our November board meeting in which we're going to deal withthe credit crunch--and possibly solve it. We'll be sure to notify youif we do! In that regard, I do think that since the businesscommunity is absolutely convinced that there is a credit crunch, theydon't have a lot of patience with trying to define it or to talk aboutthe nuances of that. And I think it behooves Federal Reservepolicymakers to go ahead and accept that terminology. I don't thinkit does us any good to poke around it and act as if it's not there ifeverybody out there really believes it is.On the national scene, our research people agree generallywith the staff here. They see further weakness and they're about-13-11/5/91evenly divided as to whether that has any implications at all formonetary policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the District, thereis really little new to report; recent trends are continuing. In therural areas, activity remains fairly decent and attitudes are okay, Ithink, at least compared to what I encounter in the Twin Cities where,as I've reported before, attitudes are quite bad. Of course, that'sbecause there is a different mix of businesses both in terms of theirdiversification and their scope of operations. And they pick up a lotof bad news from their other operations both domestically andinternationally. The Twin Cities situation is really ratherinteresting. Unemployment in the Cities remains in the neighborhoodof 4-1/2 percent as the computer industry [unintelligible]. Theproblem with that was that the medical technology business hasexploded, so the adjustment has all occurred without a great deal ofdislocation. But despite that, attitudes among the business community--or the preponderance of the business community that I haveencountered--are quite negative. And the Twin Cities do account for agood bulk of the nonfarm economic activity in the District. In theTwin Cities we have come up with a couple of new forms, though notaltogether new forms, of economic stimulus. One is hosting majorsporting events. We still have the Super Bowl and the Final Four togo. But in addition, more recently we have snow removal. And thatlooks as if it's going to be affecting the economy for some time!On the national outlook, I continue to think that a modestrecovery is certainly the most likely outcome. I have a suspicionthat we might do marginally better than the latest Greenbook forecast.But I think the real developments on the national level are on theinflation front or the disinflation front. I've become increasinglyoptimistic that we really are making progress there. The balance ofthe latest statistical evidence certainly suggests that, but I've alsobecome more and more impressed by the anecdotal evidence that I get.It's very hard to find any evidence of price pressures and wagepressures to speak of, at least among the people I've talked to. Thathas been going on for a while and it has now gone on long enough thatI think it really is significant. There is, of course, some ongoingcarping about health care costs and about the cost of [meeting]various regulations, but there's nothing new in all that. And I don'thave any sense that that situation is getting worse. So, I do thinkthere is clearly a positive development on that side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. The Tenth District continues to outperform thenation to some extent, although if we keep talking about it we maytalk ourselves out of any improvement. It's doom and gloom from anumber of people, although the numbers continue to show someimprovement. For example, most of our automobile plants continue tooperate at capacity. Now, in aviation manufacturing, there has been adecline in production over [the level] a year ago and that's primarilydue to a drop-off in foreign demand. The District's oil and gasexploration activity remains lackluster, as it does elsewhere.Drilling rigs were up very slightly in October over September and arestill well below--about 23 percent below--year-ago levels. In-14-11/5/91agriculture, cattle prices have turned [up] and are now back to thebreak-even point. And in the grain area, prices have increased, whichhas been a help in that sector. Finally, the indicators ofconstruction activity in our District quite frankly have beenimproving. Building contracts awarded in the District in August wereup 11 percent over year-ago levels. Residential awards are increasingin most of our states. And we're even seeing some improvement in non-residential contracts in Colorado and in New Mexico. So, theDistrict's economy is consistently showing improvements.As far as the national economy goes, we continue to forecastsustained growth although slightly weaker, as the staff is projecting.Our forecasts are for a little better growth than the staff has in thefirst half and a little more moderate growth in the second half. Wesee a little stronger inventory investment and some continuingstrength in consumer spending; even though the attitudes are down, wedon't see that dropping sharply. As for inflation, we anticipate theinflation numbers will stay modest and actually fall somewhat below 4percent. So, that is how we are viewing things right now. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, this is all getting a bit much, I mustsay, with all the gloom and pessimism around the table. But I thinkit is quite reflective of what one hears in conversations almostwherever one goes--in business, socially, and otherwise. And myDistrict is no exception to that. I think the economy hasdeteriorated over the last couple of months, and certainly sentimenthas become sharply more bearish. Manufacturing had been a relativebright spot in our area, but it has slowed rather dramatically and Ithink the sentiment is in the process of changing about 1992. I wouldguess that as our future surveys come in they will reflect that,judging from the conversations one has. Retailers are about aspessimistic looking toward this Christmas season as they have beenprobably since the '81-'82 recession. Our commercial real estatemarket is typical of what you have heard elsewhere in the country.And loan demand is still declining at banks. I do sense, however,that price pressures have diminished and I think that is an optimisticpart of all this.As far as the national economy is concerned, I think therisks are decidedly on the down side. We have an anemic outlook atbest and I suspect that if I'm wrong it will be on the down side.Clearly, we have something going on here that is more than a normalcyclical downturn; you can have your own list of favorites. My senseis that we're going to see a longer period of weakness in the economy,but I think most of us are going to be surprised at how much progresswe're making against inflation. In this kind of situation where theresiliency of the economy is under stress, I think we're quitevulnerable to some kind of shock. I don't know what the shock willbe; if we knew, it wouldn't be an unpredictable shock. But we're in asituation where some event could really turn this from a bad situationinto something more serious.There are not very many good policy options out there, butthe way I look at it the only available policy tools are in this room.And I think that we simply have to ring the monetary "gong" todemonstrate that somebody somewhere is at least trying to do something-15-11/5/91positive to try to arrest this sharply deteriorating sentiment. Idon't sense any real cost in doing that. In the unlikely event thatwe ease too much, I think we can reverse course. We tightened in1980; we tightened in 1988; we can tighten in 1992 if we have to. Butnow we need a loud and clear easing signal to try to undercut thisdeteriorating sentiment that we have out there, which is making usquite vulnerable.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. First Vice President Hendricks.MR. HENDRICKS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The District'seconomy reflects the sluggishness that we see in the data at thenational level. Employment growth has stalled. Weakness in autosales has led to some cutbacks in production schedules. And thisweakness in demand for autos has led to a more sluggish recovery inthe tire industry as well. On the other hand, the steel industry--andSi reported on this--is one of the brighter spots in our District.Steel producers report that this will be the best quarter of the year,supported especially by a pickup in auto and steel warehouse business.Producers of flat-rolled steel are operating at 85 to 90 percent ofcapacity. But prices are weak, profits are down, and the moodcertainly is not buoyant. We also were pleasantly surprised recentlywith the outlook for inflation that was developed by a panel ofeconomists from firms around the Fourth District. Their projection,which had been running at about 3-1/2 to 4 percent, has been reviseddownward to 3 percent.In brief, we see the growth of the economy stalling in recentmonths but we have no reason to believe that the recovery will not besustained. And we are hopeful about the outlook for inflation. Thatconcludes my report.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. It seems obvious to us that in our Districtpeople now think everything is pessimistic; whether they're consumersor business people, [they have] very low expectations. A particularlystriking [example] came at our last meeting, which was a joint meetingof our Baltimore/Richmond boards, when I heard the most pessimisticstatements of the economic conditions I think I've heard in the 36years or so that I've been attending these meetings. And virtuallyall the reports we've gotten since then have been along that line.From what I read and what I've heard around the table, it'spretty clear that for the most part that pessimism is equallywidespread in the rest of the country and may be even more widespreadin certain places. And then we got--to use Mike's term from a whileago--"a stunning confirmation" of this when we received this downwardrevision in the Conference Board consumer confidence series. Buthaving said all this, I think the question we have to answer thismorning is: Exactly what does this mean in terms of the near-termprospects for the economy? I certainly think it tells us something:namely, that the recovery has been weaker up until now and probablywill be weaker in the immediate future than any of us thought it wasgoing to be. The current quarter and probably the first quarter arecertainly going to reflect this. So, the downward revisions in theBoard staff's figures are clearly indicated. But I think it would bepremature at this point to conclude that this apparently declining-16-11/5/91confidence means that the economy is necessarily going to go into adouble-dip recession as some people have been assuming. Sentimentfrequently remains bearish in the early stages of an economic upturn,and it's clearly even gloomier than usual this time if I remembercorrectly. I think the media has added a lot to this because therehas been so much more hype on this than in the past.Now, I know there are differences of opinion about what theseconsumer surveys show, but three studies done by different FederalReserve Banks have suggested that they are not really very goodpredictors. I would say they probably are a coincident indicator atbest. So, while we have this October drop in the survey of theConference Board and this obvious pessimism in the form of anecdotalinformation, I'm not ready to push the panic button at this point.Some of the recent data are a bit on the favorable side at least. Wehad some upward revision in the payroll employment figures for Augustand September and the M2 numbers have turned around--not as much as Iwould like, but they've certainly turned around recently. And theorders and production components of the National Association ofPurchasing Managers [survey] in October were generally favorable. So,I think the staff's revised forecast is reasonable. And the risks ontheir projection are probably equally divided, although like GaryStern--who I believe is the only other one who said this--I think theymight even be tilted a little toward the up side. So, we ought toapproach this policy issue today very cautiously before we make anykind of major move toward ease.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. In terms of our District, I would say it isstill expanding but the expansion is sluggish. We have employmentgrowth in both manufacturing and non-manufacturing; it's somewhatstronger in manufacturing. Residential construction over the mostrecent three-month period is up over last year; commercialconstruction is still down, but down considerably less thannationally, particularly year-over-year.On a broader prospective, my view is that certainly some ofthe numbers that have come out on the national economy recently aredisappointing in relation to what we expected. But they really arenot all that bad, as others have observed. Clearly, confidence isvery sour. I guess I'm influenced by what Mike said earlier and thiswas confirmed by people on our staff: that confidence really has notproven to be a very good forecasting tool.I get a sense that we're very much caught up with a veryshort-term orientation toward policy right now. There's considerableease in train, whether you look at money or whether you look atinterest rates. Clearly, there has not been enough time for all theeffects of that to be felt. And, following up on my question to MikePrell, I just don't see--whether you look at money or at interestrates--that there's all that much more scope for further easing. Now,certainly we can try to force interest rates down further. But Idon't see why it is that we think we can step into the same trap thatwe have stepped into in virtually every postwar recovery and then begood enough and strong enough and smart enough to turn that around andnot end up in the same position we've been in before. I think we havebeen approaching this whole period of the last four years considerably-17-11/5/91differently than in the past and I hope we can continue to do that.In my view, that argues for considerable caution at this juncture, inline with what Bob Black said.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm not going to add anything in theanecdotal area; it would be more of the same. But, like everyoneelse, I spend a lot of time these days scratching my head a little andasking why the recovery hasn't really taken hold and what is going onout there. The more I look at it and think about it, the more clearit becomes to me that there are a number of structural or semi-structural forces at work. A lot has been said about inventories, andthat's good news and bad news; it makes the recession itselfshallower, but it also means the recovery has less "pop." One thingabout inventories that I hadn't really focused on until yesterday isthat the sense of comfort that inventories are in good shape is okayas a generalization, but I was surprised to see when I looked at itthat in the non-auto retail sector inventories are not in all thatgreat shape. Now, maybe that's just because there are a lot morestores and maybe even a greater variety of goods; nevertheless, it'sthere.But beyond the inventory situation, one of the longer-termthings we all talk about is this real estate overhang. I think DickSyron is right when he points to the fact that it's not just theoverhang itself but the spillover effect it has on perceptions aboutasset quality prices that has an impact on confidence. Mike Prelltouched on debt burdens with a bit of a question in his mind. I'vehad a question in my mind, but the more I think about it, the moreimportant I think it is in terms of attitudes and financial fragilitythat we all have talked a lot about. The fiscal situation is ugly notjust because the deficits are big but because the process is basicallyimmobilized.But when I think about those things, with the exception ofinventories, one of the things that strikes me is that in a sensethey're all symptomatic of the chickens coming home to roost. They'reall symptomatic of earlier excesses of one kind or another. But Istill ask myself: What do they mean? I just handed some charts tothe Chairman that are based on work I had staff at the Bank do intrying to look at some of this in a much longer perspective. Just tocite a couple of examples that come out of that: When you look at thedefault rate on corporate bonds--this is the default rate on all ratedissues, so a lot of the junk bonds aren't even in this calculation--it's currently 3 percent of all rated issues, which is by far thelargest it has been in the postwar period. We did one calculation onoffice space that may or may not be right, but it's pretty dramaticbecause it says that it would take six years of service-sectoremployment growth at the very rapid rates of the 1980s to absorb theoverhang in service-sector office space that's there now, assumingthat nothing else is built for the next six years. It's a big number.If you look at the banks--maybe somebody else looked at this beforebut I hadn't really focused on this--loan losses as a percentage oftotal loans are 1.37 percent. That doesn't sound all that bad, but itturns out that 1.37 percent is by a wide margin the highest that thishas been since 1936. And the loan losses in the banking system justin 1990 were $28 billion, as against before tax profits of $23-18-11/5/91billion. Again, what is interesting about the $28 billion in lossesis that while $7.7 billion was in real estate, $7.2 billion was inconsumer lending, $8.5 billion was in C&I lending, and there was still$4.7 billion left over in all other categories of lending. Again,those are very big numbers and they're not confined by a long shot toreal estate.When I look at all those things, what leaps into my mind,other than that the chickens are coming home to roost, is that in someways I'm surprised that we didn't have a credit crunch, whatever thatmay mean--I think Bob McTeer makes a good point there--a lot sooner orthat it hasn't been a lot worse. But the way I come out on all thosenumbers is that, in the face of them, we're probably doing as well aswe could reasonably expect to do. But that raises in my mind evenmore this question about the outlook. Clearly, those things stronglyreinforce the view that the recovery, whatever else it may be, isgoing to be distinctly subpar. That has never bothered me per se.But the question that looms larger in my mind and has in the past is:With all of that, can we even get a result that looks like theGreenbook in a context in which I think the Greenbook [projects] apretty good outcome if for no other reason than that it is respectableat least in terms of growth. But more than that, it is an outlookthat is compatible with this continued whittling away at the coreinflation rate. And I guess I'm not so sure that even that outlook isas comfortably in hand as I once thought it was.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I guess there's one thing that'sclear and that is that things are not ebullient.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We can stipulate that!MR. KELLEY. We can stipulate that. The anecdotal evidencewe've had at the table here this morning could hardly be morenegative. We came out of the third quarter with a poor September andwent into the fourth quarter with what looks like a poor October. Andthe confidence data that we're seeing certainly don't give us anyconfidence. Still, as I look at the data available to us, the thirdquarter, while not as strong as we had thought it might be, was notbad. The Greenbook outlook, which is probably about the best estimatethat we can make, is certainly not all bad. And we have to keep inmind, as has been mentioned by several people, that we have a greatdeal of easing still in the pipeline, and I think that's veryimportant. So, I ask myself: How can policy best help thissituation? The first thing one has to say--and this has been said,too--is that a lot of what is going on here is structural and is notgoing to be susceptible to being helped by monetary policy. It's justgoing to take time to work through. But if we do feel that we want alittle insurance for the middle part of 1992, cautious and modesteasing would probably provide that. And if we do feel that things aregoing to hell in a handbasket in a hurry, then maybe it's time--orwould be at some point--to get very aggressive and ring the gong veryloudly.One thing that I think is in everybody's mind is: How do weimprove confidence? I'd like to say a word about confidence; I thinkit may be a little more complex than meets the eye. If we make-19-11/5/91another small move, it probably will have a small impact. We've made10 small moves in the last 12 months. And we can each make our ownassessment of what the effect on confidence has been from all of that.If we make a major policy move in an effort to improve confidence,it's not easy [to conclude] that it will have the result we want. Onthe affirmative side, of course, rates would probably drop, the primerate particularly. Spending and borrowing would probably be helped atthe margin. But there are potential negatives to it as well. For onething, the Fed could come off looking panicked, which could possiblyhave very adverse consequences since we're seeing the data as beingnot that bad but people would wonder what the Fed knows that theydon't know or what the Fed thinks that they don't think. Andparticularly right here with the drumbeat of the White House in ourears, I think the Fed could come off looking politically dominated.Both of those things feed into what I think would be very a poorsituation if the Fed began to lose its credibility. In my view, we'rejust getting that solidly in place now after a long time of feelingthat we deserved it and weren't getting it. And I would surely hateto see something happen that would knock that back. If something wereto happen just as we were beginning to be accepted as fully credibleand we were called into question again, it might be a very long timeindeed before we could get that credibility back once more.I think inflation expectations are beginning to wane in theeconomy and that's beginning to have a favorable effect. And Icertainly would hate it if we were to do something that would callthat into question again and cause that confidence that inflation isreceding to waver. If it appeared that inflation were returning, onceagain we would be a long time weeding it out a second time. Thatcould have the effect of holding interest rates, particularly long-term rates, higher than they would otherwise need to be. Also, thereare the self-fulfilling elements of having inflation expectations[revive], which could make our job very difficult all over again.There are a couple of other risks that we need to keep inmind as we think about the desirability of a very strong move, to theextent that that is attractive. For one thing, the stronger the move,the more likely it is that we would get a perverse effect in longrates. I don't know how likely that would be or at what point thatwould [happen], but we have to think about the possibility that thatcould occur at some point. The inflation battle isn't won yet. I'vealways been optimistic that we can and will win it and I still am; butI'm not quite as comfortable--to use the word that Jerry used just afew minutes ago--as I was. And frankly, the Greenbook forecast, whichI'm sure is a very responsible and good one, isn't all that impressiveto me in terms of the amount of inflation progress we're going to makeover the forecast period through 1993. The dollar could weakenmeaningfully if we got very aggressive [in easing]. Of course, thatwould help net exports. That would be good news for the short run butin the long run we'd have to deal with the inflationary consequencesthat could come out of that. Another thing that has not beenmentioned yet today is that we're going into the political season, andthere's going to be an enormous temptation in this environment forfiscal stimulus of one sort or another. I can envision thepossibility, if we got a huge amount of stimulus moving through thepipeline, that we could be presented with some pretty tough choices.We could either accommodate that fiscal stimulus, in which case we'dhave monetary and fiscal policy both easing at the same time we have-20-11/5/91this enormous deficit. Alternatively, we could offset it by anearlier tightening than we might otherwise desire. That could be veryawkward to do from a number of different standpoints.So, in sum, if things are going very wrong either now or inthe future, we might just have to bite the bullet and ring the gongand run the risk of getting lead poisoning from the bullet. On theother hand, it's not impossible that things might turn out to besomewhat better or at least as good as they appear, in which case Idon't think any immediate action would be required. And to the extentthat is what we see, we'd have a little time to watch and wait. Ifwe're unsure but would like to get some mid-1992 insurance--and we maywell want to do that at some point--I don't think there's any rush todo it. There is some time still available to affect the middle partof 1992, and a delay will give us an opportunity to evaluate just whatrisks we have and to pick a time and a method to do that carefully andmethodically. Mr. Chairman, that's where I am at the moment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I agree with those who suggest that this is along-cycle adjustment process. I think anyone who saw what happenedin the oil producing states and the agricultural states in the mid-1980s understood that this was going to be an asset price adjustmentperiod. Now, monetary policy was sufficiently powerful in the mid-1980s to be able to abort that adjustment process. We are not just at12 months and 10 small [easing] moves but 2-1/2 years and 490 basispoints lower in the fed funds rate than we were in June of 1989.That's a rather significant move. Now, it seems to me that monetarypolicy lags may be increasing in this environment. And I wonder aboutlooking at maybe at least two behavioral groups to see how that mightbe occurring. First of all for households, with their reliance on CDsand other short-term investments that we taught them to rely upon inthe 1980s, I think that heavy shift really did not involve directownership of equities; and a very small amount of direct ownership ofbonds by households leaves them rather vulnerable on the income side,[given] the interest rate declines that have occurred. The interestgap for the household sector is rather enormous when one thinks aboutshort-term CD rates at 4-1/2 percent as compared to credit cardinterest rates of 19 percent. It doesn't take a great deal ofbrilliance for households--many of whom learned to have a mix of bothshort-term liquid assets and also to hold liabilities at the sametime--to understand that there's a lot of payoff to shifting out ofCDs and bringing down debt. That low rate of return for households isundoubtedly driving them into the equity market in a new way. Asinterest rates fall, that occurs. And that phenomenon means that wedon't get quite the "bang for the buck" that we ordinarily wouldbecause we're not impacting the rates that households are paying asmuch as we're impacting the rates that households are receiving.There's also a lagged phenomenon at commercial banks. Inordinary recession cycles there is a shift, of course, between lendingand investment; but [when] a longer-term adjustment [is under way]that shift might be even more pronounced and longer-lasting and havesome somewhat perverse effects. It seems to me that the realopportunity cost for commercial banks in lending is not exactly theopportunity cost in what they're paying; as U.S. government securitiesin the two- to three-year range become a larger portion of the assets-21-11/5/91of commercial banks, the real opportunity cost is the yield on thosetwo- and three-year Treasuries. In a declining interest rate marketthat yield is much higher than the coupon rate. And as long as thatyield is as high, in many ways commercial banks worried about assetquality in the lending area would naturally delay making thetransition to aggressive lending. In many ways it seems to me, then,that the impetus to lend is going to come somewhat after interestrates have stopped declining. So, to some extent, declines in short-term interest rates may [lead to] a delayed effect as to what occurs.Now, there's another factor we ought to consider and that isthat long-cycle adjustments occur because conditions get out of whack.And those adjustments--those things that need to be changed--need to[occur]. In a sense aborting asset price adjustments doesn't help allthat much. Asset prices need to adjust to a different level ofexpected inflation. And in some ways the faster those asset priceadjustments take place the better the recovery. Unfortunately, theRTC and other ownership arrangements that don't cause these assets tobe docked may indeed prolong the adjustments.Another fact in the long cycle that we have to consider isthat household savings in a sense are inevitably linked to capitalinflows to the United States. And I think there are some realadvantages for household savings to adjust in such a manner that we donot [continue to take] the share of the world's capital that we havebeen taking over the last 10 years. So, that savings adjustment needsto take place, and we need to keep in mind that we don't want todisrupt conditions by trying to create in a sense the typicalrecovery. The typical recovery is not going to be there; and tryingto get that typical recovery will run greater risks of upsettingcertain markets than if we go in a more steady-as-we-go [manner]through here. Just think how serious it would be if we were to upsetthe foreign exchange market or upset the equity market. One concernthat I have is that the equity market could be in for a boom and thatcould involve a speculative fervor; and if this adjustment period isas long as I expect it to be, then a run-up in equity prices [untilthey get] out of line and then watching them unwind very rapidly isnot going to be a very pleasant experience. So, the critical questionin front of us is: What are we teaching the world that we are doing?Are we teaching the world that our focus is on employment and outputor are we teaching the world that we continue to have a concept ofprice level targeting that will enable long-term interest rates tocome down in such a way as to continue to get recovery in housing,which I think is essential to get this long-cycle process going ourway? Just because it's a long cycle doesn't mean that it has to be anextraordinarily bad long cycle. And I think what we do is very, veryimportant.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Well, I agree with Governor Angell that wedon't have much risk of a typical recovery here. What I would like tosee, though, is confidence that we at least have a sustainablerecovery. I guess I do agree with the basic diagnosis that we'reexperiencing a gradual wringing out of the excesses of the '80s andthat that is imparting downward pressure on growth. We've seen thoseexcesses, and people are talking about an asset [deflation] in realestate. Expectations of inflationary home prices have collapsed, and11/5/91I agree with those who think that that has had a profound impact onconsumers since that's probably the single most important component oftheir wealth. And I do agree that the leverage also was an excess.One can see the way corporations are using the current equity marketto [deleverage]. Consumers not only have been reducing their debt,but their leverage has robbed us of the excess bench capacity to spura recovery. So, we don't have that force. And I believe all thiscomes home to roost in financial institutions, which financed theseexcesses. We've seen this most dramatically in the collapse of theS&L industry; but it's also in banks, insurance companies, and financecompanies, all with varying degrees of exposure to these structurallytroubled areas of commercial real estate, unleveraged loans, and junkbonds. The public capital markets in my view adjusted quickly andbrutally to these excesses. The stock market collapsed in '87; thejunk bond market disintegrated in '89. But even after that period,the momentum of excess continued in financial institutions, and theirretrenchment out of this is slower and more painful. They're still inthe process--it was not only in 1990 but even in 1991--of recognizingand dealing with asset quality problems and pulling back to raisecapital ratios and asset quality. We see this in the shrinking offinancial intermediary credit at the same time that public market debtis growing. We also see it in slower M2 growth.I think that much of the force of our easing to date has beenabsorbed by this retrenchment process instead of fostering spending.The ease in long rates and the rise in stock prices resulted in largenew issue volumes, but the proceeds are not going to businessspending; they're going to clean up balance sheets. The ease in bankfunding costs has gone into the healing process of increased margins,and mortgage rate reductions have gone increasingly into refinancingto reduce home [mortgage payments]. We can't avoid this retrenchmentprocess, but I think we must take into account these retrenchmentpressures in setting our course. And our current stance has not beenconsistent with our earlier forecast of moderate sustained recovery,at least in my view. That earlier forecast had two engines of growth.First, sustained recovery in housing of modest dimensions andsecondly, this inventory-led increase in industrial production. Thesetwo developments, housing and industrial production, were supposed tospur income growth and consumer spending with business spending comingin later. In my view, it's pretty clear that the forecast is notbeing fulfilled. The housing market, after advancing since early thisyear, has at best flattened out and is likely declining despite lowerinterest rates. Industrial production, after growing for fourstraight months, has been dead in the water for three straight months.The leading economic indicators also have flattened out and themomentum that was in evidence in mid-summer is now gone. Andsentiment has turned increasingly sour.With the importance of the consumer to our economy, I thinkwe have relatively little room for error in the current situation.With industrial production and employment not growing, income growthwill be minimal with a low saving rate and deteriorating consumerconfidence. We've already seen it have an impact in the housingmarket; we've had long-term mortgage rates coming down dramaticallyover the last several months and yet the housing market is going inthe opposite direction [of what one would expect]. I think that's theimpact of confidence. There is a real risk in this environment and apotential for the momentum in this massive economy to turn down.-23-11/5/91Business confidence is also increasingly sour, reflecting thedeterioration of the recovery. And I fear there is power in negativethinking. [Earlier] the momentum was generated in part by anexogenous shock: the military success in the Persian Gulf. It raisedconfidence, which increased stock prices and bond prices and reducedoil prices. This time I see no such positive shocks on the horizon,although I wouldn't rule that out. I would agree with those who thinkthe economy is vulnerable to a negative shock, and there are somepotential ones in the financial sector. So, I have difficulty withthe current [Greenbook] forecast [in terms of] understanding what isgoing to pull the economy out of this deceleration and place it neatlyback on the track in the second quarter of '92. That is perhaps whereI differ a bit from the Greenbook.As for policy in the current environment, we need to weighagainst these retrenchment forces and the deteriorating confidence inorder to return to the track of this summer's Greenbook forecast.Since these are contractionary forces we are responding to, I seelittle risk to the inflation reduction program. Indeed, the currentenvironment has been characterized by an extended period of slowgrowth of M2 and slow growth of credit. If you take one-yearinflationary expectations right off the Michigan Survey and comparethem to one-year bill rates, real rates are higher than they were lastyear at this time. So, I don't believe monetary policy is too easy.It is true that we've done three easing moves recently, but two ofthose--or I guess more than two--are already included in the Greenbookforecast. There are some arguments against making this adjustment.Some would argue that lower rates may not be especially effective. Ifso--if you think they're not going to affect the economy--they shouldnot be especially harmful or risky to inflation. Despite doubts inevery [bout] of economic weakness, I believe that monetary policyworks. And I think a significant reduction in rates would help thehousing markets and the stock and bond markets and would facilitatethe [deleveraging] process, which ultimately must give way to businessspending. I think it would help banks; it would precipitate alowering of the prime rate and allow the pass-through of lower ratesto final borrowers while still retaining the margins needed for theadjustment process. Ultimately it would help with consumer durablesas the average age of autos reaches historical levels. The quality ofdomestically produced autos has improved substantially, and I thinkwe'll have a pickup from that as well. Also, I think a move wouldcause the dollar to give up some of this year's gains and that wouldhave an impact on exports. My view is that a move at this time wouldalso help confidence; I don't think it would frighten people. It'spretty clear to me from the confidence surveys or the public opinionpolls that consumers and business people alike perceive thedeterioration in the recovery. The frustration is that they seenothing happening that could turn the situation around. They see noresponse. And if we respond in a discreet and visible way, I thinkthat would be supportive to confidence, not frightening. It is truethat we might be accused of responding to what Mike Kelley calls thedrumbeat from the White House but since that drumbeat is constant[unintelligible] all is quiet up the street.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If they had an impact, they would havestopped at some point.-24-11/5/91MR. MULLINS. And when they say this ease came just after adrumbeat, I would say: How does that distinguish that day of the weekfrom any other day of the week? I do think there is some risk ofdissipating the impact of our moves with continued small moves, and Iwonder if we continue on this path whether we're going to have much ofa "gong" left to ring. So, I think the time has come to make a moveand to lean visibly against this ill wind before it blows us seriouslyoff course. The risk to policy if we wait is that the force ofeconomic momentum could well turn down and confront us with much moredifficult policy situations down the road in 1992.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I've really been startled by therecent clouding of our otherwise perfectly clear crystal ball. I alsofind it difficult to deal with the proposition that this is a bank-managed credit crunch that is a major factor in the continuedsluggishness of the economy. After all, credit extension is a two-party transaction: a willing and demanding borrower and a willing andaccommodating lender. And lenders who have been abused for recklesslending and excessive risk-taking can hardly be criticized for a morecautious current stance. As a matter of fact, I suspect that thosewho are complaining the most and the loudest about the unavailabilityof credit are the people who didn't pay back their loans last year andwhose balance sheets have deteriorated substantially as a result ofthe economic slowdown. I think businesses and consumers at this pointare confused and worried by the same conflicting signals that confuseand worry us. And they are not hammering on the doors of the banksdemanding extensions of credit. In my opinion we are in a paralysisof confidence on the part of consumers and businesses as well asbanks. And I am somewhat skeptical about the effectiveness ofmonetary policy in dealing with human psychological depression. Itseems to me that confidence is more likely to return under thestimulus of a clearly enunciated political leadership in dealing withdomestic issues, and I question whether further ease in interest rateswill do the trick.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Coffee has arrived.[Coffee break][CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Lindsey.]MR. D. LINDSEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Excuse me, why don't you wait; we'vejust lost Governor Mullins. Sorry about that. We're back in recesspending the finding of a missing Board member. Here he is. Okay, goahead.MR. D. LINDSEY. Thank you again, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for David? If not, let meget started. As I indicated at our telephone conference last week, Ithink what we are dealing with clearly is an historical process thathas very little in the way of counterparts in the post World War IIperiod. This is an old fashioned asset contraction. It is reflected-25-11/5/91most severely in the commercial real estate area, with obviousconsequences in the financial [sector] as we discussed. It'sreflected, strangely, in the residential single-family area eventhough the data themselves scarcely suggest anything even remotelyclose to the asset-price deflation in commercial real estate.Nonetheless, what is clear--and one picks this up from anecdotalevidence and at these cocktail parties we all go to--is thatindividuals somehow perceived that the market values of theirresidences were actually much higher than they really were. There wasa sense in which the offering price they had in the back of theirminds was the equivalent of a market [price], and what is happeningnow with the return of a degree of realism is basically that peoplefeel that the prices of single-family residences are undergoing afairly major decline. All of the analytical work we've done suggeststhat this is a major factor in household purchases, especially durablegoods outlays.Part of this process reflects not only the weakening inbalance sheets, but it is also a significant element in the physicalvolume sense. As Gary Stern was saying earlier, what we have here isanother "inventory" problem, which we've been discussing pretty muchall year--especially earlier in the year--and last year. Theseinventories are not so much autos in the dealers' showrooms or unsoldhomes in the hands of developers, but too many cars in the garage andtoo many homes relative to the underlying demand. In a sense, nothaving had an economic contraction in the 1980s, we just never hadthat adjustment. Businesses and households picked up a much higherlevel of economic structures and of hard durable assets so that theirbalance sheets are all undergoing a fairly apparent adjustment processat this stage.What is clear about this whole process is that one wouldassume that there is some significant price deflation going on. But Ihave been confronted with something, which I find really quitepuzzling, in the differential behavior of the stock market and thebond market. If in fact there is a significant decline ininflationary expectations, which one would assume in this sort ofenvironment and which is clearly supported by the slow growth in moneysupply even if we make all of our various adjustments, one wouldexpect that price/earnings ratios in the market would be high. All ofour history suggests that in a noninflationary environment price/earnings ratios are significantly higher than in an inflationaryenvironment. Indeed, the level [of stock prices] today, calculated ina real rate of return sense, is fully consistent with the notion thatthe stock market is presuming that there is a disinflationary forceout there and that a low discount rate on effective real earnings isappropriate. But if this is the case, why are real rates in the longend of the market as high as they are? Or, more readily getting atthe issue of trying to make that calculation, why are nominal rates ashigh as they are?One possibility, which I suggested to some of you--and I mustsay it's unclear whether it's true or not--is that we all view theintermediation process as something that brings down the real rate ofreturn of long-term instruments. In fact, it is that phenomenon thatcreates the value-added in the intermediation process. As aconsequence, if you are focusing on what has clearly been a cripplingof the intermediation process, and the symptoms of this are all over-26-11/5/91the place, then the answer may be--and I'm not sure that this is acorrect answer--that one of the reasons we have higher long-term realrates is that we are not getting the intermediation process thatbrings the whole basic rate structure down. That should not affectthe stock price relationships because that's external to theintermediation process. But it is very clear that this issue is amajor problem in trying to evaluate the extent of the disinflationaryforces and how critical they really are. Measured inflation is higherthan is consistent with the hypothesis that what we are looking at isa gradual disinflationary process. Part of this, however, may verywell be the fact that there are significant increases in indirectbusiness taxes that are showing up in the GNP accounts. And this ispartly the issue at the state and local government level. It alsoreflects some of the excise taxes that were put in as part of the lastbudget agreement. Indeed, take a look at the nonfinancial corporatebusiness rates and remember that they break down prices into unitprofits, unit capital consumption allowances, unit indirect taxes, andall that. If you strip out the governmental actions that affect pricelevels--indirect business taxes and mainly subsidies, which usuallycome in in the other direction--then the rate of inflation that we arelooking at through the second quarter in the GNP accounts shows thatthe total price increase for the quarter is 3.8 percent; excluding thedirect taxes and subsidies, it is 3.1 percent. Now, I don't want tomake too much of that, but it may well be that one of the problems wehave here is a measurement problem because it's fairly apparent thatwe could have a highly disinflationary process and if we stick a bunchof sales taxes on top, we get measured price indexes in the CPI thatare fairly significant.The implication is that once we get beyond this particularperiod, the measured price inflation is likely to fall somewhat fasterthan is indicated in the Greenbook. In fact, if I had a bet on it, Iwould take it. The consequence of all of this is that we have seen,as everyone has mentioned, a very major crippling of financialintermediaries. Obviously, the S&Ls are not lending; they're introuble [as are] the commercial banks and insurance companies. It'sreally interesting that the areas where we are seeing very stronglending are areas that are not touched by this, namely, the smallerfinance companies, other than those involved in autos. In fact, themost interesting statistics that were given to us yesterday in theBoard staff presentation were the very dramatic increases--a 25percent annual rate--in small finance company lending. We'reobviously seeing a tremendous amount of public offerings of equitiesand bonds. If the loan demand is so weak, why is it so strong incertain areas? I think the answer has to be in part that we aredealing with a very weak financial intermediary system. None of thisis new. We knew all of this two, three, four months ago. Wecertainly knew it when the economy was coming out of the recession.What we didn't know is how significant all of this was, as Mike Prellmentioned earlier. There is no question that the economy was comingback in July and August. It wasn't coming back in a huge surge, but[at a pace] consistent with the proposition that this overhang ofdisinflationary forces was not very potent. In the last several weeksit is beginning to appear that that conclusion may not be correct; itcan be a wholly false phenomenon. I had to live through the summer of1976. We all remember the "recession" of the summer of 1976; that'swhat got Jimmy Carter elected. And in February 1977 there was thisnew "get the economy rolling" program which had to be pulled back-27-11/5/91because the economy was at that point rolling too fast. So, we haveseen pauses before, and it is not inconceivable that this is exactlythat. The trouble is that we just do not know that this is going tohappen. And we have to think of policy in the context of a periodwhich is very sensitive and one which in retrospect is going to lookabsolutely clear to all of our critics! What all of this suggests tome is that at this stage six-week intervals between contacts of thisCommittee are not particularly appropriate time lengths. Indiscussing the issues of policy, I would suggest, irrespective of whatwe decide to do, that we really ought to meet--and I don't meanphysically but in a telephone conference--to review what is going on.Having said that, in trying to balance the various forces asI see them, I think the risks of easing at this stage are very small.I say that for two reasons. One, if we were to move lower at thispoint, it would be in the context of the money supply showing a minus$4 billion when we publish it Thursday, leaving the growth of M2 forthe year below the lower bound of the Committee's range. If we lookat the credit structure, it is very tough to envisage inflationaryforces re-emerging anywhere near this level. It's not interest ratesthat move inflation; it's finance. And so far as finance isconcerned, we just do not have inflationary forces running. The rateof borrowing at this stage is the lowest it has been in the post WorldWar II period. It is just extremely difficult to believe thatinflation will take hold unless one believes that inflation is not amonetary phenomenon. And that, I suggest, just makes no sensewhatever.Secondly, I think the evidence of our ability to move on theup side during an election year is fairly significant. Earlier viewswere that the Fed could not move under those conditions. I think whatwe were able to do in 1988 clearly indicates that there's a change inthe tone of how money and politics run. And, if it became necessaryto turn around, I don't see any reason why we shouldn't be able to dothat. I certainly would say, and I hope, that the will of thisCommittee is clearly in that direction.So, I conclude from all of this that we ought to move lower.Because of the uncertainties that are involved in the outlook, I wouldsuggest that we only do 25 basis points. Now, how we would handlethat with respect to the discount rate is something that the Board ofGovernors will have to decide. Having gone through all of that, Iwould suggest to you that we are in a very unusual period. And whileI hear this issue of a jump-start as being crucial, a jump-start isnot the need of the economy because you can't jump-start the Americaneconomy. It's like a battleship or an aircraft carrier, which has toturn. We may at some point need an element that affects confidence.I would suspect that it's conceivable, as Mike Prell pointed out, thatwe may have to do some ringing of the bell a lot more loudly at somepoint. At the moment, however, I think it is very important that theFederal Reserve appear to be there because what has been going on outin the political world is the indication that nobody is minding thestore. We're the last game in town. And to do something thatsuggests that we are there, that we are mindful of what is happening,and that we are up to date on everyone's concerns is a crucial factorthat we have to keep in mind as the weeks go by. We're going to findout one way or the other where this whole thing is going within a muchshorter time than I think we suspect. And in the interim, as I said-28-11/5/91earlier, we have to keep in somewhat closer contact with Committeemembers and make judgments in real time.So, in summary, I would at this stage recommend half ofalternative A, which I hope we would implement after the refunding isover, which suggests to me Friday. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, since we might be having atelephone conference call anyway, there's some uncertainty in my mindas to how that would take place if the Board were not to make adiscount rate move. Wouldn't there be some advantage in going "B"asymmetric and then having a telephone conference call after we knowwhat the Board is going to do? That would still mean the FOMC wouldbe free to do what it chose to do, but it would then have knowledgeabout what the announcement--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, with the alternative I suggestedwe don't need a telephone conference because the 1/4 point iscontingent on a discount rate cut.MR. ANGELL. That could be an alternative. That would be analternative that would be more appealing to me.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, how would you propose to structurethis technically? If there were to be a decision at this table to godown 25 basis points to be effective Friday, we have a couple of daysto get through here that could be susceptible to some sort of leak tothe market that could be of critical importance.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would suggest to you that theexperience that we have had in the last couple of meetings indicatesthat this is a secure organization. If that is false, then we havefar more problems than we know. If you feel more comfortable about itand you want to leave it asymmetric, I would recommend that we goasymmetric but my intention would be to move.MR. BLACK. Would that be on Friday?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Friday.MR. BLACK. On the federal funds rate?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, if I might just [comment] on thatnarrow issue. I think security after our unfortunate episode hasimproved. And if we really think that's what we're going to do--Ihave some sympathy for it and I'll get back to that later--then thisgroup, depending on what it thinks the Board of Governors is going todo [on the discount rate], should vote for it now instead of goingthrough the process of just saying we're not officially doing itbecause we're afraid of a leak in a couple of days.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I feel uncomfortable about it justbecause of that leak possibility. Wayne, are you through?MR. ANGELL. Yes.-29-11/5/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, it's pretty clear that the recentdata have intensified doubts about the whole process of the recovery;that's clear to all of us. At the same time, we seem to be makingsome progress with regard to inflation. Under these circumstances, Itoo would favor the middle course, which I would define as a 25 basispoint cut in the funds rate. I really would not favor the 50 basispoint decline. It seems to me that gradualism has served us quitewell. Of course, we reduced the funds rate 1/4 point last week and Ithink another 25 basis point, presumably on Friday, would beappropriate. If we wish to ring the "gong," it's very easy to dothat, of course. And I guess in some respects I would be in favor ofthat. It seems to me that if the move of 25 basis points that we'retalking about were combined with a move on the discount rate, thatprobably would accomplish a great deal as well. Finally, in terms ofthe language, I would favor asymmetric language on the down side.MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, I just have a technical questionbefore we proceed. We do have this even keel [consideration] in [theface of a Treasury] financing but is it an open-and-shut case thatthis change could not be done tomorrow morning? After all, we havethe shortest maturity being auctioned today, which isn't as affectedby these fluctuations. If we did it tomorrow, both the medium-termand the longer-term bidding would still be ahead of us. And I amthinking, given the risks--and while we are an honest organization--that that's a long time to go. I'm just wondering what the pros andcons are.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, may I make a suggestion?MR. BOEHNE. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's wait to see what conclusion wecome to. Then, let's put "when" on the table, if that is theconclusion, as a separate issue.MR. BOEHNE. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Bob Parry, are you finished?MR. PARRY. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I came into this meetingfeeling that we should cut the funds rate 25 basis points. I alsohoped, and I still continue to hope, that that will be accompanied bya drop in the discount rate. I think that would send an important anddramatic message that we really need to send. As you said, themomentum of this recovery has slowed down or even stalled. I pay agreat deal of attention to this confidence element, and I think peoplereally need some kind of a signal from some institution. And giventhe impotency of fiscal policy at the moment, we're the onlyinstitution that can provide some kind of action that will help toturn confidence around. Twenty-five basis points and even a drop inthe discount rate may not renew confidence completely, but it will gosome of the way toward helping with that and helping with the further-30-11/5/91consumption and business [unintelligible] needs. Finally, I agreewith you entirely that the inflation risks of moving at this time arevery minimal. So, given the risks to a sustainable recovery, I thinkwe need to move and 25 basis points strikes me as [appropriate].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And would you be asymmetric?MR. FORRESTAL. I'd be asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, while I'm in favor of what you wantto do, some questions arise, given what we know and don't know. Whatwe do know is that we have risks on the down side and that, while wemay not be able to control things, we can influence them. This issueof confidence, which others have spoken of, is very important. Ithink the worst thing we could do would be to tell the American publicnot only that fiscal policy is impotent but that we don't thinkthere's anything the Federal Reserve can do either. I think peoplewould give up. Also, in terms of the longer time frame, if it shouldbe necessary to turn back, I think the Federal Reserve would do it.It's a win/win situation in some sense if the economy recovers becausewe buy more credibility in the long run by showing that we're willingto do it then. I certainly hope, because I think some--to use thephrase of the day--"gong effect" is needed, that the 25 basis pointcut will be associated with a cut in the discount rate. Some of [myconcern] does have to do with the timing issue that Ed Boehne raisedand that you want to return to. But I'd be in favor of [yourproposal] and I'd be in favor of asymmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. First Vice President Hendricks.MR. HENDRICKS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our support for therecent reduction in the fed funds rate was based on the need toencourage a stronger growth rate of M2, not because of a perceivedthreat to the economy in the District or the nation. We're concernedover the persistent weakness in M2 since last spring and its longer-term trend over the past four years. A stronger growth rate in M2,within its target range, would likely add to the credibility of thattarget and would provide the base for a realignment of intermediate-and long-term rates. Normally, we would be inclined to wait a bitlonger to judge the impact of this recent reduction in the funds rateto the 5 percent level. Work in Cleveland suggests that if we want afourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter 1992 growth rate of 3 percent in M2,we need a funds rate lower than 5 percent. Projections of M2 growthhave fallen short for some time now, and we would prefer to push onthe funds rate until we get M2 safely to a level we are comfortablewith. We're getting close now to next year and, although we haven'tcome to a finalization on our view yet, our guess is that we will wantsomething around 3 percent. We would not mind going into next year alittle heavy on M2 growth, but we don't believe the 1/2 pointreduction in alternative A is needed at this point; our preference isfor the position half-way in between. We believe another 25 basispoint reduction of the funds rate with symmetric language isappropriate at this time. And we believe we should push ahead asrapidly as we can to get the M2 growth we want.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.-31-11/5/91MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that the smallreductions we have been doing really aren't producing the desiredresults, with M2 in this process having continued to deteriorate. Wehaven't reduced the discount rate since September and that seems to mean awfully long time to have left such a visible rate in place, nothaving made a change. I do think we are at a point where we need todo something a little more visible. This confidence factor isimportant. Also, it's important to do something that will bring theprime rate down. I'm not [certain] that a lower prime rate isnecessary to encourage more lending, at least at the outset; however,ultimately, I think it does work its way through to higher lending.But it certainly does reduce the costs [of doing business]. Mypreference would be to reduce the discount rate by 50 basis points andthe fed funds rate by 25 basis points. As to whether it's Wednesdayor Friday, I have a slight preference for Friday, but I don't care. Imust say, having heard the conversation earlier, that I don't knowquite how much confidence I have that a change in the discount rate[will be adopted] at this point. Lacking that, then I'd be in favorof alternative A with a 50 basis point cut in the fed funds rate. ButI could live with 25 basis points now on the fed funds rate if therewere asymmetric language. If [the consensus] were for 25 basis pointsnow and symmetric language, I'd find that a very difficult option atthe moment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I favor this "A to B" 4-3/4 percent funds ratewith an asymmetric directive for this body, and I think it ought to beaccompanied by a discount rate reduction by the other body. The logicis that we have a reasonable prospect of doing some good with thispackage and I think we have very little chance of doing harm. Andeven if we find it is harmful, we can undo it. So, in that situation,it seems to me we ought to do it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I find these unusually difficult circumstances,but on balance I come out in agreement with you. It's not that Ithink a 1/4 point reduction in the funds rate, whether or not it'saccompanied by a discount rate reduction, is going to do a lot quicklyand directly for consumer confidence or [business confidence] or jump-start the economy. And we know more about jumper cables and jump-starts in Minneapolis than most! But my expectations would be moremodest. I am concerned about the slow growth of M2, not so much in astrictly monetarist context but in the sense that going into this yearI at least was looking for continuity in policy, not a sharp departurein M2 growth from what we experienced in the previous four years. Ithink continuity is still a virtue. I don't believe such a move atthis point would weaken our credibility. In fact, it might enhanceour credibility and I think it's the responsible thing to do at thistime. And I don't think it would interfere with wringing out theexcesses of the 1980s, a process which has to continue if we're goingto restore economic health.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I'm in favor of standing pat right now. I'd gowith alternative "B." We just moved. [Unintelligible]. It's not an-32-11/5/91original idea; Wayne alluded to it and others have mentioned it. ButI'm not so sure that a lot of activity isn't frozen on the expectationthat rates are going to go lower. A lot of people are just waiting tosee. So, I'd just stay where we are and watch for a while. Also, Iwouldn't be so quick to say that there isn't any inflationary riskright now. I continue to think long rates are a reflection of long-term inflationary expectations. I wouldn't be a bit surprised, if wemade a move, that long rates would come down somewhat. But I don'tthink that's the measure; it's a measure over a longer period of timeof what those rates are doing. I think we have to be careful if wedisturb them.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. I think your recommendation of a 25 basis pointcut in the funds rate is appropriate. And in the context of morefrequent discussions in the coming weeks, I would prefer the symmetriclanguage.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I have some concerns about easingnow in terms of inflation down the road. I assume that there may be adiscount rate cut. If that's the case, that would make for anannouncement from the Fed and then I would recommend the possibilityof a 1/4 point cut on asymmetric [language toward] easing based on newinformation that may come to you. So, I'd be slightly different.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would favor the 25 basis pointreduction in the funds rate accompanied by a discount rate change of1/2 percentage point, recognizing, of course, that the timing decision[for the discount rate] itself is the Board's. If both of thosethings were done--this gets into Ed's question about timing--Iprobably would favor a symmetric directive thereafter. With just thefunds rate done, that complicates matters and I'd probably favor anasymmetric directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The trouble is: Which would you votefor?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That means I'd vote either way.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to suggest a compromise,which I guess would be controversial, though.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's how it's a compromise!MR, BLACK. I thought we had covered every permutation andcombination we could have, but I don't think anybody has come up withexactly this. I would leave the federal funds rate where it is forright now, but I would favor submitting--in the case of our Bank,which would join several others--[a recommendation for] a 1/2 pointcut in the discount rate with the hope that the Board would see fit toapprove that on Friday. If we had a steady federal funds rate right-33-11/5/91now, I think that would be a good way to reassure the long-termmarkets and it would give us a little more time to judge the easingactions that we took last week. At the same time, reducing the[discount] rate would reestablish a more normal spread between thediscount rate and the federal funds rate. And a very important point,to which Governor Angell alluded earlier as did Tom Melzer, is that itmight also convince a lot of potential borrowers who are sitting outthere just waiting until they think rates have hit the bottom to moveinto the fray. A lot of people in the real estate business think thatis true. Now, if we did adopt that approach, which I'm sure we're notgoing to, I would favor having an asymmetric directive in favor ofease thereafter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I don't believe the state of theeconomy is quite to the point here that others seem to feel. We mayget there, though I hope we don't; I don't think we're there now. Ithink there's still a lot of stimulus in train that is going tosupport us as time goes forward. And I don't view a discount rate cuthere as quite as riskless as we would like. As a consequence, I wouldprefer alternative B but I do believe that asymmetric language iswarranted under these circumstances. I'm aware of the fact that youhave said you would use it if you got it. If that turned out to bethe case, so be it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I would favor a 1/4 point cut now and alsoasymmetric language because I believe the risks are still very much onthe down side. We're playing catchup.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Well, I must say that I feel like the person whois lost in the woods who as a boy scout was told that if you get lostin the woods find a stream and follow the stream downstream and you'lleventually come out. It may be a long trek if you're somewhere nearthe Continental Divide! But I sense that there's a stream going alonghere, and I guess I'm persuaded that the downside risks are notmaterial. So, I will vote reluctantly for "A" symmetrical.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry, with the 25 basis points?MR. LAWARE. Yes, 25 basis points down but symmetricallanguage.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I've run out of people. It's clear thatthere is a majority of the Committee for 25 basis points. I countone, two, three, four, five...; there is a majority for asymmetrical.Let me ask you this: Is anyone's vote dependent on "when?" Can wediscuss that independently?MR. PARRY. Well, maybe Peter ought to address that issue.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, no, what I'm trying to say iswhether or not the vote [unintelligible] we just took a survey. WhatI conclude from marking down what everyone has said is that there is a-34-11/5/91majority for both 25 basis points now and leaving asymmetric language.The question I am asking is: Was anybody's [decision] related towhether that would be done, if it were done, sooner or later? Inother words, can we discuss that issue after we find out whether infact that is the consensus of the Committee?MR. PARRY. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm merely asking whether these areindependent events in a sense.MR. PARRY. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. If that's the case, then I wouldask that you read the directive.MR, BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to decrease somewhat theexisting degree of pressure on reserve positions. Depending uponprogress toward price stability, trends in economic activity, thebehavior of the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreignexchange and domestic financial markets, slightly greater reserverestraint might or slightly lesser reserve restraint would beacceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserveconditions are expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 overthe period from September through December at annual rates of about 3and 1 percent, respectively."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would you call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell NoPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley NoGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Mullins YesPresident Parry YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. We now ought to have a discussionon the timing of this. Do you want to start, Peter, on the issue ofwhat would happen if we move 25 basis points Tuesday, Wednesday,Thursday, or Friday?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, Mr. Chairman, as I said in mystatement, I think the market is looking for further easing: probablya further 1/4 point on the funds rate and probably also a discountrate move. That has to be on their minds as they bid on theseTreasury offerings. Yet, I can't escape the feeling that it's somehowpotentially disruptive to have those changes actually implementedright within the period of bidding for the Treasury securities. Ifsomething had been done early this morning, a couple of hours beforethey come up to bidding for the 3-year, so be it. We did that inAugust, I believe, when a small change was implemented the morning ofthe 3-year auction. We did get a certain number of complaints from11/5/91the market even about that. But with a move that occurs right withinthe bidding period we would hear even more about it. You can say,well, why wouldn't an easing move if anything be a plus for securitiesif they take them? But you have to remember that they're in the midstof a distribution process where they are shorting; they are selling ona "when-issued" basis the issues that are about to be bid for. So,you could catch some market participants in that stage of having sold"when issued" to some customers with the expectation that they willthen be putting a bid in the auction. I think that's an awkwardposition to be leaving them in. So, I have just a gut feeling thatit's preferable to wait. Now, how long should you wait? It seems tome Friday would be about the earliest that I could feel comfortablewith. I could even make a case for having it carry over to early nextweek. But I would feel most strongly that it would be preferable notto implement a visible change just within these bidding days of today,Wednesday, or Thursday.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you want to [comment]?MR. D. LINDSEY. I agree with Peter's comments.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I hope my advice is wanted on thiseven though it wasn't on the other. I do believe that there's anintegrity question here. Information is scarce and information ishard to come by for the market. And I don't feel comfortable for usto deliberately let an auction take place for a 10-year issue tomorrowmorning and not let the markets know all that we know. I do not feelcomfortable with people taking short and long positions on an auctiontomorrow while we know precisely what we're going to do. It seems tome that the fairest thing to do is to do it as soon as the marketshave [closed], which I think for us would be tomorrow morning. Iwould also suggest, Mr. Chairman, that there have been times thatwe've had leaks that are more in the realm of information for [newsmedia]. But if we were to have a leak, that would only be seen as anadvantage for someone in the market and would do this institution agreat deal of harm.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know, I must say I agree with that.Let me cite one of the problems I have. The FOMC is scheduled to meeton a publicly announced date and is expected to make decisions. Themarket knows that. If we in the past had moved during an auction,everyone would have screamed bloody murder. But the questionessentially is: Who is right in this question? And the question I'dlike to put to a vote with you is: If we were to do it some time inthe middle of the auction, how much damage would actually be done?MR. D. LINDSEY. I personally started out with that view lastweek and early this week. And I thought particularly that if theCommittee were to go down 1/4 point, that is what is expected and itcould be done in [the midst of] an auction. But after talking toPeter, who yesterday read me a litany of commentators saying it'sinconceivable that the Federal Reserve would move during the auction.I said: "Peter, I realize that's a common view, but is it right?" Iwas resisting even then. I did finally come around to the thoughtthat it would be better not to mix this policy change with the middleof that bidding process. So, as I said before, I personally come down11/5/91with Peter on this one. After having thought about it, I realizethere are two sides and I've been on both!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But answer the question. How muchdamage is actually done?MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, may I add to your question? Howmuch damage is done and to whom is the damage done?MR. D. LINDSEY. Well, let's say that the 1/4 point isn'tfully built in. Let's say we announce tomorrow and there's a littledecline in the yields in the 3-year note. To the extent that there issome market reaction, those who went short on the 3-year are going tobe hurt and we're going to hear from them. There are going to becomplaints. I think they'll complain more if we move tomorrow than ifwe move on Friday in the sense that they're going into their biddingon the 3-year note pretty sure that we are going to move on Friday.So, they're not as likely to write irate letters even if yields moveagainst them. So, there are people who potentially are damaged. Ishould probably let Peter--MR. STERNLIGHT. [Unintelligible.]MR. BOEHNE. In these kinds of situations where you havesomething of a trade-off, I think you have to ask yourself a question:If I had to defend the actions to the whole world, which side would Irather be on? And I would rather be on the side that said we had ascheduled meeting and we made a decision; there was speculation proand con but we implemented that decision in the market so thateverybody would find out about it at the same time. I'd rather saythat than that we delayed it for three days or five days or six daysbecause we were afraid a few people would get hurt selling short. Inthe whole context of what our role is as a public institution, we haveto go with the side that meets our standards and with which we feelcomfortable.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, you have to ask yourself: What isthe job of the market people? Their job is to make judgments as towhat is going on in the market. And one of those jobs is [judging]what we're going to do.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I just want to associate myselfvery strongly with the views both of yourself and Governor Angell. Ithink this is a case where there is a question of integrity of theorganization in what we're doing, particularly in the environment ofthe last several months domestically. I'd be concerned about notletting people who are paid to bear the risks bear the risks when wereally don't think, from what I hear, that this is something we fearis going to do a lot of damage to the economy. And the economy iswhat we're supposed to be concerned with.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, there's another complication. Anumber of us have meetings of our executive committees or full boardson Thursday and we'll be addressing the question of the discount rate.And if we know that we're going to cut the federal funds rate 1/4point on Friday, we can't tell the directors yet. They don't have the-37-11/5/91information they need to make a rational decision. So, there'sanother reason for doing it now rather than then, although I have alot of sympathy for what Peter and his associates have been saying.MR. PARRY. You mean you can't make a recommendation on thediscount rate independent of that?MR. BLACK. Sure, I can; but I have knowledge that they don'thave that I can't share with them.MR. PARRY. Yes, but you--MR. BLACK. And I wouldn't--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's true all the time.MR. BLACK. Well, it is [a concern] to me not to shareinformation and give them my best judgment, which would have to beaffected by the knowledge that we were going to cut [the funds rate]1/4 point the next day. We're pretty free with our directors but wenever tell them anything about what we're going to do or anythingabout what we just did that isn't released, and we never will. So wecouldn't possibly tell them that this 1/4 point [reduction] waspending. And yet I think their attitude would be affected to somesignificant extent by that if they knew.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. First, I think we shouldn't schedule FOMCmeetings around quarterly auctions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't the quarterly auctionsschedule themselves around our meetings?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's not a bad idea!MR. MULLINS. I tend to agree with Wayne's analysis, althoughI think we should be aware that there is potential damage here. Theconcern I would have is the 30-year auction, because that price is nolonger being set by people at the margin. On auction day, Thursday,they will rip open the market and reach deep within it to sell $12billion worth of bonds and, when you do that, that marginal buyer issometimes a fairly aberrant personality. If there is skepticism aboutour move, I don't think we would see that on Friday so much because,again, they are trading at the margin. And we just are morevulnerable and at risk of getting a sloppy auction and doing somedamage to the long-term rate. I think that happened a bit in April,and there have been some other examples as well. Even recognizingthat risk, I still would come down with Governor Angell.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I was just going to ask Peter: If, say, we didit tomorrow, how effectively could you transmit it? I don't know whatmode open market operations are in right now.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we think we have a moderate add need.We didn't do anything today because funds were sitting right at 5-38-11/5/91percent. If we wanted to transmit a signal tomorrow, we probablycould do overnight system repurchase agreements and it probably--MR. ANGELL. At what time, Peter?MR. STERNLIGHT. At our normal time.MR. FORRESTAL. Could we do it early, though?MR. ANGELL. You wouldn't do it early?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't know. I'd have to think about that;I wouldn't be inclined to.MR. SYRON. If that's your concern, wouldn't you have to putmore in if you do it at the regular time rather than by doing it withan announcement effect before the market opens?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't know. My inclination would be to dosomething--. To go back to this question of damage, I don't seeterrible damage from doing it, and I really have a lot of sympathy forwhat Governor Angell and others have said: If there's a change inpolicy, it ought to be transmitted to the market. Maybe I've been tooclose to the markets on this, but I think we'll get some adversereactions.MR. MELZER. I'm a little rusty on this. I was just going toask: What is the dollar price effect of 10 basis points on the 10-year?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. A whole bunch!MELZER. Exactly. So, if somebody is short $50 million onthe 10-year, isn't that--?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's probably $150 per 1/32 permillion.MR. STERNLIGHT. But as the Chairman has said, they're allbig boys and they know that we're facing these policy decisions andcould be acting. They know we're having a meeting today.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I tend to be a bit conservative, asyou know, about these things. But in this context, I frankly don'tworry about [unintelligible] people maybe getting burned becausethey're short. They are risk takers. What worries me is a littlemore far-reaching than that, and that is, as you know very well, wehave to be very careful about this marketplace. Governor Angell isquite consistent. But going back to our discussion a week or 10 daysago when we were talking about basically dismantling the wholeinfrastructure to that market, this is a very concrete, vivid exampleof the kind of thing I'm worried about. And we've got to be carefulof these things.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, what we ought to do is at leastschedule our meetings---39-11/5/91VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I think Dave has the rightidea. Notwithstanding my extreme caution in terms of some of theseother more sweeping moves, in this particular context I'd go ahead anddo it on Wednesday and take our chances. But that doesn't mean thatmy anxieties about the need for a little care and nurturing of thismarket can be assumed to have disappeared.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. I think my question has been answered. I wasgoing to raise the question about how we would get the announcementeffect out tomorrow. The last time we did this there was someconfusion in the market. So, whatever we do, we ought to make it veryclear. On the broader issue, I'd go ahead and do it and risk theletters and so on. I just wish we had done it early this morning!MR. BLACK. If you hadn't talked so long, maybe we couldhave! [Laughter]MR. MELZER. That's impossible.MR. BLACK. I know. I'm being facetious.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I'm very strongly in the camp withGovernor Angell. We have made a decision here and it becomes at thatpoint a simple question of integrity. With this auction going on, wenow know what has been done and what will be done and it is only amatter of straightforward integrity that we have to go on and do itand release that information. If we did not make this effective rightaway, in time, as the minutes come out, the fact that it was decidedupon and then delayed would be known to the market and I think wewould quite correctly suffer an integrity question and a credibilitygap that we would deserve to suffer. And that would be there for along time.MR. MELZER. I didn't want my comments to be misinterpreted.I'd support going ahead and announcing it. It think it's unfortunatebut I support that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, we also ought to see if we canarrange not to have a conflict; this issue has come to us before.SPEAKER(?). Bizarre.SPEAKER(?). It's just crazy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This issue shouldn't be coming to thesurface. Tom.MR. HOENIG. I totally support taking this action tomorrowfor the very reasons that Governor Angell, Governor Kelley, and othershave expressed. We need to get it out.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Anyone else?SPEAKER(?). I'd go now.-40-11/5/91MR. BLACK. Could I ask Peter one question, Mr. Chairman?Peter, if we went in before the normal time, which you could andsometimes do, would that alleviate to any extent the problem that youalluded to originally?MR. STERNLIGHT. It probably is a better way to make sure themessage gets across immediately. I don't think it will remove some ofthe down side that I see. I'm kind of swinging around in my own view.MR. BLACK. I'd favor doing it in the morning, first thing.MR. KELLEY. Just make an announcement--not let it happenthrough the market?MR. BLACK. No, I was thinking about going ahead and doing itthrough the market tomorrow as soon as the market opens.MR. BOEHNE. As soon as the market opens?MR. BLACK. That's what I think I'd do.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay.MR. KELLEY. Not 11:00 a.m.?MR. BLACK. No, nor 11:30 a.m.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next meeting is December 17 and wewill adjourn for our luncheon for our departing colleague.MR. PARRY. Is that a one-day meeting?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. A one-day meeting.END OF MEETING-41-