Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 17, 1991A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 17, 1991, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice ChairmanMr. AngellMr. BlackMr. ForrestalMr. KeehnMr. KelleyMr. LaWareMr. LindseyMr. MullinsMr. ParryMs. PhillipsMessrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron. AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents ofthe Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and EconomistMr. Bernard, Deputy SecretaryMr. Coyne, Assistant SecretaryMr. Gillum, Assistant SecretaryMr. Mattingly, General CounselMr. Patrikis, Deputy General CounselMr. Prell, EconomistMr. Truman, EconomistMessrs. Beebe, Lindsey, Promisel, Scheld,Siegman, Simpson, Slifman, andMs. Tschinkel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Division of Monetary Affairs, Board ofGovernorsMr. Hendricks, First Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of ClevelandMessrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Ms. Greene, Messrs. Lang,Rolnick. and Rosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Kansas City,New York, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and Dallas,respectivelyMessrs. Frydl, Goodfriend, and McNees, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Richmond, andBoston, respectivelyMr. Belongia, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of St. LouisMs. Meulendyke, Manager, Open Market Operations, FederalReserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee meeting ofDecember 17, 1991CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Before we get started with our agenda,I'd like to welcome our two new Board members to their first FOMCmeeting. I trust it will be both interesting and inspiring; I canpretty much guarantee the first.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, there may be some people who stillentertain doubts that Governor Lindsey is actually from the FifthDistrict, but he is wearing the Thomas Jefferson tie. If you canarrange it, I think it would be good if you would call Terry Sandfordand tell him you'd like him to come over and meet him; he wouldrecognize the tie!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move the minutesof the previous meeting on November 5th?SPEAKER(?). So moved.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Gretchen Greene,would you bring us up to date on the Foreign Desk?MS. GREENE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there questions for Ms. Greene? Ifnot, would somebody like to move the [amendment to the reciprocalcurrency arrangement with the Netherlands Bank] that was requested?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Would you continue?MS. GREENE. I would like now to report to you on ourdiscussions with the Bundesbank regarding the possibility of alteringthe double-forward investment facility provided for the investment ofthe bulk of the U.S. authorities' German mark reserves. [Continuationof statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any questions for Gretchen?Would somebody like to move [the ratification of the transactions inforeign currencies during the intermeeting period]?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.12/17/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Thank you very much.Peter Sternlight on the Domestic Desk.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Peter?MR. BOEHNE. What is the status of the notion that theTreasury would rely less on long-term bonds?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, Secretary Brady acknowledged at acouple of recent Congressional hearings that they are looking at thequestion of the extent of their reliance [on them]. He seemed to betrying to downplay the effects that might follow from that, noting itis only a modest portion of their net borrowings; 7-1/2 percent or sois done in the 30-year area. I believe that, after a very sharpreaction following that first day's reference, a clarification cameout [from the Treasury] to the effect that people should not look forthem to abandon totally the long bonds. So, the market was left withthe impression that there might well be some scaling down but probablynot an abandonment.MR. BOEHNE. Is this a variation of the Operation Twist idea?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it has some resemblance, although inthe case of Operation Twist there was a positive desire to see short-term rates higher as a balance-of-payments remedy; that element hasnot been present this time. The Treasury might just [want to] leaveboth ends lower.MR. KOHN. And to our knowledge, they haven't tried to enlistthe Fed in this effort--at least not yet.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Peter?MR. SYRON. Peter, is there a central tendency in the rangeof views on the effectiveness of this kind of thing? It seems to havehad a big expectations effect.MR. STERNLIGHT. We hear such a range of views that it wouldbe hard to say whether there's a real coalescing. I have heard verystrongly put views from some in the bond market who think it would notdo much good at all; and they are very troubled with the idea oftinkering with the Treasury's regularity and reliance on the long end.On the other hand, there are some who feel that some modificationcould be useful and recommend it as at least a partial step.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Now, what is interesting here is thatthere has been extensive literature on Operation Twist, and myrecollection is that it's pretty mixed. No one has been able toconfirm that there is a significant supply-side effect occurring inthat particular context. On the other hand, there is also evidence,mainly in the recent period, that the Treasury rate is higher relativeto private instruments than it otherwise would be, from which oneassumes that there is a supply-side effect. So, I would say thatthere is no really strong analytical evidence that confirms this oneway or the other. And what I find a little surprising is how strongly12/17/91the market responded to Brady's initial [remarks]; I think rates moveddown 5 basis points at the long end of the market.MR. ANGELL. Unfortunately, any time public officials makecomments about taking away the supply of an instrument that themarkets have been accustomed to using--. And with the considerabledemand for strips that is out there, it does seem to me a bitdangerous to destroy in a sense an entire market system, includingthat largest commodity of all which is Treasury bond futures. Thatis, I think moderating the supply is quite different from anydiscussion of taking the instrument away.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Peter? Ifnot, would somebody like to move to [ratify] the actions of the Desksince the last meeting?MR. KELLEY. So move.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We now move on toreviewing an issue that we have discussed previously. You may recallthat Governor Kelley raised a question with respect to the directivelanguage relating to intermeeting instructions. We've gone through aseries of [discussions] on that and I thought it might be useful ifGovernor Kelley could bring us up to date on where we stand andperhaps make recommendations as to how we might finally resolve thisquestion.MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Committee willrecall that after our inconclusive discussion of this matter on August20th, the Chairman asked me, with the good help of Norm and Don, topoll the Committee and see if a preference could be developed. Weappreciate the response of Committee members. Everyone participatedbut I have to say that it still was not at all definitive. We hadpresented three options. The poll came out 7 for option 1, 7 foroption 2, and 2 for option 3, which left us in a bit of a quandary.As a result of that, we felt that we should at least come back todayand put on the table again the two recommendations that were at eitherend of the spectrum [of alternatives]. If you'll turn to pages 17 and18 of your Bluebook, alternatives II and III there represent the twoends of the spectrum of possibilities that we discussed earlier.Alternative II would represent the continuation of the currentapproach. And if the Committee comes out of this discussion wishingto go that route, we'll have to look further at whether or not we wantto change the order of what we have. Alternative III on page 18 isthe other end of the spectrum, which is to delete the entire matterand start over. I would like to recommend, if I may, alternative I onpage 17. This is the response to the initial alternative number IIfrom the memo back last fall, which is to try to use elements of whatwe have had but restructured somewhat. You've read that language andI won't repeat it. This is an attempt to focus on long-term goals,which is the essence of the old alternative number II. It also makesreference to the factors that the Committee considers in itsdirective. That is in reference to the old alternative I, whichcalled for continuing that. Also, by watering this down and making itmuch more generic, it is an attempt to give, at least on an impliedbasis, some emphasis to the desire possibly to get away from this12/17/91system altogether. So, Mr. Chairman, my recommendation would be thatwe adopt this language in alternative number I on page 17 of theBluebook with the understanding, of course, that this could be broughtup and reviewed at any time and probably should at any rate be lookedat by the Committee at least once a year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's pretty reasonable and Iwould support your point of view on this. I think it's a clearimprovement over where we stand.MR. PARRY. I would support it as well. I think it's good tohave the distinction between long-run objectives and attention to theshorter-term developments in the economic, financial, and monetaryareas in the same basic sentence. And I think it's an improvementover what we had.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. For the reasons that the Chairman and Bob Parrygave and that Mike Kelley talked about, I support this. It does makeit clearer and I like the idea of considering it once a year ratherthan debating at Committee meetings the exact wording of this fromtime to time. The only question I have--I'm just curious--is that I'dlike to ask Peter how much all the things we put out there arescrutinized. I don't see [this matter] coming up on the screensoften. I do see it in newsletters, etc. Given the [directive]publication lags, how big a deal is that? I support doing it but I'mjust curious.MR. STERNLIGHT. I think [the order] gets attention whenthere are changes.MR. SYRON. How much attention?MR. KELLEY. That's why it has not been a big deal.MR. STERNLIGHT. It gets the analysts' attention and theywrite about it in their market letters and so on.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think Governor Kelley has done usa real service in bringing this question up, and I would stronglysupport his recommendation seconded by you. I'm particularly pleasedthat he listed price stability and then sustainable economic growth,since I feel so strongly that that is the route by which we reachsustainable economic growth. So, I really like the order of those.MR. KELLEY. That was especially for you, Bob!MR. BLACK. Well, there were some others too--you included, Ithink.MR. KELLEY. Sure.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.12/17/91 -5-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I support Governor Kelley'sposition.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I can support that position. I guess I don'thave quite as much enthusiasm as others have expressed. It seems tome that Governor Kelley ought to know how hard it is to change it oncewe've done this. And with this language it's just almost impossibleto change it, so I think we're back in the same circumstance. I dobelieve there are times that the Committee may wish to give a signalof changing emphasis; it seems to me that during the '80s we hadforeign exchange markets that did need some attention. And having away of responding to that which is necessary, I think, was helpful.At the same time the movement up in the order of "price levelstability" was a part of the announcement or the signal of theCommittee's determination in that regard, which I think frankly willget lost in this arrangement. But I can understand when something isgoing [to be approved] and so I'm going to vote for it! [Laughter]MR. BLACK. It will shorten the meetings; that's anotheradvantage of it. I wish I had thought to mention that!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think this is a clearimprovement over what we have, so I would support Governor Kelley'srecommendation. I take Governor Angell's point; there's something tobe said for that. On the other hand, I don't think we're precludedfrom making a change if at some point we really wanted to send asignal. So, I look forward to reviewing it again next year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I also can read the tape and support this. Ido agree with Governor Angell that it's useful to have a mechanism tosignal special concern. He mentioned the exchange markets; theremight also be a case where the stock market is weak or financialinstitutions are very weak and we might want to signal that that's aconcern. As Bob Forrestal said, we still could do that. I think thisis an improvement overall, though, and I would support it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Just a word to our two new members: Ifyou seriously believe that what you're hearing here is that people arefalling in basically because other people are falling in, the samepeople will sell you the Brooklyn bridge! Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I would much prefer alternative III. I thinkit's simple and straightforward and it gives the opportunity toemphasize in the Policy Record anything that we want to callparticular attention to. However, I, too, can see that the trainalready has left the station, so I will support alternative I as astep in the right direction.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, while I might have a preference foradjusting the wording slightly or the order of the objectives, I think12/17/91I hear the way things are going and I support Governor Kelley'srecommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anybody else wish to make anycomments? We will not have an official vote on this but will embodythe obvious consensus in the directive when that is discussed andvoted upon later in the meeting. I thank Governor Kelley. And I amimpressed with the way he strong-armed everybody on the Committee intoaccepting his position! We now move to the economic situation andMessrs. Prell and Truman will prevail.MR. PRELL. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Questions for either of thegentlemen?MR. FORRESTAL. Mike, we've talked a lot about consumerconfidence over the last couple of months. I'm just curious: Howmuch do you take into account in your forecast the Conference Boardsurveys and the Michigan Survey results?MR. PRELL. Well, [the reliability of the] information we aregetting from those data is a matter of considerable dispute amongresearchers. I think there is considerable evidence that they do addsomething to the relevant data one has for judging what consumerspending is doing currently. The increment to our knowledge of whatwill happen down the road is probably more limited. We had basicallytaken it as a sign early on, when we saw the drop in last month'sfigures, that this was going to be a weak quarter for consumerspending; and I wouldn't want to read much more into it at this point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. In the key assumptions section, you discussedfiscal policy and indicated that action was likely but that the impactwas likely to be quite small in terms of affecting the economy in '92or '93. I wondered if you could give us some views about what some ofthe most likely possibilities are. This is more a question for DonWinn, I guess.MR. PRELL. Well, I would duck that to anyone I could! If wehad a strong conviction about what the composition and magnitude ofany package would be, given our guess that something is going tohappen, we would have put it in. We really don't know. There aresignificant differences among the packages, [such as] emphasis onactions that would reduce the cost of capital versus other things thatwould provide a rapid transfer of income to middle class households orwhatever. These things vary considerably and their impacts would besignificantly different, I think, in timing and potential dimension.MR. PARRY. It seems to me that a lot of them, in the effortto try to maintain the integrity of the budget agreement, end upalmost with no effect.MR. PRELL. Well, that fact was one of the reasons--and Ithink we at least hinted at it--why we didn't put it in. I do think12/17/91they still feel somewhat constrained at this point by the size of thebudget deficit and the Budget Act itself. No one seems to be talkingabout really large net fiscal impulses, so we felt we wouldn't bemissing much by not including the package in the forecast at thispoint and merely suggesting that the direction is likely to bestimulative but probably not very large.MR. PARRY. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mike, you [raised] a question on equipmentspending. On the face of it there is a pretty significant change,with different concepts to some extent, between equipment spending inthis Greenbook and the last Greenbook. There's some discussion ofthis, but I was curious: Is this almost entirely attributable tochanges in weights in the computer sector so that, in terms of how youthink businesses are reacting, there is nothing to be read into yourforecast on equipment spending this quarter as compared to lastquarter?MR. PRELL. Well, the change in computer deflators that wentinto the index is a major factor in the change in this forecast.MR. SYRON. It must be a big change!MR. PRELL. But we've also anticipated, in light of thestalling out of overall activity, that there's going to be a greaterdeferral of equipment spending. So there's an element of fundamentalchange in the forecast. I might also note that the revisions in thenational income accounts give a larger weight to nonresidentialconstruction in business fixed investment. And given that that's avery weak component in the forecast, that also tends to damp theexpansion of business fixed investment in this forecast.MR. TRUMAN. One other aspect of this is that on the trade incomputers, which is subject to the same kind of influences, it doesseem that there has been a structural shift. Our trade in thecomputer area, broadly defined, is such that essentially we now havebalanced trade. We've gone from a situation in which we had a slightsurplus in this [area] to balanced trade. That seems to be associatedlargely with the change in the structure of the market wherebymainframes and so forth are being de-emphasized and peripherals,software, and other computer processing [equipment] are beingemphasized more. [These categories] are those that tend to come infrom abroad and [they are subject to] all kinds of relocationdecisions and so forth and so on. We have vaguely adjusted to thatprocess as it seems to have unfolded over the course of 1991, and wesee no basis for [assuming] it will change. Therefore, we have insome sense a stronger import component to computer-related demandsthan we had built into our forecast before.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions? If not, can westart on our round table? Who would like to start off?MR. MELZER. Alan, I'll start on the theory that if I saysomething positive maybe we'll get three or four more [doing so] after12/17/91me; that's the usual pattern. Lately, we've been starting too much ona negative note, so I'm going to go first.In terms of the latest numbers we have on the District, wehave had reasonably strong payroll employment growth over the period,about a percentage point higher than nationally. Most of that iscoming from manufacturing, although there's some growth in thenonmanufacturing segment. Residential construction is particularlystrong over the three-month period. Contracts are up 10 percent;that's not at an annual rate; that's a percentage increase over theprior three-month period. Nonresidential is still weak.Our banking sector really continues to look very good. If welook at the numbers through the third quarter in the Eighth Districtoverall, we're looking at: 1 percent ROAs; 12-1/2 percent ROEs;nonperforming loans that are really up imperceptibly over the lastyear and are at less than 2 percent; and reserves that are about 10basis points shy of fully covering nonperforming loans. In fact, inthe month of November at the large reporting banks we have seen forthe first time some meaningful loan growth, mostly in the C&I sector.That sector in that month was up 2 percent--not an annual rate but 2percent absolutely.The anecdotal information is hard to read, but what I keeppicking up is that [business conditions] are basically pretty much thesame, though I wouldn't be surprised to see a little deterioration inemployment showing through in the last couple of months of the year.The national sentiment that we all read about in the press is quite abit different than the numbers we're seeing in the Eighth District.As for the economy overall, the only comment I'd be inclinedto make is that I think there are dangers inherent in trying to applywhat the economy is doing right now to what policy ought to be doing.I worry increasingly about that. Obviously, that doesn't take accountof the lags, and there is no gauge of the thrust of policy in there.That's all I have. I hope we get some positive comments to follow.[Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That wasn't bad; it's like a jump-start.President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, maybe I should defer my comments![Laughter] I'm not sure I can fulfill Tom's expectations, although Idon't think I'll be completely negative, Tom. Basically, Mr.Chairman, there has been very little change over the past couple ofmonths in the level of economic activity in the Sixth District. Thatis to say, I think we're just bumping along the bottom; there's noacceleration, but there's no perceptible deceleration either. Some ofthe people I've talked to over the past couple of weeks, including ourdirectors, tend to confirm this. They certainly are not very happywith the state of the economy, but they also are reporting that theydon't anticipate any further declines.Retail sales are better than retailers had expected. One ofthe things that is constraining sales in the District is lowinventories, and that's especially true of discounters. All of theretailers, of course, are citing very cautious spending--a cautiousattitude--on the part of consumers. A lot of consumers apparently are12/17/91waiting for further markdowns, further promotions. So, as we getcloser to Christmas, there's an expectation on the part of some of theretailers that they may get a surge in their sales this week or earlynext week. We did a survey of retailers in the four states that havemost of the population in our District and they're anticipating anincrease of 2 to 3-1/2 percent. That was [the figure] for the 23 daysending on December 7; I hope they're able to realize that for theentire season. The gains are generally in nondurables, as I guess wewould expect.Residential real estate activity is basically flat. Thecommercial side is still very, very poor. The commercial developersare still complaining about lack of credit. But for the most part Ithink their not getting credit is a good thing because I don't thinkthey are very good credit risks, at least the ones I've talked to. Onthe other side of the fence, very large firms in the District outsideof the commercial real estate area are reporting that bankers are nowcoming down and visiting them with some regularity, attempting to booksome business. Those firms, of course, are the ones that can goanywhere in the marketplace to get financing. So, that's thesituation in the District. It's very little changed; it's basicallyflat for the most part.With respect to the national economy, our forecast wasrevised down but not quite as much as the Greenbook forecast. Ourforecast for the current quarter and the first quarter is somewhathigher than the Greenbook. As we get out in the second half of 1992,the two forecasts are about the same, but then we show a modestdeceleration as we get into 1993. The differences are basically inconsumption and investment. Our inflation forecast is lower thisquarter and in the first quarter of next year than the Greenbook buthigher over the forecast horizon. I certainly agree with the commentin the Greenbook that the risks to the forecast seem to be more evenlybalanced than they have been recently.What all of this suggests to me in terms of policy is that wecertainly have done a lot over the past several months. And I thinkat this point that we have to be very careful not to overdo thestimulus in the economy; we need to proceed very, very cautiously.Thank you, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, business sentiment and confidenceand general economic conditions in the Twelfth District havedeteriorated since our last meeting. Confidence of District businessleaders and expectations of retail sales have weakened. The commentswe receive from our directors and Beigebook contacts are now almostuniformly negative with the only exceptions being those from Utah andIdaho, where conditions are really quite good. Department store andauto sales in early December are reported to be extremely weakthroughout the District. Employment conditions in California and theState of Washington have worsened while remaining the same in otherDistrict states--that is, relatively strong with the exception ofArizona. After leveling this summer, payroll employment in Californiahas fallen for three consecutive months. And employment in the Stateof Washington has declined in 7 of the past 8 months, with job lossescentered in construction and also in trade. Manufacturing employment12/17/91in the State of Washington remains stable and that's largely a resultof the strength of Boeing. Conditions in most other District statesare relatively stronger. In October, employment expanded at annualrates ranging from 1.6 percent in Hawaii to 13 percent in Alaska, withmost states growing in the 7 to 9 percent range. Employment inArizona, however, declined for the second consecutive month.As I'm sure you know, agriculture has become the largestindustry in California and it's very important in the District aswell. We seem to have a series of problems that affect agriculture,such as drought and those kinds of things. The new one, of course, isthe white fly infestation, which is devastating the Imperial Valley.What we now see is of such a magnitude that it actually had asignificant impact on the CPI in November. So, we're not sure whatother natural disasters can befall us, but there probably are one ortwo more that we could experience.Turning to the national outlook, data since our last meetinghave certainly led us to revise down significantly our forecast forreal GNP in this quarter and the next. Like the Greenbook, we expectthe economy to be roughly flat in the current quarter. For the firstquarter of next year we do have a slight positive; but since theuncertainty is so high I certainly wouldn't argue strongly with thesmall decline incorporated in the Greenbook. In the quarters thatfollow we have growth rebounding to around 3 percent, with the majorsource of strength being spending for inventories and also somestrength in the interest-sensitive sectors of the economy. It seemsto us that the outlook for inflation is clearly encouraging. Itcertainly was good to see the lower PPI and CPI figures for Novemberas well as the moderation in unit labor costs. Overall, we expect areduction of inflation in 1992 compared with the average of this year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Incidentally, is there anything that isbeing done on the infestation to suggest that it can be eliminated atsome point?MR. PARRY. They really don't have many ways of dealing withit. Apparently, the chemicals don't work very effectively, so whatthey're looking for are some natural predators. I think they havefound some small [unintelligible] or something like that that is anatural predator. But the infestation is spreading; it has alreadygone into Arizona and is moving a little farther north in California,but it won't get too far north because of the cold. But the ImperialValley, which has mainly truck types of crops--lettuce, tomatoes,strawberries, and things like that--really has been devastated. Thewhite flies have wiped out over 70 percent of the honeydew crop, forexample.MR. BLACK. What kind of insect is that white fly?MR. PARRY. I don't know. I'll get the technical descriptionlater.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I'll admit to feeling a bit on thegloomy side. In a District context, the moderating pattern that has-10-12/17/91been in evidence for quite some while is continuing. I don't thinkit's necessarily accelerating, but it certainly is continuing.As I have so frequently commented, the automotive business ofcourse has a very major impact on the District's activities and it iscontinuing to exert something of a negative influence. The order ratefor dealers has been consistently underneath the manufacturingproduction level with the result that the production schedules arecontinually reduced. In the fourth quarter, production is going tocome in substantially under what just a month or two ago was revisedto the very lowest level possible. There was something of an increasein the order rate in the first week in December, but I am told thatabout half of that increase was the result of fleet sales, not higherretail demand. The first-quarter production rates are very uncertainat this point. Initially, they have been set at a level a littlelower than the fourth-quarter level, but there is every expectationthat as we get into the quarter they will be reduced further. Butbecause the first quarter of 1991 was so very weak, in a comparativesense at least the production levels may exert a positive influence.The forecast sales levels for 1992 are about one million units higherthan 1991, but much of the increase is in the second half. And,frankly, it seems more of a hope than a forecast of the reality.All of this is backing up into the supplier group. Steelcompanies are experiencing cuts resulting from the auto manufacturers.The orders have been reduced by about 10 percent for January andFebruary and, as a result, the operating rates in the steel industryhave declined and are currently down to about 77 percent. Therefore,the first-quarter expectations for steel will be weaker than they werebefore. Still, they are expecting for the full year that shipmentswill come in at about 82 million tons. That would be up from about78-1/2 million tons this year. The other suppliers to the auto sectorare experiencing similar curtailments. It looks to us as if in adirect and indirect sense the automotive industry may have a negativeimpact of as much as 1 percent on fourth-quarter GDP; and it may alsohave a continuing negative effect in the first quarter.The heavy truck business continues to be terribly weak. Theclass A truck shipments this year will come in at about 100,000 units.For next year the expectation is that the shipments will go up to109,000 units, so it's quite an increase. Nevertheless, we have tocompare that number with what shipments could be in a good year, andshipments could come in--have come in--at as much as 175,000 units.District employment increased in October; that's the latestmonth that we have available. But the unemployment claims rose inNovember, and a survey of hiring plans for the first quarter indicatesa decline in the Midwest from the fourth quarter. The ChicagoPurchasing Managers survey indicated a pretty substantial decline inNovember; there was even a steeper decline in Detroit. And theChicago December report, which will be coming out later this month,shows a further decline.With regard to retail sales, it's a little hard to get apicture; but I think the outlook is a little better, particularly forthose in the discounting business. For those people the earlyChristmas sales seem to be running a little over last year. Butalternatively, those who are not in the discounting business are12/17/91having a very tough time. One specialty retailer I talked to saidthat currently he's having the worst experience he has had in 29years. He gave me a report on sales in the various regions that theycover and I was surprised that in Chicago in the first week ofDecember they had an 8-1/2 percent decline in sales from the firstweek of December last year.On the inflation side, given the competitive conditions,pricing is really very, very tough. One major manufacturer said thatthey have gotten decreases in the prices of their outside purchases of1.4 percent this year and they are forecasting a further 0.6 percentdecrease next year. Despite some attempts to raise steel prices, I amtold that steel prices more broadly are still at about the 1980levels, so there is no improvement there. The wage patterns continueto be favorable, but I will say there's a growing level of anxietyabout the Caterpillar strike, which at this point looks very, verydifficult.In a national context, the reduced staff forecast certainlyseems plausible. In fact, our current look at the first quarter wouldbe just a bit better than the staff forecast, but we have theremaining quarters of 1992 weaker than in the staff's outlook. Ithink there's a lot of hope in this expectation that we'll get aturnaround. To me the risk is that the growth rate, if we get it,won't be strong enough to sustain itself and that we could, therefore,get back into a deteriorating environment. And it seems to me thatour policy actions have to deal with that risk.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think it's a very difficult timeto forecast. Of course, it's always hard but it is particularlydifficult now. Looking back, the vast majority of forecasts--and thatcertainly includes our forecast--underestimated the strength of thenegative forces that are apparently working in the economy. But Iguess by now we really should realize that some of this restructuringand downsizing that we've seen in a lot of different industries willnot only eliminate existing jobs--forever probably--but will alsoraise a lot of doubts in the minds of others about their job security,with predictable effects on consumer and business confidence. I thinkwe've all been aware that there are some important structural changestaking place in the economy, but we underestimated the extent to whichthey were restraining consumer income and spending. And, of course,in this highly uncertain environment, the disinflation process ismaking it increasingly difficult for businesses to pass on anyincrease in prices. The firms are naturally very reluctant to hireand are cautious about inventory management, not to mention capitalexpenditures. This caution really augurs well for the long runbecause I think we're going to emerge with a much more competitivesociety than we had before. But certainly in the short run it hassome implications for the level of business activity and I think it'sgoing to retard the recovery beyond what we had thought earlier.When you think about the structural changes and couple thosewith some cyclical changes occurring on top of them, it makes it verydifficult to predict how strong and how persistent these restrainingforces are going to be and to what extent they're going to be offsetby the lagged effects of the considerable easing in monetary policy-12-12/17/91we've done over a period of a number of months. The Greenbookprojections of the real economy strike us as reasonable and quiteplausible, given what we now know. We do think the staff might be alittle high in their projections of inflation, although those arecertainly reasonable. But I believe the inflation outcome in [1992]is going to be a tad better than projected in the Greenbook if we canmaintain the System's credibility about our long-term objectives.That last point is a very crucial one as we move into this policy-setting process today. Another measured step toward ease of the sortwe've been taking for some time is probably appropriate now, but Ithink any more aggressive move would be quite counterproductive atthis point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. In the Philadelphia District, I'd say [activity]is flat to down, with little prospect for an upturn on the horizon.Manufacturing, which had been a relative bright spot earlier in theyear, has turned down--and rather sharply--in December. Some of thatis auto-related but it's broader than that. Construction, which hadseen a modest improvement in housing, is down; there's a lot of gloomin the construction industry, with very little near-term prospect forimprovement. Retail sales are about even with last year; but thenumber of people that the retailers are hiring is down, so there's anegative effect on employment. I still see a slippage in loan qualityat banks. It's particularly evident--though it may just be becauseI've spent more time on it in the last few weeks--in de novo banks,which seem to be running into some additional problems. In terms ofattitudes, I don't sense that there has been a deterioration inattitudes so much as a "hunkering down" kind of sentiment--a view thatwhat we have may last a while.Turning to the nation, the Greenbook forecast is certainlyreasonable, but I think the risks are still on the down side, perhapsmore so than six weeks ago when we last met. It's difficult to find asector to lead a recovery. And having gone through this so-calledinventory cycle, I have less confidence in that the second time aroundthan the first. I think this hunkering down attitude just reflectsless confidence that we will have a recovery. There's also a seconddownside risk and that is that monetary policy will continue to haveless of a stimulative effect than one might ordinarily think. Thiscould very well turn out to be one of those recessions--and we've hadthem before--in which we have to push the fed funds rate below theinflation rate in order to get the kind of forward momentum to theeconomy to bring the Greenbook forecast about. In any event, withinflationary pressures subsiding--and they clearly are--I think thisdouble-downside risk provides room for some additional monetaryeasing, and I would prefer it sooner rather than later.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As has been the casefor some time now, District business activity is mediocre. It reallyhasn't weakened much--and we seem to have been insulated from some ofthe major problems around--but it isn't all that strong either.Unemployment remains uniformly low in the District; attitudes,nevertheless, are quite negative. There are some positive signs, forwhat it's worth. It really is true that you can't find a parking-13-12/17/91space in the shopping malls on the weekends. Retailers are quick topoint out that people are looking for bargains and not buying as muchas they used to, and so forth. But we'll see if that plays out. AllI can tell you is that there's a lot of traffic. The auto dealersreport that sales are bad but traffic in the showrooms has picked up.Perhaps people are looking for bargains or perhaps they're gettingready to buy something sooner or later. In any event, there's atleast a glimmer of hope there. Sectors that have been in pretty goodshape for some time include tourism, agriculture, and the retailerswho are reachable from Canada. Those areas of the economy continue tomove along as they have been moving and really are quite healthy.With regard to the national situation, I agree with thecomments that have already been made and, as the Greenbook forecast iscurrently depicting, that the risks are probably symmetric. I waspuzzling for a long time as to why attitudes, particularly businessattitudes, are as bad as they are, given that the aggregate data don'tlook that bad. But it seems to me that the aggregate data arestarting to catch up with the attitudes, and that's reconciling thatdifference at least in my mind. But what I would emphasize at thispoint is a comment that Mike Prell made earlier, which is thatdisinflation is in train. And I think that's something that we canlook forward to. Anecdotally, it's very hard to find much in the wayof price pressures. I was struck by a meeting we had at the Bankrecently during which a lot of private-sector employers in the TwinCities reported [that they expect] wage increases of about 3 percentfor the year ahead. Of course, benefits are rising more rapidly thanthat, but 3 percent is the kind of number we haven't heard in the TwinCities in quite some time. There's a lot of concern looking to thefuture about aggregate demand; but we've been looking at supply,recognizing that that's somewhat of an artificial distinction. But itlooks to us at least as if the 1980s were characterized by unusuallyrapid growth in labor force participation and unusually largeincreases in hours worked. If that is not repeated in the 1990s, andit doesn't seem likely, then the supply side of the economy's abilityto grow seems to me to be constrained unless we get real improvementin productivity--which, of course, is possible, but hard to bank on--or unless we believe that when the aggregate demand comes back thegaps are going to be made up by imports. So, we may be looking at asituation where not only is aggregate demand likely to be subdued, butthe growth in productive capacity may be as well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Yes, Mr. Chairman. Even though it seems as ifthe economy is dead in the water--and the forecasts for the fourthquarter and the first quarter certainly suggest that--I think it'sbetter to look at the economy as being balanced by certain sectors andregions in which growth is occurring, albeit rather slowly, and othersectors and regions in which there are continuing adjustments and someretrenchment. So, it seems to me that there still is not thesynchronization of all of these sectors and regions into a commoninventory cycle phenomenon. Consequently, it seems to me that theseeds for growth are building even while we're in this period of apretty flat economy.Secondly, I want to suggest that the pessimism we seeassociated with this [economy] is a real estate phenomenon. It's a-14-12/17/91long-cycle real estate phenomenon and it is accompanied by depositoryinstitution difficulties that look just like those that wereexperienced in the 1920s and 1930s. And it seems to me that we arenot immune from the sense of pessimism associated with that kind of anevent. I think it would be well for us to remind ourselves of somesignificant differences between the current conditions and those thatprevailed during that last banking-real estate episode.First of all, I would suggest that the monetary aggregates--whether you look at Ml, M2, or M3--are growing; they are notcontracting. And there's a substantial difference between monetarycontraction and slow money growth. If you look at Ml as well as M2,there's some indication here that we are supplying liquidity to thesystem. And that liquidity, as shown in the steep yield curve, willwork its way. Now, in the 1930s the banking system did not have theheavy concentration of Treasuries in their portfolios that they holdnow. At that time, as many of you probably remember, the governmentdebt was contracted from about $24 billion in 1920 to about $16billion in 1929. So, in that episode, we didn't have commercial bankschasing yield into long-term Treasury securities. And the commercialbanks had a quality bond problem. It wasn't just a question then ofhaving bad loans; it was also a question of having bonds, bothmunicipal and business corporate bonds, that were not marketable. Andwhen that quality spread developed, the banking system was, of course,locked in with those securities. So, they didn't just have bad loans.They had bad loans in bonds as well as bad loans of the usual kind.Of course, they did not have something that we have today and that isdeposit insurance. I know a lot of people have been complaining aboutdeposit insurance systems, but this is not too bad a time to have one,it seems to me! [Laughter] And, of course, that's why we haven't hada monetary contraction. If we had had these depository institutionfailures without deposit insurance, it seems to me that there wouldhave been no way we could have kept the money stock growing.The second thing I would mention is that we are not in adeflation period as measured by the producer price index. In thelatter 1920s and early 1930s, we had very steeply declining pricesthat brought the price level down 40 to 50 percent below where it hadbeen before. We haven't yet had what I would call a significantproducer price index decline. And the fact that the PPI for finishedgoods is now year-over-year at minus .5 percent is hardly anindication of a deflation underway.The third point I would mention is that our system is indeeda transfer payment system that does offer a huge amount of support. Imean by that not just Social Security, but Medicaid, Medicare, andunemployment compensation, and also a rather large pension planprogram. So, that provides a great deal of sustenance.The fourth thing I'd mention--I know one could add more tothe list but I'm going to stop at four--is that world trade isexpanding. It's not expanding quite as rapidly as it was a few yearsago, but it's still expanding. And in the 1930s, as you know, we wereundergoing the threat from the Hawley-Smoot tariff. So, thiscircumstance is so different that to me it doesn't make sense for usto let that kind of fear permeate our ranks.-15-12/17/91Now, as to the monetary aggregates, I frankly am not worriedat this point about M1's growth rate. When I look at Ml and M2--andM2 seems to be dawdling along at a little higher [growth] rate than itwas before--it doesn't seem to me that this is a problem at this pointon either side. I'm not going to join the forces of alarmists inregard to Ml. But I do remember, Ed, that in 1986 when I was not tooworried about M2 growing at a rate of 9-1/2 percent and some of youwere saying that that was a problem, that it did turn out to besomewhat problematic. So, I don't know at what point in timeliquidity in a sense catches hold and shows up. At this point,commodity prices do not show any force of over-liquification as Ml'sgrowth rate might indicate. That is, I don't see any upward bulge incommodity prices that says we're putting too much liquidity in thesystem. But neither do I see commodity prices forecasting asignificant deflation. It does seem to me, though, that the commodityprices are forecasting stable producer prices and some diminution inthe commodity price index. But I think it's worth noting Bob Parry'sreport regarding agriculture. Civilizations do go through periods inwhich certain [anomalies] in agriculture show up. And it seems to methat we do run the risk that we're in an era in which food prices maybe subject to more [unfavorable] surprises than good surprises.In conclusion, it seems to me that the healing forces and therecovery forces--with a little longer time lags than we're used to--are really underway. I don't want to try to do any better atforecasting [than the staff]; I don't have any quarrel with Mike'sforecast at all. I don't think we've ever been to this place before,and I don't know for sure that that's the way it's going to work, butit does seem to me that this is a time for a little patience.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bill Hendricks.MR. HENDRICKS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We concur with theBoard staff's view that growth of the economy has stalled, although weare not quite as bearish about retail sales in the fourth quarter asis indicated in the staff's estimates. Perhaps, like Gary Stern inMinneapolis, we view the outlook from the vantage point of a Districtthat has outperformed the nation since last spring, although there aresignals of softening in our area, too. Ohio unemployment roseslightly in November for the third consecutive month and theunemployment rate held steady at about 5.6 percent, which is lowrelative to the nation. Retail sales and manufacturing productionalso have been stronger than the national averages, at least throughSeptember. And construction contracts for both non-residential andresidential homes have continued to grow faster than for the nationthrough October. Our concern, as Si Keehn also has indicated, is thatscheduled cutbacks in auto production extending into the first quarterof '92 may be working through the auto supply industries in ourDistrict. Steel operations are under downward pressure. Our steelcontacts note that delivery lead times have been shrinking in recentweeks; customers are no longer on a quota; and order books for flatrolled steel now have openings for late January delivery. Capitalgoods production is still mixed but apparently on a slowly risingtrend. I would conclude by mentioning that, despite a pervasive moodof pessimism, even among business executives we see no widespreadcutbacks of capital spending plans. Indeed, some producers planincreases in 1992 and they have not changed their plans, while a few-16-12/17/91others are scaling down spending increases in view of the lower-than-expected sales and profits in recent months.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the First Districtthe economy remains poor, but we have some hope that it may [improve]to mixed. However, there is concern that the mood--you probably sawthat story in the front page of the Sunday New York Times aboutdepression in New England--certainly exceeds the reality in terms ofsourness. I think this is something that has been spreadingnationally recently, not just in New England. But even though thereisn't a fit between the mood and the reality, this does have apsychological effect which feeds back on the economy, and it'sobviously something that overhangs [unintelligible]. We think that weprobably would not be that far from the bottom in New England if wewere to have a national outcome somewhat like that in the Greenbook inthat employment losses are stabilizing and there is some beginning ofstabilization in the banking situation.On the retail side, we talked to retailers over the lastseveral days and they say that people are being extremely cautious.This is reflected in some interesting ways. One way, according to amajor retailer, is that as there are successive sales, a lot of peopleare coming back and bringing items to the return window becausesomething they bought at $14 last week is advertised at $9.95 thisweek. So there's more foot traffic in a way than there are sales,though we don't have any problem with parking spaces at this stage!I'll report what one retailer told us regarding sales: Sales, whilebad, are not terrible in that there's an expectation that on a year-over-year basis many [retailers] may actually break even, though somenational chains we've spoken to have indicated that they see aspreading of the situation in New England to the rest of the country.Part of that is because inventories have been kept so lean, andpurposely so. And some retailers say that they are losing salesbecause inventories are so lean. But if the choice is to take achance on one side or the other, they are not going to [take it on theside of] inventories.The job market remains very soft. A personal anecdote onthat is that we have something called a "sunrise shift" in our cashoperation, with hours from 4 to 8 in the morning and no benefits. Ithas turned out to be very effective for us. We had three openings onthat shift and when we advertised in the Boston Globe we had 1,000applicants. The applicants actually had to come in and apply--therewasn't any sending in of resumes--so we know that people were seriousabout it. On the other side, we do see some change in the timing ofprojects by state and local governments with the notion that this is agood time both to finance and to get lower construction costs.As far as the Greenbook goes, we find it realistic this timeand possibly even slightly too pessimistic--in terms of what itforecasts for the economy per se, not the potential results. We dothink that the unemployment rate for any given level of output couldbe slightly higher than the Greenbook forecast. But, looking at allof this, one starts to [question] what went wrong and why things areso much softer than they had been. There has been some reference, andI think appropriately so, to the restructuring phenomenon and the-17-12/17/91effect of that on confidence and to these longer-term issues aboutwhich there may not be much that we can do. Another interestingquestion, and I don't know the answer, is whether any of the changesin the tax code and the composition of employment this time havediminished the effect of the automatic stabilizers in some ways--theremust be some data on this--and whether the decline for any givenchange in economic activity and federal receipts has been a littleless this time. There are arguments one can make to say that that wasthe case. Whatever it is, things aren't working as expected. And inan [environment] in which things aren't working as expected--eventhough, as I say, the Greenbook forecast is pretty realistic--what I'mconcerned about is the risk or the impact of an error. And I thinkMike mentioned that. We've been through this a number of times; wedon't need a lot of discussion on the amount of fragility in thefinancial system or in expectations. But I do think one has to bequite concerned about the potential spreading of this level ofinappropriate panic. Like many other people, I do see an improvementin inflation. I see it on the wage side and, with the number ofmedical providers that we have in our District, we've begun to seeeven the beginning of some steps being taken on benefits, which willhave an effect in the longer run.As far as policy goes, I know that we have this overhangregarding what may happen on the fiscal side. But from my ownperspective, that argues for our doing what we think we can morepromptly rather than less promptly before concerns become evident[unintelligible] have a little less uncertainty about what the rangeof options may be on the fiscal side. I'll finish by saying that ifan action is taken, I think there is some value to maximizing thesignal impact of any given amount of change because of what Ipersonally feel are the psychological aspects of this. There'snothing we can do about the short run but the environment that we'vebeen in I think does demonstrate the problems involved in an interest-rate targeting regime and what that implies in terms of discretesteps.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Well, I think the economy is dead in the waterwith no forward momentum or maybe drifting back a little but with nomomentum there as well. I can't really quarrel with the Greenbookforecast for the fourth quarter or the first quarter. For the secondquarter of next year the Greenbook has 2.6 percent real growth in GDP.We haven't had a quarter like that in over 3 years. If we get it, itcould be perceived as a boom and might be disorienting to people![Laughter] I think that second quarter is where it is difficult tosee what is going to happen. The Greenbook puts an emphasis on theinventory cycle and on a rebound of consumer spending as the savingrate falls. Since I've been here I haven't been impressed with ourability to predict inventories, but the logic is there for theinventory side. The consumer rebound is difficult for me to see whenI think of the environment next year where the media will have acouple more negative quarters to work with. We will have a politicaldebate which will aspire to divisiveness and may achieve it. I thinkthere is serious downside risk for a stalled economy. The mostobvious one, and the one I would be most concerned about, is that ifconfidence continues to be a problem, with the prospects for thepolitical debate and the media hype, these fears will lead consumers-18-12/17/91to increase their saving rate. And since they are 60 or 70 percent ofthe economy, that could propel us downward pretty quickly.There are many other downside risks for next year, not onlythe fiscal policy foolishness. Already perhaps the speculation aboutan investment tax credit could be sufficient to freeze capitalspending plans for a while. And, of course, we have large banks onthe precipice as well as maybe a couple of industrial companies aswell. There are international events. So, I see a little more riskon the down side. And, of course, underlying all of this is thecontinuing pressure from this retrenchment process, the balance sheetadjustment process, which it seems to me in retrospect has been goingon for three years. The recent third-quarter GNP number, which hasnow been wiped from all of our data, was revised to 2 percent. Wethought it was going to be revised up. That 2 percent real growth inGNP was the best quarter since the first quarter of '89, and I thinkit was the first quarter of '89 that was biased upward by droughteffects. So, the compound growth rate over these three years from thefirst quarter of '89 to the first quarter of '92 as projected is 1/4percent annually; essentially, we've had three flat years. So, Ithink the contractive pressure of this retrenchment process is strong;it's durable and it's stubborn. I see no evidence that it's on thebrink of exhaustion.Can monetary policy help? I think it can and has. Onewonders where the economy would be without the easing actions we'vetaken. I believe the easing we did last year helped lift the economyout of the more traditional recession--the traditional Gulf or oil-price-related recession--which was superimposed upon this longer-termadjustment. More recently, I believe the moves we've made sinceAugust have helped stabilize the housing recovery and also havearrested the free-fall in M2 growth and put it back into the lower endof the range. But it seems to me the important role for monetarypolicy in the current environment is in facilitating this adjustmentprocess itself. Monetary policy has raised stock prices. It hasproduced the issuance of equities, which has helped in the de-leveraging. It has decreased bank funding costs, which allows banksto create this margin that will help in building their capital. Thereductions in the prime rate have reduced the debt burden for firmsand consumers because a lot of home equity loans are tied to the primerate. And, of course, mortgage refinancing has also reducedhomeowners' debt burdens. Even though much of the force of monetarypolicy has been absorbed in this balance sheet adjustment process, Idon't view it as wasted energy. This is important work for monetarypolicy; it is necessary and indeed unavoidable work. There is no waymonetary policy can short-circuit those adjustment processes, and weshouldn't try to rekindle the excesses. I view a role of monetarypolicy as advancing the day in which consumers, businesses, and bankscan turn to future growth. So, even if we don't see it immediatelygiving rise to real spending, I think it is still having a beneficialeffect.Where are we in terms of monetary stance? I think there aresome positives here. We have moved [down] 125 basis points on the fedfunds rate since August; we have moved 75 basis points in the last sixweeks. M2 growth is once again positive and has moved [up] into thelower end of the [Committe's long-run] range. The dollar is down.It's still not as low as it was last year at this time, but it is-19-12/17/91lower than the Greenbook forecast. That is offset a bit by thesoftness in the foreign economies. The stock market, despite a fewshudders, has held up; the market sees no double-dip. One might makesome argument on that as well, but at least it's up there. The yieldcurve is still steep. People are betting real money that rates aregoing to be higher in the future, and the quality spreads in the debtmarket also have remained relatively narrow. The housing marketappears to be holding up. Consumer confidence is very low, but it'sstill well above the lows of last October and still well above whereit was in the 1982 recession. At least on the Michigan survey that istrue; the Conference Board [index] is somewhat lower. I think therecent round of easing and where we stand now has been sufficient tokeep the economy from turning down and to keep it from gatheringmomentum on the down side. But it has left the economy pretty much ata standstill against these forces of retrenchment and I see thedownside risks overhanging next year's environment.I think we need to be moving ahead; it would be useful toaccelerate the balance sheet adjustment process and offset its impact.Moreover, I think it's now safe to say that reports of M2's death werehighly exaggerated. It was only a flesh wound. We saw M2's weaknessin the summer and now we see weakness in the real economy, even thoughother aggregates were giving more positive signals. We have seen M1grow at a healthy rate, but we haven't seen that associated withhealthy [economic] growth. I wonder--and maybe Don Kohn can answerthis later--my general impression on M1 is that it is growing a bitmore slowly than our models would expect, given the reduction ininterest rates. This time around we have no exogenous shocks; we haveno oil price increases or wars; we basically just have to recognizethe force of this retrenchment. And in this environment my view isthat we ought to look for consistent monthly growth of M2 in the upperhalf of the range. I also continue to think that with a prime rate of7-1/2 percent, given outside analysts' forecasts of near-terminflation in the 3 to 3-1/2 percent range, real rates to finalborrowers remain high at 4 percent over prime. The real prime ratedoesn't look like easy money to me.So, in conclusion, I still think we need an adjustment inpolicy to acknowledge and incorporate the downward pressure from thisretrenchment process and help the economy move ahead. I don't viewthis as aggressive counter-cyclical policy but rather as an attempt toachieve a monetary stance that will both facilitate this adjustmentprocess and have a little left over for growth. I don't see potentialdamage to the objective of reducing inflation. We don't have high M2growth. We don't have high credit growth. If you take the federalgovernment out, credit growth is quite anemic. And we don't yet havea federal funds rate below the expected inflation rate. In lastsummer's Greenbook, we were satisfied with the disinflation pathimplicit in 3 percent real growth. Now we have a few quarters of flator negative growth and I can't see the risks in returning to the 3percent path. If we don't move, I think we risk instability.How do we make the adjustment in monetary stance? Myfeeling is that it may be time to reconsider the pattern of moving inan incremental approach and making the smallest moves possible. I'mconcerned that this may dissipate the impact of our actions and nothave the signalling effect. I'm also getting a bit concerned aboutthe way the market is responding to the easing pattern rather than-20-12/17/91perhaps to economic fundamentals. They think we ease on employmentreports and before [Congressional] testimony. They're predictingpolicy easing rather than focusing on the fundamentals, it seems tome. And I wonder how much benefit there is to making another fullyanticipated minimum size policy move. We had academic consultants inthe other day and one of them said, in effect: "It's time to get thismule's attention." I doubt that another 1/4 percentage point tap onthe mule's head is likely to do much. It may be time to figure outwhere we want to be and get there and make a stand. So, I still thinkwe need an adjustment in policy, but in view of the lags I believe weshould try to get the work done ahead of the uncertainties of nextyear. I would like to be in a position where we would have theexpectation that we would not have any easing to do next year--to beessentially in a symmetric position. We do have to save someammunition for emergencies, but I'd rather make the bulk of theadjustment in a deliberate manner than gradually dribble out 1/4points with the perception that we have a lot more to go. I'd likefor us to be in a confident position to say the Fed has done its part;M2 is growing; real rates are not high.My guess is that there is not a unanimous consensus on this;indeed, I think we have done a lot lately. We might consider at thisstage waiting a bit and doing nothing--waiting a few weeks to breakthe pattern of ease and to let the market think about economicfundamentals. We could wait until the data are more convincing andthen in our own time, for our own reasons, implement a discrete,significant, adjustment. If the data don't convince us, we can standpat or move another 1/4 point. I think a few weeks one way or theother will not make a lot of difference. I certainly would not opposea move now because I think we ought to have a lower rate, but I mightprefer waiting until we have something to communicate rather thansimply to move another fully anticipated 1/4 point. In my view, wedon't have much room left and we ought to make every move count. So,even though I think we should make a move, if there's not agreement,it might be useful to break the pattern of a slow slide and step backand wait to make a significant move when we feel comfortable with sucha move. Obviously, I wouldn't vote against another small move, but onbalance I would be comfortable waiting until we have the confidence tomake a symbolically louder move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Well, Mr. Chairman, at the risk of sounding likea broken record, I will restate my conviction that what we have now isa crisis or paralysis of confidence. There is clearly [underway] adeliberate restructuring of balance sheets on the part of consumers,businesses, and banks to reduce debt and increase equity andliquidity. And given current attitudes, until that adjustment is muchfurther along than it is now, I think we will not see a return tostronger [economic] growth patterns. Confidence is at best anephemeral concept and basically it is a psychological phenomenon.Perhaps if we had a clinical psychologist on the Committee, it mighthelp! In the meantime, I remain unconvinced that confidence will beshored up by a further easing in policy. While I recognize that theburden of high levels of debt is somewhat alleviated by a lowerstructure of interest rates, at the same time I do worry about thedollar and the risks related to a steeper slide in its value due to aneven more significant interest rate differential. A flight to safety-21-12/17/91may be the thing that is keeping the dollar as stable as it is, givenchaotic conditions in the Soviet Union and eastern Europe. And yet Iam persuaded that we have not seen the full effect of the easing thatwe have already accomplished, and I would like to wait beforeinitiating any further ease.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our District growthcontinues to be slow and we see no real improvement in [prospect] inthe near future. In agriculture, we expect declines in income ofbetween 5 and 10 percent this year and we anticipate similar declinesnext year. Activity in the oil and gas areas of our Districtcontinues weak. Drilling operations activity as of November is downabout 30 percent from the year before and there are no signs of anysignificant improvement there. Manufacturers, particularly the autocompanies that are operating in our District, are now increasing theirfurlough periods. The General Motors plant is going to go out forfour weeks starting I think this week or next week. In theconstruction area, our District has seen improvements. As I mentionedlast time, it's partly because we've had such deflation; but we'veseen good residential activity and some nonresidential activity inparts of our District.As far as the national economy goes, our staff feels that itsprojections are generally in line with those in the Greenbook. We'renot quite as pessimistic for this quarter or the next quarter, butwe're certainly not as optimistic about the rest of 1992. Forinflation, our forecast is very similar to the Greenbook forecast. Wesee no really strong inflationary pressures going forward.As for the implications for policy, then, we think there isroom for easing, although our preference is along the lines of whatGovernor Mullins said in that we think it's something we ought to beprepared to do down the road but would wait and choose our time. Ithink that would be perhaps a more effective way of going forward.Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, as everybody has already said,this is a tough one. Clearly, attitudes are lousy. To pick up onGary Stern's point that the statistics are catching up with theattitudes: Maybe the causation is precisely in that direction and wehave a classic self-fulfilling prophecy. Another interesting thingthat is surfacing now in a rather forceful way, which is attitudinalin one sense, is that even among informed observers there is thisnotion that monetary policy is pushing on a string. I just don'tthink that's right. Mike Prell touched on it a bit. But if you lookat the behavior of the so-called interest-sensitive parts of spendingversus the so-called non-interest-sensitive parts, at least to date,the anomaly is not in the interest-sensitive parts; it's in the non-interest sensitive parts. It's not that the interest-sensitive partsare booming, but the big difference is in the non-interest-sensitiveparts which, of course, is consistent with the view that monetarypolicy is not pushing on a string. When you look at it a bit morecarefully in the context of this confidence factor, where are the bigdifferences? It seems to me that one can say, at the risk of a major-22-12/17/91oversimplification, that the big differences lie in two areas. Thefirst is government itself. We do have for good and necessary reasonsa more restrictive fiscal policy stance at the federal level, givenwhere the economy is, than we had in earlier episodes. But what Ithink really makes the difference is the combination of the federallevel and the state and local level. Indeed, it seems to me that thestate and local sector in many, many different ways--including the wayit affects confidence--really is one of the major differences in theeconomy and the performance of the economy in recent quarters.Now, the second big difference is the one that many havetouched on and that is the debt overhang problem. The point thatGovernor Mullins made is an important one. In part, the workout ofthe debt overhang problem has been going on for two or three years,and I don't think we fully recognized it when it began to take hold.But it is one of the reasons why the economy as a whole has basicallybeen limping along for three years. And whatever you think of it, itobviously still has multifaceted implications both now and for theimmediate future in terms of financial institution problems, balancesheet rebuilding, corporate restructuring, and all the rest of it.But the cumulative effects of those things have a lot to do with thisconfidence factor that everyone's speaking of. But even after havingsaid that, I am still perplexed on the one hand and worried on theother as to why these measures of confidence have dropped like a stonein the last couple of months. We can argue whether they are at 1982levels or 1987 levels, but they do just seem to have cracked. Again,I think Mike's point is right. The economics profession doesn't tellus much at all about what to make of that. Certainly, it doesn't tellus much at all about how to build that into a forecast or anythinglike that. As a matter of fact, the track record of those [confidencesurveys] is lousy. Nevertheless, we have this sharp downward break inconfidence against the history of all these other events.Well, I don't know what to make of that any more than anybodyelse does. But it does seem to me that at the very least it raisesfurther questions about the near-term outlook for consumer spending.As I think I mentioned at the last Committee meeting, the retailinventory situation isn't great. Now, when we talk to individualstore owners, they say their inventories are lean as the devil; andwhen we go into our local department store and look around, theshelves don't look overburdened. But what we forget is that there area heck of a lot more stores out there. There has been a tremendousincrease in the number of retail outlets as a part of this boom of the'80s. So, the information at the level of the individual store maynot be telling the whole story.Another concern, in the context of this confidence factor, isthe other side of Dave Mullins's point about the stock market. Thestock market, of course, has been doing terrifically. With all ofthese new offerings and stock prices holding up the numbers, it isactually one of the few things that probably are helping to maintainconfidence. But we have to remember that, by many conventionalmeasures of PE ratios and things like that, the stock market is at apretty high level given any kind of reasonable guess as to what near-term profits at least are going to be. Now, of course, it may be thatthe stock market has really gotten smart and is looking through thenear term to the longer-term implications of the restructurings and-23-12/17/91other things that are going on, which could be a big plus [over time].Nevertheless, it is another area of concern.When I put all that together along with what everybody elsehas said, I can't take serious exception to the kind of forecast thatMike has in the Greenbook or that of my own staff in New York, whichisn't all that different. But I think the band of uncertainty ispretty wide, if for no other reason than that this confidence factor,as John LaWare says, really is the wild card.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, there has been very little netchange in the economy in Texas and in the Eleventh District since ourlast meeting. It remains essentially flat with perceptions somewhatworse than the numbers. A lot of those perceptions are not based onlocal developments but on the continued drumbeat of nationalannouncements of closings and layoffs. This past week we got twolocal jolts to confidence: One of Dallas' two newspapers, which was112 years old, closed; then just the other day [unintelligible]. Theprime candidate is one that's in the Dallas area.We've done a lot of surveying in the last few days on retailsales, trying to pin down what has been going on during this Christmasseason. It's very hard to pin down, but on balance the conclusion isthat retail sales have not been too bad in the context of diminishedexpectations. Most of the strength is in discount stores such asWal-Mart, Kmart, and Target; their sales seem to be up about 8 to 10percent over last year. The conventional department stores and thechain stores such as Penney's and Sears are not doing as well,although their sales are up from last year, nominally at least, about5 percent. Penney's, which is headquartered in Dallas, says its storesales are up about 5.3 percent over last year, but they report veryweak catalogue sales. And the reason they give is very interesting, Ithink; it's because when they print a catalogue they can't takeaccount of price declines, so it becomes outdated and nobody uses it.Let me give you a quick year-end report on Eleventh Districtbanking, because I'm pleased to report that in 1991 for the first timein several years we have not led the nation in bank failures. We aregoing to conclude the year with only 33 bank failures; that comparesto 105 last year and 144 the year before.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How many are left?MR. MCTEER. I might say that someone mentioned the timing ofthese banks' charters: A third of those that failed in '91 werechartered in the '80s. The failing banks are getting much smaller.The 33 in '91 had $1.4 billion [in assets] and the 105 in '90accounted for $6 billion, whereas the year before it was $24 billionand it gets bigger as you go back. After four years of aggregatelosses, 1990 was the first year of aggregate profitability for theDistrict banks, and that has continued into this year. But EleventhDistrict bank lending has continued to decline on net, and the bankerssay that's because loan demand just isn't there. Property values arebeginning to stabilize after about six years of deflation. I mentionthat because property values and banking trends still appear to bemoving in the other direction in many parts of the country, and I-24-12/17/91guess the message from the Eleventh District is that that does notaugur well for a quick recovery.On policy, I would just say that whenever we decide to takethe next step, I believe it's important that we do all that we thinkis going to be necessary in the foreseeable future. Someone mentioneda moment ago that discussions of the investment tax credit can freezecapital spending. By the same token, I think expectations of stilllower interest rates in the future can cause a postponement of bigticket spending as well. So, when we do decide to ease interest ratesfurther, I think we ought to ease enough so that the directive becomessymmetrical and the probability of going one way is the same as theprobability of going the other way the next time a move is made. AndI would just comment that I would not consider lowering short-terminterest rates a little more to be a major easing move because of thelong period of very slow growth in M2. I think our current de factoprocedure of targeting the fed funds rate and our pattern of smallfrequent changes may have given us the impression that we were doingmore than we actually were on fundamental monetary policy. So, Ithink there is room for a further reduction without derailing ourlong-run objective of price stability.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, it's helpful to me as I look atthe economy to think in terms of two separate sets of factors workingtogether to retard economic growth. One is a cyclical set and theother is a secular or structural set. And they march to entirelydifferent drummers, I believe. The cyclical factors are the usualsuspects that we find over and over again down through the years:inventories, and so forth. I think they probably would have beenovercome by now--or maybe would never even have emerged--in theabsence of the structural problems that we have. The latter are muchmore important and they are much stickier. And I think they are goingto have to be allowed to play themselves through to correction in theinterest of long-term growth and stability. I would mention the debtoverhang and several things that interplay one with another: the realestate depression, the credit crunch in all of its differentmanifestations, and the very large fiscal deficit, which has severaldifferent kinds of perverse effects not the least of which right nowis the inhibition it provides to any counter-cyclical fiscal activity.And then, of course, there is the restructuring and perhaps downsizingin the services sector. Those are pretty powerful and prettyimportant structural and secular trends that are going on. The policydilemma, as I would identify it right now, would be to allow thesestructural problems to go ahead and correct. I think it would be amistake for us to try to abort them to the extent that we could.Obviously, we want to cushion them, but I don't think we ought to tryto abort them. We should allow them to run their course and,obviously, we all want to be careful that we don't lay a foundationfor future inflation. On the other hand, to the extent possible, wecertainly want to try to ensure against having economic activity fallinto a black hole, which I think haunts the back of our minds at thispoint. And we also want to do what we can to [encourage] anacceptably strong recovery as soon as possible.Three sets of things go together with those conflictingdesires in the way of activity. One would be, obviously, the recent-25-12/17/91weaknesses we've had in the economy; we've been over that and I don'tneed to mention that any further. I do think it's important to stressmaybe a bit more than we have this morning the stimulus that is in thepipeline from earlier monetary policy moves. The staff informed methat as of yesterday we have approximately 3 percentage points at anannual rate of stimulus in place right now for 1992 spread out overthe year almost equally from the first quarter through the fourthquarter; it recedes a little by the fourth quarter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's on GNP?MR. KELLEY. Is it GNP or GDP, Mike?MR. PRELL. It's the output that we're talking about.MR. KELLEY. Right. At any rate, there is a lot [in thepipeline] that is going to come along. That could turn out to beeither a salvation or, possibly even before it's all over, a problem.If we ease further, that obviously ups the stakes on both sides ofthat. Net, it seems to me that monetary policy has already done agreat deal. We have eased every month this year from January throughDecember with the exception of May, June, and July when there seemedto be a recovery underway and we stopped. We started again in August,in what I think was a very early recognition that things were notcontinuing to go well. There's a great deal that the economy has todo for itself in the area of these structural adjustments--things thatI don't see as being very susceptible to a useful assist from monetarypolicy. It may be that we've done enough or very nearly enough interms of monetary policy now. I think that policy stability is animportant virtue in and of itself and that quick starts and stops inpolicy are undesirable. And we could be getting close to settingourselves up for one of those cycles. So, my preference would be towait and see here. Obviously, if it appears that the economy iscontinuing to slide, we'd have to take appropriate action at thattime. I do have to grant, of course, that there is a good case forgoing ahead and easing. The economy has reached lower levels [ofgrowth] than I think many of us would have anticipated--certainlylower than I anticipated. It's relatively low risk to proceed to easea bit more and it might help some at the margin. So, I would notdemur from an easing, though I would prefer to keep our powder dry fora time at least.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Well, as a novice governor, I found this to bea very, very interesting discussion. My knowledge is about the sameas what was contained in the Greenbook. The issue I would like toreflect upon is simply what one does when confronted with theGreenbook's statistical [data]. I guess I've been not too long out ofa classroom when I was temporarily domiciled in the First District.MR. MULLINS. It's a crowded District!MR. LINDSEY. I'd point out that we have three Virginianssitting here; my colleague was born in Richmond. What one would lookat first is the probability of being wrong, and I have no reason todispute the argument that the risks are equally weighted on the upside and the down side from the Greenbook forecast. But I'd point out-26-12/17/91that those are economic probabilities only. One never knows whenanother Saddam Hussein might come along, when something might happenin Russia or the Russias, or when something might happen in otherparts of the world. Those kinds of surprises, while we might wishthey were symmetric, probably are not symmetric; they are asymmetricon the down side. The implication of that probability is not helpfulfor solving our problem. On the one hand, if the risks are on thedown side, that might incline one to ease. On the other hand, if therisks are on the down side, one might want to keep one's powder dry incase those risks come true. So, on the probabilities side, I have noanswer.One has to look at what the penalties are for being wrong oneither side. On the up side, if the economy turns out to be morerobust than we thought, the staff forecast suggests that we're goingto have decelerating inflation through '93 in any event. In fact, ifone looks at the labor market data, the big surprise is not thatunemployment is as high as it is but that the rate is as low as it is.An analysis that we were presented with yesterday suggests that, usingthe standard [econometric] model, we're not going to see unemploymentpeak at 7 percent but at closer to 8 percent. We're fortunate thatthat's not the case; but that suggests that there's probably morelabor market slack than otherwise. So, if anything, I would say theupside risks are very, very low. I don't see the penalty for beingwrong, if the economy is stronger, as being very [large] on theinflation side. I think the downside [penalty] is great. If onelooks at what could happen--really, we should compare the Septemberforecast with what we have now--the real downside risk is that we'rewrong by two quarters, just as the staff forecast was wrong roughly bytwo quarters in September. That two-quarter error in the forecast ofwhen the recovery would start is 1-1/2 million extra jobs; it's $69billion in lost output at an annual rate. And since that willcontinue for about 2-1/2 years, the cumulative effect of that is alarge number even in Washington. Other downside risks include bankingproblems--we know that there are weak banks out there--and, as DickSyron mentioned, fiscal policy. Whatever they do [on fiscal policy]is not likely to be helpful, and perhaps we should think aboutpositioning ourselves to avoid the downside risks of extremeCongressional action as opposed to modest Congressional action. So,in conclusion, Mr. Chairman, I would say the probabilities may beequally weighted. I would stress the penalties of being wrong. Theyare very modest for stimulus; they're very great if we're too tight.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you. I must say that, speaking towardthe end of this discussion, there's not much I can [add]. I would saythat the discussion has been extremely helpful, and it does portraythe very difficult balancing situation that we find ourselves in now.I wish that some of the positive signs coming out of St. Louis couldhave carried through a little further. The negative economic signsthat are portrayed in the Greenbook have been confirmed. If you makea list of the negatives and of the positives, the negative list islonger than the positive list. Nevertheless, the restructuring thathas been discussed around the table does lay a very good foundation.Once we get through bumping along the bottom, I think we will bepoised to move up with stronger productivity, better efficiency in the-27-12/17/91services sector, and so on. And I do think the monetary aggregatesare showing signs of getting back on track.So, we're in this balancing situation and, perhaps a bit likeLarry Lindsey, I've been trying to weigh what the penalties are on thedown side. I haven't been in Washington that long but I am becomingsensitive to the political pressures; there might be worse thingscoming from the Hill or downtown--however one words it. Nevertheless,I do come down on the side of accommodating this continued balancesheet restructuring. From my perspective, David Mullins described themonetary easing that has occurred very, very clearly. I think we doneed some more easing. [I don't know] whether the timing is right nowor whether we should wait for a bigger bang, so to speak, to get thatmaximum impact. I could be persuaded on that. Nevertheless, I dothink some easing at this time to continue the accommodation of the[business] restructuring would be helpful. I'm afraid, unfortunately,that I agree with the Greenbook that the economy is still likely to bemoving along the bottom for a while. So, some easing at this pointwould seem to be helpful, but we're likely to need even more later on.To the extent that we can do it earlier rather than later, I thinkwe're better off because if we go into the spring and we start to seethat black hole widen, we might start seeing more [unintelligible].And about February is not a grand time to be seeing a panic situation.Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm informed that coffee is here.[Coffee break]MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Questions for Don?MR. BLACK. Don, I have been one of those who thought that M2was flashing wrong signals. I even went so far as to say in one of mymore frivolous moments that it was as if I were experiencing coliclike a baby who has lost his pacifier. But looking at it now, asGovernor Mullins indicated earlier, it might not have been flashingall the wrong signals. What has happened has been along the lines ofwhat you would have expected, taking it at face value.MR. KOHN. I would interpret its signals as partly wrong andpartly right in the following sense: I don't think we're getting theextent of the damping in nominal income one would have expected fromthe kind of money growth we've had, especially with interest ratescoming down. That should have boosted money growth and it didn't.Essentially, we have had unchanged velocity for the year but one wouldhave expected a very sharp decline in velocity. So, I think we've hadsome shift in the money demand function. That means that not all theweakness shows through. At the same time, the forces affecting moneygrowth--the credit crunch type forces, to use the overarching phrasehere--clearly also have been affecting income. So, while not all theweakness in money growth has shown through to income, it has been abit of a leading indicator, and I think that was true in 1990 as wellas in 1991 in terms of weakness in income. Now, we tended to discountit in 1990 because the war intervened; the weakness in money wasfollowed by weakness in income but that was said to be because of thewar. Maybe looking back, the weakness in money should have been-28-12/17/91telling us something about an underlying process in the financialsystem that was showing through to income. I wouldn't put percentagepoint by percentage point M2 and income together; I don't think onecould do that. But I do think M2 has had some [leading] properties.MR. BLACK. I think that's a much better answer than the oneI suggested earlier. You had warned us that there might not be[unintelligible].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Don? If not,let me start off where Bob Black left off. I, too, sense that there'smore to what is going on in M2 and that its weakness is more relevantas it passes through to the economy than I would have been willing tobelieve six weeks or six months ago. I think it's still obvious thata very big chunk of the M2 weakness is essentially structural; but tothe extent that it is in fact taking disintermediation out of thesystem, it doesn't matter that it's structural; it's working there.The only ways one can look at it as being non-relevant are either:(1) through the displacement in mutual funds, which we've discussed;or (2) that in many respects the sharp declines in small CDs in thethrifts, for example, are not materially impacting home mortgagelending largely as a consequence of the extraordinary degree ofsecuritization that has evolved in that market. But having said allof that, we are still dealing with something that suggests that thenormal relationships between M2 and the economy are at least in partholding, which also means algebraically that P* is still alive andwell. And if P* is alive and well, there is a good chance that theGreenbook may be overestimating the level of inflation. And that,frankly, is my impression. I do think that we're looking at successin bringing the inflation rate down a lot faster than we had anyreason to contemplate. When one considers that there has been anextraordinary rise in state and local indirect taxes--sales and otherindirect taxes that have been embodied in the price level--I think weare getting a core inflation rate, ex-taxes, which probably is doing agood deal better than we might readily grasp.The economy is dead [in the water]. It's not decelerating;we are not getting really major problems. It is true that industrialproduction is down in November and that, on the basis of the weeklydata we are looking at, it probably is going to be down in December.We are clearly looking at some secondary inventory recession, which isnot atypical of previous pauses in past economic recoveries. What isreally extraordinary about this particular period is what Jerrymentioned: namely, that in the context of a period not really allthat much different from a lot of pauses in the early stages of arecovery, we have had such a dramatic drop in consumer confidence thatone would presume that something fundamental has really struck us. Weare all puzzling about it and, as Jerry pointed out, no one reallyknows exactly what happened. But let me throw on the table a possiblehypothesis based on an additional piece of evidence. A veryinteresting survey came out last week as a Wall Street Journal/NBCpoll. It indicated that the average consumer or voter--depending onhow you wish to look at it--perceived that the economy was terriblyimportant but that what should be done was not tax cuts forthemselves, or middle income income tax cuts, but tax cuts forbusiness. Even the capital gains tax cut got the majority vote inthat context. What clearly came through, as best I could see, is thisreally very profound fear of the long-term economic outlook. What has-29-12/17/91happened, I suspect, is that while the economy was coming back fromthe recession, it led to a willingness on the part of the averageconsumer to say essentially that it's coming back and that's okay.But as soon as the balance sheet pressures put the wringer on thisrecovery, I think there was an abrupt reconfirmation of their concernsabout whether the long term is really out there. They observedincreasingly that they are living in houses that are nowhere near thequality of those that their parents lived in, even though theirparents may not have had the education or any of a number of other[advantages] they have had. And they are worried about the future.They ask: Where is it all going? This situation creates a veryprofound fear.I must say that I find the fact that the savings rate is aslow as it is in this particular context, frankly, slightly surprising.I think there's a good chance that it may move up, which leads to aconclusion that is an odd one in the sense that the economy isn't allthat far down. You can't account for the consumer psychology with theunemployment rate where it is. But far more importantly you cannotaccount for the psychology with the layoff rate. The layoff rate isbasically not fundamentally different from what it was in other yearsin the '80s, not even during the recessions. And initial claims,adjusted for the [number] of those in the labor force, also are notshowing anything really extreme. Therefore, something different isbasically going on. It suggests that if this type of psychologyeases, it won't be all that difficult for a modest recovery toresurface. And since it is not all that far from the top of arecovery, the economy can probably come back pretty much in line withthe Greenbook forecast. But, as John LaWare points out, there issomething really fundamental involved here, psychologically. And it'sgoing to be difficult to break this general attitude easily, althoughI do think that the balance sheet problems are probably now startingto ease because the market itself is creating a very significantcountervailing force. We now have record equity issuance, which isde-leveraging the system. We have a significant volume of publicofferings of debt securities, a significant part of which are beingused to fund short-term liabilities, and that is taking off some ofthe pressure. Lower interest rates, as Don mentioned, are having animportant impact on reducing debt service burdens. The market'scourier system is working. And unless it cracks open, it probablywill proceed in that way and we will look back at this period a yearfrom now and say that we were unduly concerned. Frankly, that's mybest expectation. Indeed, I'm saying that I think the Greenbookforecast is probably right.As a consequence, as far as policy is concerned, my readingin this context is that the majority of the Committee favors somefurther downward adjustment in the rate structure. If that is in factwhat the Committee chooses to do, that suggests that the Board willhave to determine how the discount rate should be structured to getthe maximum effect of the easing, especially in the context of thispsychology. What I would recommend for today is that we vote to goasymmetric toward ease with a very strong presumption that unlessimprovements in the economy become evident rather quickly or unless weget significant evidence of a pickup in M2 in the period immediatelyahead, it would be expected that the Desk would be requested to movelower. So, I would recommend an asymmetric directive, which I wouldcharacterize as hard asymmetric; the balance of the evidence is going-30-12/17/91to have to be that the economy is really showing surprising signs ofstrength [to preclude an easing move]. There is a possibility thatthings that have been extremely dull could become very buoyant veryquickly; were that to happen, I think we would want to stand pat. Butif that doesn't happen, the meaning of what I suggest is that we wouldmove lower. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I support your recommendation. I think it'sthe right approach in the current environment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation as Iinterpret it, but I might go a little further. Let me say why. If wewere to get the Greenbook forecast, with the turn, it might be not allthat uncomfortable. But I'm afraid that the risks are not symmetricalon the cost side. I really do think there's a chance we will get anoutcome that would be highly undesirable. And then I ask: What canwe do about it? I don't believe policy is totally impotent. I don'tthink a lot of people do, given what has been talked about here. Andin that sense, I really do prefer maximizing the signal effect of whatwe're doing. The first paragraph in the Bluebook says that followingthe last meeting there was a "slight easing of monetary policy," whichit interprets as being a 25 basis point cut in the funds rate and a 50basis point cut in the discount rate. If that's slight, I have somequestion about whether that's what we should be doing in this periodof time. We could always reverse [an easing move] if we were to gethappy surprises. I agree with your basic view that the most likelyoutcome is the one that is [in the Greenbook]. What I'm concernedabout is the risks that are on either side. So, for that reason, myown personal preference would be alternative A.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. I agree with your recommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I support your position. I'd justmake a point that sounds absolutely preposterous in this environment:Things could develop, even in 1992, where we could get surprised onthe up side. That sounds ridiculous right now, but let's not forgetabout that possibility.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I might say parenthetically that Ipresume it would be the desire of this Committee to move with duedispatch should that consideration arise. That has been the [statedposition] of this Committee previously. But it's important for us tobe aware that it may be necessary to preserve what has been really anextraordinary success to date on inflation. I must say, looking back,that I think we've had some lucky things happen to us. One of them isthat our policy has been able to rein in inflation at a much morerapid pace than we had contemplated earlier. And it would be a shameif we were to let that get away. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I would support yourrecommendation. A point of clarification: I assume you're talkingabout a 1/4 point move?-31-12/17/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. Let me put it this way: If itturns out to be more than that, the implication is that other thingsare going on and it would be appropriate under those conditions tohave a telephone conference.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, as I said, I would support yourrecommendation. I find myself in a bit of an anomalous position, assomeone who has been urging ease for over a year, to feel a littleuncomfortable with this position now. But that is because I think wemay have done enough at this point in time. We need to keep in mindthat there are very substantial lags in monetary policy and thatanything we do now is not going to affect the fourth quarter and isnot going to affect the first quarter. As I look at the profile ofthe Greenbook forecast, I think it's not a bad outcome given noadditional restraint. And since my forecast for inflation is a bithigher in the 1993 period, I'm just a little nervous about overdoingthis and making the kinds of mistakes we've made before. On the otherhand, the arguments for ease of the kind that you are describingcertainly are reasonable. We may get a very substantial psychologicalbenefit from moving. So, I would support the recommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Jerry, if you think what you said soundedpreposterous, wait until you hear this! To say I'm not worried aboutthe real side would be silly; I think one has to be. But at the sametime, I have the feeling that there's a limit to what monetary policycan do on the real side and that whatever it can do is only temporary.The permanent effect of our actions is really only on inflation. AndI'd have to say that policy has become very stimulative in the lastsix months. To gauge that, I look at reserves and I look at narrowmoney. I do that because those are things we really affect throughour actions. And both of those are growing at double-digit rates.One can argue about what that means, Alan. But in terms of beingsurprised about what happened to inflation, one of the things that welook at is a three-year moving average of Ml. When you came on, in1987, that was over 11 percent; and in the next three years the three-year moving average of Ml came down to about 3-1/2 percent or a littleless. To us that indicated that the thrust of policy was very much ona disinflationary course and we've seen that flow through. Now, whatworries me is that, given the actions in the last six months, thattrend growth rate has moved up a full percentage point. My guess isthat if we did nothing further, it probably would move up another fullpercentage point in the first half of next year. And I worry aboutthe long run. I'm not sure we've stepped into the trap yet, but Ithink we're getting very close to making the same mistake monetarypolicy typically makes at this point in the cycle in that we could besowing the seeds of the next inflation. Now, I don't disagree [aboutthe near term]. I think we're going to see very good inflationnumbers in '92 and we're probably going to see very good numbers in'93. What we're doing right now isn't really going to affect thoseyears in terms of prices. I think the effects are further out. Itgets back to what Mike was saying before. I worry about setting up astop-and-go policy and putting us in a position where several yearsdown the road we're going to have to tighten dramatically. I thinkthe only chance of bringing inflation down in a permanent sense isthrough stable policy applied over a long period of time. So, that'smy longer-run concern.-32-12/17/91In the shorter run, what I worry about is the risk in foreignexchange markets. I was struck by Gretchen's describing that earlier.We have a fiscal policy that's in pretty tough shape; we're going tobe looking at deficits next year of 6 to 7 percent of GDP; and we'regoing to be hearing a lot of political discussion about other measuresthat might be taken on the fiscal side. We could continue to have aweak economy with that background music and we could find the dollarunder extreme pressure. If at that time we are sitting here with amonetary policy that is way out of position--and I'm arguing that Ithink we're getting there fast--we could have a real problem nextyear. So, where I come out is that I would not be inclined to changepolicy now. Obviously, that's not going to fly; I understand thatfrom our discussion, but that would be my preference. What I wouldargue for, assuming that we do make a change, is that we begin tocommunicate in some fashion that monetary policy has done about all itcan because, if we don't start getting that message out there,expectations and pressures and so forth are going to continue to tryto stampede us. David, you talked a bit about this. I probablywouldn't favor doing it with as aggressive a step as you would, but weneed to get that message out. And we need to do that relatively soonor we're going to continue to get run over by these pressures.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I always feel very uncomfortablewhen I disagree with Tom Melzer, and I'm partly with him because Ithink we've done almost enough. But if we adopt your proposal ofmoving [the funds rate] 1/4 point--and I would add a gratuitous bit ofadvice to the Board of Governors that they couple that with a 1/2point cut in the discount rate--I think, and hope, that the marketprobably would conclude on its own that we've gone as far as we aregoing to go. And some people will come out of the woodwork when theythink rates have gone as low as they're going to go.MR. KELLEY. That's right.MR. BLACK. I would be a little more leery of taking thatsecond step because I think a 1/2 point move on the funds rate, evenif it's done later on, might look surprisingly close to theseridiculous suggestions we've been getting with regard to fiscalpolicy. I basically buy what you have suggested, but I share some ofTom's nervousness that we're almost there.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Hendricks.MR. HENDRICKS. Yes, Mr. Chairman. We come out just a bitdifferent from your recommendation, perhaps a little closer to TomMelzer. We acknowledge the potential for a no-growth economy thisquarter and next. But we don't believe further action by the Fed cando a whole lot to counter the near-term weakness in output. Neitherdo we believe that the Fed can or should do much to offset thestructural imbalances in the economy that have been talked aboutaround the table here today: real estate, the decline in defenseexpenditures, debt overloads, and so forth. Apparently, M2 growth hasrevived recently and might now be on an acceptable path that is closeto the midpoint of the target range. We've cautioned against a policyoriented around a reaction to real-time economic data. History hasshown, it seems to us, that such a policy process can mislead-33-12/17/91policymakers into thinking they can fine-tune these economicactivities. Moreover, it seems to us that such a policy process alsoleads policymakers to lose sight of the key long-term objective ofmaintaining price stability. So, our policy prescription, while not awhole lot different from your recommendation, is that the FOMC hold asteady course at least for now until we see the cumulative results ofour several actions to cut interest rates over the past year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Don is a little concerned that maybewhat I said wasn't clear. I'm saying that my recommendation is to donothing now but to have an asymmetric directive. I don't think thathas been--MR. ANGELL. Yes, Bob Black I think stated it a littledifferently, but that's the way I heard you.MR. KELLEY. Yes.MR. BLACK. I didn't hear it that way. I'm sorry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh no, I'm sorry.MR. LAWARE. You're saying "B" asymmetric?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. "B" asymmetric.MR. MULLINS. A hard asymmetric.MR. BLACK. When you invoke the proviso, if you have to, youwould go 1/4 point and that's all?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. I'm sorry if there was anyconfusion. I'm recommending "B" asymmetric.MR. BLACK. I guess I'm the only one who is confused!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, apparently, [I wasn't clear]. I'msorry about that.MR. BLACK. No, it's my fault.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I could accept "B" asymmetric. Iwould hope that [if and] when the rate is moved that it would beaccompanied by a change in the discount rate and that we would findsome opportunity to emphasize or highlight our longer-term objective.In addition, I'd emphasize the point that we've made around this tablethat it's important for us to be willing to reverse direction whencircumstances dictate. And I would like very much to disagree withTom Melzer, if I am understanding him correctly. I don't want to jointhis dialogue that monetary policy can't do any more. I think that'swrong. There may be an issue of whether we should do any more, andthat's certainly a legitimate question. I hope we never join thegroup that says that we're pushing on a string and can't do any more.MR. MELZER. I don't think I said that, Bob.-34-12/17/91MR. PARRY. I think you said: "We can't do any more." MaybeI didn't hear what you said. What did you say?MR. MELZER. That we shouldn't.MR. PARRY. Oh, I thought you said we couldn't.MR. KELLEY. Shouldn't, not can't.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation butI do stand spiritually with Messrs. Melzer and Black.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I, too, support your recommendation. The onlything I would add at this point is that, while it's certainlyunderstandable that there's some frustration around the table in termsof the results we've achieved to date--at least in terms of the realeconomy and its tendency to fall below expectations--I think we shouldresist the temptation to try to do something more dramatic and moreheroic. I believe the course we have been on has been the right oneand I think we ought to continue with that. As many people havealready commented, a lot of the problems we face are structural andare not amenable to changes in monetary policy. And I think, as yousuggested, that we are not very far from where we want to be in anyevent. So, I'm comfortable with your recommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I would prefer alternative A. I think therestill is a positive role that monetary policy can play both in termsof healing some of these structural wounds as well as providing somecyclical uplift. And given my reading of the downside risks and thecost of being wrong, I prefer to get on with it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I can vote for your proposition,as I'm sure you anticipated that I would. Thanks a lot for giving mea chance not to have to write another dissenting statement! I do wantto suggest that during the last six years I've become a bit lessoptimistic in regard to how easy it is to get the rate of inflationdown. When I came in, I had the view that inflation could be broughtdown by gradual and persistent control of the money stock even ifunemployment is at its natural rate. My experience is that it's verytough to get the CPI rate of inflation down. And I don't know whywe're looking a gift horse in the mouth. Here we have had someunexpected occurrences, which means that the rate of inflation isgoing to come down a little faster than we thought it was going to.But we're committed not to let it turn into deflation. We're just notgoing to let that happen. I don't know, Mr. Chairman, whether there'smore pain doing it this way than there is doing it over a 10-yearperiod. I feel quite confident that this improvement in the outlookfor inflation will make the recovery that we finally get a much betterand a long sustained one. I do look forward to the discussions that I12/17/91think we might be having, particularly in regard to Governor Mullins'scomments, and I guess I get to vote again. So, thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Many times. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, my view doesn't change the tallybut I would have preferred alternative A. I think we all are veryconfused about the current stance of monetary policy, including me.If it's narrow money that's important, it's too easy. If it's short-term interest rates that are important, policy is not as easy as itseems; we have in this recession reduced the fed funds rate by asmaller percentage than in previous recessions. And if broad money iswhat is important, policy is too tight. This is the first recessionin the last 30 years, I believe, where the rate of growth of M2 hasnot increased during the recession. If we believe M2 is the right M,we need to be more aggressive. I believe the next move ought to be a1/2 point move because I think it's important that people stopperceiving that every time we do something we're going to do somethingelse a week or two later. The next time we move the perception oughtto be that we have done our thing and people should stop waiting forthe next shoe to drop. People are out there trying to make decisions--they want to buy a house or a car--and as long as they think there'sa little more [reduction in rates] to go they're going to bepostponing those decisions. When we do make a move, if it's correctto do so, it's important that we emphasize the slow growth in M2because I think that's the best way to set the stage for the time whenwe're going to have to reverse the course and [raise rates]. And Ithink M2 will be our most consistent explanation for changing course.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, given my concerns about the outlookand the overall situation, I'd be very much in favor of doing more anddoing it now. I'd be in the Syron/Boehne camp, supporting alternativeA. Having said that, as I hear your recommendation, the evidence ofeconomic growth would have to be very, very compelling in order not toease. If I'm right about my interpretation of that and if the movemight be in the near term, then I support the recommendation. But ifI'm not right, I don't know how you can be more precise about exactlywhat you mean in terms of the indicators that would cause you to dosomething. If I'm not right in my interpretation, then I'd be infavor of alternative A.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I would prefer "B" with symmetric language. Ireally think that we have to send a firm sign that the [downwardinterest rate] drift is going to stop. That could have a verystimulating effect because I think the economy and the public arebeing exposed to something akin to Chinese water torture. We creepdown 1/4 point in the funds rate and then we creep down another 1/4point and we change the discount rate. If we follow that samepattern, it seems to me that we are creating the expectation that thatpattern is going to continue almost indefinitely. I think there's alot to be said for turning it off, at least for a while, and seeingwhat happens. I'm still not convinced that all of the effects of ourprevious easings have come through and I don't see why we need tocontinue this drift. So, I would be in favor of "B" symmetrical.-36-12/17/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I'm happy to be able to supportyour proposal. I am struck, however, by comments from people who aredisagreeing with your proposal on both sides. The term psychology isused by those who would not favor further easing and my good friendJohn LaWare has just made the case against further easing but bysaying that water torture is going on. So, there is a great deal ofsentiment at the table--and I'm struck by it--that we have not solvedthe psychological problem by this proposal. That issue may have to berevisited. But I am very happy to support your proposal, which Ithought was a very well crafted statement of the [FOMC'S] position.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. I also am pleased to support the proposal. Icould have gone further, but I'm happy to support this proposal.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Tom, did I miss you?MR. MELZER. You don't want to hear that one again, do youAlan? I'm "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. He thought he wrote you down on apiece of paper without [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I heard a long discussion but Ididn't remember how you actually came out.MR. MELZER. Well, I'm relieved.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. As I read it, the proposal on thetable will be "B" asymmetric toward ease with the new language thatGovernor Kelley drafted earlier. I'd like Norm to read it.MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions." Then, the new language would be ason page 17 of the Bluebook--MR. KEEHN. Norm, at the risk of interrupting, which I'mdoing, could I ask the Chairman for just a bit more interpretation asto what you really mean in terms of the indicators that would causeyou to do one thing or another? What would really make a differencein terms of monetary policy?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Essentially, what I have in mind is thatif events do not change and if the quality of the outlook remainsunaltered from where we sense it today, additional ease would beappropriate.MR. KEEHN. Continuation of the current trends. Do you havea time perspective in mind?-37-12/17/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, obviously we're dealing here witha time-frame encompassing the period immediately ahead; we can alwayshave another meeting.MR. KEEHN. Two to three weeks or something like that?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't want to be [too precise]. Icouldn't disagree with you, but I'd hesitate to phrase it thatconcretely.MR. KEEHN. Thank you.MR. BERNARD. Continuing with the new language on page 17:"In the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for pricestability and sustainable economic growth, and giving carefulconsideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments,slightly greater reserve restraint might or somewhat lesser reserverestraint would be acceptable in the intermeeting period." And thencoming back to the standard sentence, as shown on page 15: "Thecontemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent withgrowth of M2 and M3 over the period from November through March atannual rates of about 3 and 1-1/2 percent, respectively."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare NoGovernor Lindsey YesGovernor Mullins YesPresident Parry YesGovernor Phillips YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Our next meeting is Tuesday andWednesday, February 4th and 5th of next year.END OF MEETING-38-