Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeFebruary 5-6, 1991A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, February 5, 1991, at 2:30 p.m. and wascontinued on Wednesday, February 6, 1991, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBlackForrestalKeehnKelleyLaWareMullinsParrySegerMessrs. Guffey, Hoskins, Melzer, and Syron, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas,and Minneapolis, respectivelyKohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Deputy SecretaryCoyne, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPrell, EconomistMessrs. Beebe, Broaddus, R. Davis, Lindsey,Promisel, Scheld, Siegman, Simpson, Slifman,and Ms. Tschinkel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Rosine, Senior Economist, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Fisher, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs,Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Lang, Rolnick, andRosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of Cleveland, Kansas City, Philadelphia,Minneapolis, and Dallas, respectivelyMr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof BostonMr. Thornton, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of St. LouisMs. Krieger, Manager, Open Market Operations,Federal Reserve Bank of New York1. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussionof the economic outlook and its longer-run objectives for monetaryand debt aggregates.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofFebruary 5-6, 1991February 5, 1991--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good afternoon, everyone. Welcome, BobMcTeer; it's nice to see you at the table. You're sitting between twoformidable characters but I suspect you'll survive.MR. SYRON. What do mean by that?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The first item on my agenda is not onthe [meeting] agenda but it's something I'd like to bring up because Iknow a number of you felt quite uncomfortable about the need [for theBoard] to take the action that we took on Friday and the way we had totake it. The action, in my judgment, had to be done and I think inretrospect it clearly was right. I thought waiting until this meeting[would have] put policy behind formidably, which I think we have toavoid. As we discussed at that time, we moved under the directive dejure, which was still targeting borrowing and not the funds rate.And, obviously, under those conditions, there's an immediate basispoint-for-basis point passthrough with the discount rate. De facto,it's very hard to believe that that is what we're doing. As aconsequence, I think we have to resolve this question in a manner thatis consistent with the rules of this Committee. Unless somebody hasan objection, I would suggest that we form a small committee--and I'mrecommending Messrs. Kohn, Sternlight, Mattingly, and a FederalReserve Bank economist of their choice--to prepare a paper on thisissue and how it should be handled for inclusion on the agenda of ourMarch 26th meeting. We have so much ambiguity on this particularissue that I think we have to get some clarification so that theBoard, the Desk, and the Committee know where we are under allconditions on this issue. If anyone has anything to add to that, I'dappreciate [hearing] it. If not, I'd just like to go forward andofficially appoint that committee to prepare a paper and put thisissue on the agenda next time.MR. HOSKINS. Just a clarification on the paper: The mandateis to look at the operating instruments as well as the relationship ofthe discount rate to the funds rate?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The mandate is basically to evaluate ourprocedures and give options on what the alternative actions are whenthe Federal Reserve Board chooses to move the discount rate.We are into the formal meeting. Since at the moment we haveno chairman, I will turn [the meeting] over to Governor Seger, who isour senior [Board] member, to obtain a chairman and vice chairman forus.MS. SEGER. As Mr. Greenspan says--I shouldn't call himchairman at this point--we have to select a new chairman and vicechairman for this FOMC year. I would entertain a motion for chairman.MR. ANGELL. Oh, you want them separately.MS. SEGER. Yes.2/5-6/91MR. ANGELL. I move Mr. Greenspan be chairman.MS. SEGER. Okay, thank you. May I have a second or somemore nominations?SPEAKER(?). Second.MR. SYRON. Move the nominations closed.MS. SEGER. All in favor?SEVERAL. Aye, aye.MS. SEGER. Thank you.MR. KELLEY. You were just in time, Dick!MS. SEGER. Right. Now we need a nomination for vicechairman, please.MR. ANGELL. I move Mr. Corrigan.MS. SEGER. All right. Any additional nominations?MR. KELLEY. I'll second Mr. Corrigan.MS. SEGER. Thank you. All in favor?SEVERAL. Aye, aye.MS. SEGER. Thank you. I guess we have our officers.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Congratulations, Mr. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Condolences, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We now have to elect staff officers andI ask the Secretary, technically the Deputy Secretary--he's just beenpromoted--to read them.MR. BERNARD.Secretary and Economist, Donald KohnDeputy Secretary, Normand BernardAssistant Secretaries: Joseph Coyne and Gary GillumGeneral Counsel, Virgil MattinglyDeputy General Counsel, Ernest PatrikisEconomists: Michael Prell and Edwin TrumanAssociate Economists from the Board:David Lindsey;Larry Promisel;Charles Siegman;Thomas Simpson; andLawrence Slifman.Associate Economists from the Federal Reserve Banks:Alfred Broaddus, proposed by President Black;Richard Davis, proposed by President Corrigan;Karl Scheld, proposed by President Keehn;2/5-6/91Sheila Tschinkel, proposed by President Forrestal; andJack Beebe, proposed by President Parry.That's the list, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no objections, I willconsider the list to be approved. The next item on the agenda is toselect a Federal Reserve Bank to execute transactions for the SystemOpen Market Account, and we recommend the New York Bank unless I hearany objections. Without objection, I assume that is approved.MS. SEGER. I was going to push Kansas City!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I knew you were! That's the reason [Imade a prompt recommendation.] We need to select the Manager forDomestic Operations and the Manager for Foreign Operations, SystemOpen Market Account. The incumbents, of course, are Messrs.Sternlight and Cross. Unless I hear objections, I will assume that weapprove their carrying on for the next year. I assume you havereviewed the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations andagain, without objection, I will assume that that is also approved.I'll now call on Mr. Cross for a series [of recommendations]. Mr.Cross.MR. CROSS. Mr. Chairman, this is the warehousing agreementproposal?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. CROSS. Mr. Truman circulated a memorandum on this matterto the Committee and I concurred in the memorandum. The Committeewill recall that at its meeting last March it agreed to a proposal toincrease the warehousing maximum by $5 billion, from $10 billion to$15 billion. This was made subject to a Treasury request. In theevent, the additional amount of $5 billion was not needed during theyear and was not used; there was no Treasury request to use it.Indeed, the Treasury has taken an initiative, with our aid andencouragement, to reduce the amount outstanding under the presentwarehousing agreement. As you know, the amount outstanding has beenreduced in the past months from $9 billion, which is where it stoodwhen the Committee approved the increase, to $4-1/2 billion. TheTreasury in reversing these amounts and reducing the outstandings to$4-1/2 billion has always urged that a cushion of unused capacity beretained in case there is a requirement for it, even though [the need]has been going the other way. We have made the point that we don'tthink the warehousing facility should be in continuous use and we havebeen helping and encouraging them in bringing the amount down from $9billion to $4-1/2 billion. Our view is that the correct approach atthis point would be to drop the additional $5 billion that was addedlast year and to seek the renewal of the facility at the present timewith the pre-existing maximum of $10 billion. And I so recommend, Mr.Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Cross?MR. HOSKINS. I have a couple, Sam. One is: What happens ifwe don't renew it? Does it automatically expire or is this a processthat the FOMC has set up to review this annually? If so, I guess theidea is that the Committee is endorsing this kind of activity.2/5-6/91MR. CROSS. Well, there have been warehousing arrangementswith the Treasury going back to the early 1960s. I would have to seeklegal guidance on what would happen if at the time when there wereoutstandings the Committee did not authorize their continuance.MR. KOHN. I assume they would run off as they mature.MR. CROSS. I assume so, yes. The next ones that fall dueare in May and June. Well, I don't know what the legal position wouldbe. If there were no warehouse facility, I don't know whether thatwould mean that the whole $4-1/2 billion would have to be ended atthis moment or--MR. MATTINGLY. They would go off according to the terms. Isthere a term on them?MR. KOHN. Yes.MR. CROSS. There are terms on them.MR. MATTINGLY. [Each] would roll off according to its terms;there would be no additional warehousing after the resolution.MR. HOSKINS. So, if we endorse the recommendation of $10billion, would that essentially mean that the FOMC endorses theactivity of warehousing?MR. CROSS. It means that the FOMC endorses the continuanceof this facility up to a maximum of $10 billion, yes.MR. KOHN. The FOMC has been authorizing the warehousing onan annual basis when it votes on this.MR. GUFFEY. Sam, what's magic about $10 billion as opposedto $5 billion, for example?MR. CROSS. Well, as I say, the Treasury has taken theinitiative and has acted to bring down the amount outstanding quitesubstantially in this past period. They have always made the pointvery clearly that in doing so they urge and would expect that therewould be a continuation of this [facility] so that if conditionsshould change--and they can change--it would be available to themquite promptly in order to continue further warehousing. At thispoint conditions are such that it certainly does not look like that'sthe way it's going; it's going the other way. We're in the process ofreducing our foreign currency holdings.MR. GUFFEY. A follow-up question: If we were to authorize$10 billion, then it's up to them? We don't trigger it but they do?They could do this anytime they want to and we have to take it?MR. CROSS. If we authorize the $10 billion, then typicallywe act on their request in providing the warehousing. Now, obviously,this is not an adversarial relationship, as far as I'm concerned.It's something that we talk to them about, work with them on, and dealwith them on a daily basis. It has always worked satisfactorily onthat basis.2/5-6/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Charlie Siegman, do you have anythingyou'd like to add?MR. SIEGMAN. No. I think the Treasury's need for somecontingency or a cushion for reserve is appropriate, given theuncertainties. Otherwise, we'd have to review this on an emergencybasis rather than--MR. CROSS. Any action to change this does get reported. Ifwe leave it at $10 billion, that's outstanding until we choose to actotherwise or we look at it again next year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we're still in the mode oftrying to reduce our holdings [of foreign currencies] and that willcontinue. We have communicated that periodically to the Treasury, andI think we are just going to bring down gradually what we all think isan excessive position in this respect. It will take a while, but Ithink we're moving in the right direction.MR. CROSS. We've made clear to the Treasury many, many timesthat we don't visualize this as a facility that should be incontinuous use. It's there when conditions are such that it'srequired and it should be drawn down, or reversed, at times whenconditions warrant. That's the basis we've been working on and thebasis on which it has been reduced to $4-1/2 billion in recent months.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, for two years I was ratheruncomfortable with this position. I am not uncomfortable with this$10 billion request. I feel that the Treasury was rather generous inmoving in this direction, [based on] the Federal Open MarketCommittee's objections. It seems to me that they gave heed to thesize of the fund, which was one basis for the objections. The secondarea that I was objecting to as a matter of principle is no longervalid in that we did call to the attention of the Congress [issues]about the appropriations process. If the Congress feels comfortablewith the arrangement, I'm certainly on board in this context.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions? Would somebodylike to move approval of Sam's request?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MR. SYRON. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, it is approved. Wehave three additional foreign currency instruments, which have to beapproved. Would somebody like to move them?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would move that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Second?MR. SYRON. Second.2/5-6/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. The next item on theagenda is the memorandum from Mr. Mattingly, which is dated January25th, on the Committee's Rules Regarding the Availability ofInformation. I specifically requested that individuals on theCommittee be contacted to see what the general response to that draftmemorandum was. There were several who had problems with it. My viewis that if there isn't [virtual] unanimity on an issue such as this,it would be inappropriate for us to [approve] it or move on it. And Iwould suggest that it just be dropped at this stage. Hopefully we'llget our issues in this area resolved in a somewhat better manner.Nonetheless, we have to have a vote on the technical part of thatmemorandum before publication. Would somebody like to move that?MS. SEGER. I'll move it.MR. SYRON. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second? Is there anydiscussion? Without objections.MR. KEEHN. Would it be appropriate to ask what the nature ofthe objections was?MR. KELLEY. Yes, I'd be interested also.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Don, why don't you comment?MR. KOHN. Several members of the Committee and otherpresidents questioned the need for it. Several expressed the viewthat, indeed, whoever was doing this leaking knew it was wrong, so whydo we have to pass more rules? A couple members of the Committee wereconcerned that the language having to do with verbal or unwritten--aswell as written--material was overly broad and might end up gaggingtheir ability to discourse in public even in the normal course ofbusiness without [divulging] anything that could be used in that way.Let's see, those were two of the reasons. Really, it was: Why do weneed this? It could be misinterpreted; it could be used against theCommittee at some point. It seems unnecessary, so why go forward withit? That was, I think, the general nature of the objections. Norm,do you--MR. BERNARD. Yes, in line with your comment, the observationwas made that the rules already contained the prohibitions and theauthority for the Chairman [on this matter], so there was really noneed to be more specific and draw attention to this.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I understand that it is your intentjust to drop this now, but do you anticipate that this will bereexamined and revisited?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, if there is concern in the Committeethat in order to respond to a specific problem we are creating too[cumbersome] an instrument--which is what I infer, basically, from thecomments--then I would recommend that we just drop it and live withthe problem that we have and hope that it does not get worse. Maybewe'll be fortunate and it will disappear.2/5-6/91MR.SYRON. I hope I'm not being gratuitous, but my ownconcern is that I think the problem that we have, if it continues, isa problem that threatens the viability of how we approach both thediscussion and formulation of policy. So, if the problem were tocontinue, I think we would have to do something.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, unless somebody can find a meansthat is acceptable to the Committee on a virtually unanimous basis, Ithink we will have to live with this until we find some alternative.MR. KEEHN. I don't have a solution to that problem, but justto express my view: I thought a greater degree of specificity wasappropriate, and given the problems that we've experienced, Iunderstand that it could be contentious.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If the issue comes up again and it iscreating significant difficulties for deliberations in thisorganization, then it will be appropriate to [revisit] it. Butsomebody has to have an idea that is [unintelligible] formality.Okay, do we have to a motion? [Secretary's note: The motion wasmade, seconded, and approved.]Can we now have a motion to approve the minutes of theprevious meeting for December 18?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So moved.MR. SYRON. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Sam Cross, would younow bring us up-to-date on your operations since December 18?MR. CROSS. [Statement--See Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Sam?MR. HOSKINS. I have a question on intervention activitieswith respect to the mark, since that's the only currency involved inthe intervention we've been doing. I presume that is supposed to be asterilized intervention. The question really is: If we're pegging arate like the funds rate, how do we know we're sterilizing it?MR. CROSS. I think it happens automatically, but I defer--MR. KOHN. If we didn't sterilize it, the supply of reserveswould be changed and the funds rate would be different. So, I thinkin order to peg the funds rate, we have to sterilize it. If I can seethat the funds rate is being basically determined by supply and demandfor reasons--MR. HOSKINS. Yes, but you're sterilizing around the fundsrate and not around total reserves.MR. KOHN. Either way I think it's--MR. HOSKINS. Total reserves is what we think drives moneyand we're trying to get money to grow. So, if one is worried aboutthe slowness of monetary growth, one might worry about this practice.2/5-6/91MR. KOHN. If we didn't sterilize it, then it would showthrough presumably to total reserves, to interest rates, to borrowing,or whatever it is the Committee is targeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions for Mr. Cross?MR. KEEHN. Sam, what is your sense of the outlook for thedollar? You say that, given the interest rate differential and otherthings that are putting pressure on the dollar, [downward pressure] isthere. But is a precipitous fall likely here or just this continueddownward pressure?MR. CROSS. Well, it's very hard to predict because one neverknows when something is likely to set off concerns about confidence inthe [exchange] rate of the dollar, which could lead to a precipitousfall and spread to other markets and all the problems that thatentails, since we obviously still have a large deficit that we stillhave to finance and have to attract the funds to do it. There hasbeen downward pressure on the dollar and, as I say, it's at an alltime low in terms of the mark. As to the prospects over the moremedium term, there are some facts that tend to provide moreencouragement about it. For example, the dollar at these very lowlevels is considered by many people to be quite competitive; and ifthis present period can be managed, then maybe that [sentiment] willbegin to be reflected more in the exchange markets.MR. SYRON. Sam, and Peter also: With respect to what you inthe market hear, do you hear much more in the way of concern aboutoverseas purchases of U.S. debt securities? How much has this been anissue and how much do people anticipate it becoming more of an issue?Or do they?MR. CROSS. It is an ongoing saga. Every time we have arefunding the question arises: Will it this time be a party to whichno one comes--a Stella Dallas party? But thus far, [unintelligible].There continues to be foreign participation; it changes and at timeshas declined quite noticeably, but funds continue to come in. Peter,do you want [to comment]?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think there's anything remarkablydifferent about foreign participation. I'm hearing that there wasgood foreign participation in the three-year note that was justoffered today. There is rather limited talk about what participationthere might be in the longer maturities, but that's related more tothe portfolio decisions of those foreign holders rather than about theparticular [amount of] dollars at this point.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What we are seeing though, Dick, isforeigners backing away a little from private securities of all kinds,including bank paper--certainly anything over 5 years. Even if it'sfrom Morgan Guaranty, it cannot be sold overseas.MR. SYRON. But this is a financial fragility risk questionas well as a question about the dollar.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Right, it's both.2/5-6/91MR. CROSS. Also, a lot of the activities in the foreignexchange markets reflects changes in hedge ratios. That [means thatif] Japanese investors and these categories of large investors decidethat they think the dollar's prospects are not good, they will changethe hedge ratio without necessarily getting rid of the securities oranything like that. So, you can't detect this just by what is goingon in the securities markets. There's an awful lot of hedging anddehedging and that is a very important factor.MR. FORRESTAL. Sam, are these funds that are flowing in inconnection with Desert Storm detectable in terms of coming through theforeign exchange markets? Are they continuing to cushion the--MR. CROSS. They pay us in marks and yen and we feed them outin a manner that is like our normal customer business. In otherwords, we just try to make clear that this is not an action by us [soas not] to appear to be influencing the rate.MR. FORRESTAL. So it's not affecting rates?MR. CROSS. As far as we can tell, it has worked out quitewell so far.MR. BLACK. You haven't used the BIS on this have you, Sam?We have done this ourselves?MR. CROSS. We have used the BIS for some portion of thesesales of foreign currencies, so that we're not seen in the market toappear to be selling. Thus far, it seems to have worked outsatisfactorily.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anything further for Sam? If not, wouldsomebody like to move approval of his transactions of yesterday?SPEAKER(?). I move them.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MS. SEGER. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, sir. Questions for Peter?Tom.MR. MELZER. Peter, I wanted to ask you about your thoughtson the instability of the funds rate. Do you view the instability asa problem, which seems to be what you've implied, in terms of marketsknowing where we are and other interest rates not being affected?Maybe it isn't a big problem, but I'm sure there are other problems interms of overnight financing and that sort of thing. So my firstquestion is: Is the instability a problem? Secondly, do you think itwill persist as some of these seasonal factors affecting reservebalances, cash, and so forth pass? In other words, are the reserve2/5-6/91balances adequate to handle the clearings? And, finally, assumingthey aren't, what do you think we can do about it?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it has been something of a problem.We've been somewhat lucky in that we've been able to communicatepolicy moves as well as we have without that process getting confused.So, I wouldn't say it was such a problem that it kept us from doingthe essentials of the job, but it was something of a problem. As towhether it's a temporary or more lasting phenomenon, I think theseverity should be ameliorated from what it has been as the playersget used to the new factors and partly because we're just now comingthrough a reserve period where the need for maintaining balances atthe Fed to satisfy reserve requirements is exceptionally low. It's aseasonal low point for balances at the Fed because cash is seasonallyhigh and reserve requirements are seasonally low. Also, there hasbeen a gradual build-up--rather modest so far, but ongoing--in theserequired clearing balances. More and more banks have looked at thepossibility of [establishing] these required clearing balances to payfor Fed services and that has gone up about $500 or $600 million sincemid-December. I know that's true of a number of large banks; andundoubtedly many small banks also are looking at it now. So, I expectto see something more there. But I don't know if that's going to beenough to erase the problem totally. I suspect there's going to besome lingering element of greater volatility looking ahead. As towhat can be done about it, probably the best thing--if one could havea wish list on this--would be to be able to pay interest on requiredreserves. But that would take Congressional action. We've beenconsidering, and some market people have suggested, the possibility ofbigger reserve carryovers. I think that could be of a little help butrather limited; it takes more looking to decide just how much help itmight be.MR. KOHN. Bigger and longer, too.MR. STERNLIGHT. Also, there has been a suggestion that thebanks have more than one period in which to use excess that developedin a given period. The suggestion has been made to have the Deskenter the market later on the same day. I would see very little netgain from that just because we're physically limited in how late wecan go in and still achieve delivery in the day. So much of thegreater volatility has come after that point in the afternoon. But wereally don't have much more information, let's say, at 1:00 p.m. thanwe have at 11:00 a.m. that would give us much gain from later entries.MR. PARRY. Do these developments suggest that the level ofreserves that banks are required to hold is very close to what theywould hold if there were no required reserves?MR. KOHN. Yes, it suggests that they're close to what theywould hold for clearing purposes alone.MR. PARRY. Isn't that sort of surprising? One would havethought that with a 12 percent requirement on transactions balancesthat would have [meant] much more [reserves] than a bank--MR. KOHN. Transactions balances are a very small proportionof total deposits; they're less than 10 percent, or in that range.-10-2/5-6/91MR. STERNLIGHT. And a great majority of banks, of course,are not bound at all. They have been meeting their needs fully withall cash anyway.MR. KOHN. I think there is still a tax involved in thisreserve requirement because if one were transacting with a privatebank, one might hold these balances but at least receive compensatingbalance credits or earnings credit on them. They would serve doubleduty for you. We don't allow them to serve double duty, althoughthat's part of what is going on. The banks are building up theirclearing balances and those balances do serve double duty, but therequired reserves [do not].MR. PARRY. It is surprising that just that one change inreserve requirements, which didn't look like it was that much in termsof billions, just moved to the margin--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you have any idea what proportion ofthe balances are literally dedicated to paying or offsetting fees?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, required [clearing] balances arearound $2.3--MR. KOHN. $2.6 billion, I think.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. $2.6 billion?MR. KOHN. Right, but that's not included in our requiredreserves. We have about $16 billion of required reserves this week,which is the seasonal low, plus another $2.6 or $2.7 billion ofrequired clearing balances.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, it's still a small part?MR. KOHN. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, even if those were eliminated, thatis not going to--MR. KOHN. Well, I think that $2.6 or $2.7 billion will riseover time so that people feel more comfortable with the total level oftheir balances with the Federal Reserve.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But the rate at which the balancesnow are turning over, whether they're required clearing balances orrequired reserves, has grown exponentially and is still growing. So,I don't find it surprising, Bob, that that last change had as big animpact as it had.MR. PARRY(?). It's a fifty percent change.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's a very big percentage change.And if you look at the turnover as a proxy for transactions, it'sstill rising at a geometric rate.MR. SYRON. Peter, with respect to the relationship betweenthe RP rate and the funds rate: Have you had to alter your stopouts-11-2/5-6/91or other terms in an effort to get to a particular funds rate in this[intermeeting period]?MR. STERNLIGHT. We have noticed, of course, the relationshipof RP rates and the funds rate. We have done some looking into whatmight have brought about the relatively higher RP rate. Traditionallythat has been a little under the funds rate. It may have something todo with just the volume of securities being financed; it may havesomething to do with name problems, in terms of some of the partiesgetting their financing. I wouldn't say it has been that much of aproblem in trying to get to the funds rate that we want. We generallyhave an idea of the amount of repurchase agreements we want to do andwe stop where we have to in order to get that amount done. But we'llalso be conscious of where the stopout rate is and where it might fitin relation to what we are hearing from the market as to theirexpectation of the stopout. That might be a small factor in ourdecision about just how much to do on occasion, but I think it's apretty small factor.MR. SYRON. But there has been a meaningful change?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think so.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The other thing, too, that wouldmake a difference that I don't think Peter touched on--but I guess Donwill be discussing tomorrow--is the whole question of the use andadministration of the discount window, particularly in terms of theseend-of-day types of things.MR. STERNLIGHT. Making for a very high funds rate at times[unintelligible] to come to the window. Yes, I should have mentionedthat.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I have been on the [morning] callthus far this year and I think Peter handled this exceptionally wellunder very difficult conditions. But it necessitated his resolvingthese frequent doubts between the borrowed reserve target and theexpected federal funds rate always, it seemed to me, on the side ofthe expected federal funds rate. And that's how he kept the marketapprised of what we really were aiming at. Peter, I just wanted toask you if you could remember a period when the relationship betweenthe borrowed reserve level and the federal funds rate was quite astenuous as it seems to have been [recently].MR. STERNLIGHT. No extended period.MR. BLACK. I hope there wasn't another because I know howyou struggled with that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Si Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Peter, I agree with Bob's answer but as anotheroperational alternative: What if you were in the market morefrequently than once a day--frequently enough that you could deal withsome of the volatility?-12-2/5-6/91MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, as I say, we go in at that hour whenwe have our reserve numbers assembled. On rare occasions we've gonein earlier because we had to be sure of being able to do the job orbecause we wanted to register at an earlier hour some viewpoint as toconditions that were ongoing. So, there's a limitation at one endinvolving when we would have reserve information in our hands and thatsets [the timing] at around 11:00 to 11:30 a.m. At the other end, ifwe're going to get delivery and have our operations effective thatday, it can't be much later than 1:30 p.m. or so. So there's not anawful lot we could do under present institutional arrangements aboutthe volatility that comes in mid and late afternoon and on into theearly evening, which is when we get some of the greatest extremes ofvariability.MR. BLACK. Si, one time during the week I was joking withmembers of the Board's staff [on the call], and Peter asked if wewould mind stopping so he'd have time to get into the market. Itlooked like we were going to delay him unduly--which was unintentionalby the way!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Lee Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Well, this point has already been tortured bythree other people, but the problem is not the market knowing where wewant the funds rate; they know where that is. The problem is in thelatter part of the day. What you said about having to have everythingdone by 1:30 p.m. sort of defuses my question; otherwise you couldjust stand ready to buy and sell at 6-1/4 percent as an alternative towhat we're doing. That leads me to another question--really for you,Mr. Chairman. In this commission that you have just given to DonKohn, are we going to consider alternative operating procedures? Wasthe mandate that broad?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, we're restricting it to the veryspecific problem that was on the table. The other issue is so broadthat the commission won't get back in time--MR. PARRY. We need another commission.MR. ANGELL. It would be pretty radical for us to be willingto say what it is we're really doing!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Peter said that authority to pay interest onrequired reserve balances might be helpful. Usually when that'sdiscussed in the context of proposed legislation, it is coupled withauthority for banks to pay interest on demand deposits. I justwondered: If you got both of those as a legislative package, wouldthe second part of that help or offset the benefit of the first part?MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't see a direct problem in terms ofimplications for open market operations. I think there are broaderissues to consider, which the System certainly would want to thinkthrough in a legislative way.-13-2/5-6/91MR. MCTEER. That would free up a lot of resources in theeconomy devoted to cash management and add a little efficiency I wouldthink to the--MR. KOHN. The last time the Board testified to the Congresson this, which was 5 or 6 or 7 years ago probably, we linked those twoproposals partly because we were concerned about the politics ofgiving the banks money and enhancing their profits. We thought bothof those were desirable for really very different reasons but [theproposed legislation] didn't go anywhere.MR. BLACK. It wouldn't appear to be as much of a giveawayprogram now with the banks so troubled.MR. KOHN. Yes, I think it probably would be welcomed.MR. BLACK. If you could ever sell it, this is the time youcould sell it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. One thought on this volatility inthe funds rate in a context in which it has been stipulated that therehas not been an enormous problem in terms of policy transparency: Imust say that I'm not sure I consider the volatility all bad. Ifnothing else, it may ultimately be consistent with a little morediscipline and a little more order in the way borrowings are managed.As I said, I don't think it's necessarily the end of the world.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there any evidence that the failureto use the discount window is pressing everything on open marketoperations? Do you sense that?MR. KOHN. Well, yes. I think that's part of what has beengoing on really for a couple of years now. I don't know that it's theshift of the borrowing function; the borrowing function has gottendown so close to the origin that it's hard to imagine further shifts.But I would guess, if anything, that in the last several months it hasbeen worse.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If you do that in the context oflowering reserve requirements in general, it's double-hitting theSystem then.MR. KOHN. Yes, the safety valve. I will talk about thistomorrow, but in some sense the safety valve of the discount windowdoesn't seem to be there and so we get these 90 percent funds ratesthat banks feel they have to bid before they come into the window. AsPeter said, there has been a lot more use of the window, partlybecause they were just about forced--they had to [borrow] in order toavoid overnight overdrafts. I'm not sure that's so bad; it creates alittle background in borrowing here.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Peter?MS. SEGER. Can you open the [discount] window at night sothey won't been seen going in? Would that help?MR. BLACK. They already have been seen coming out.-14-2/5-6/91MR. LAWARE. Let in the night air!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There is this other point, too, thatBob McTeer raised and Si raised. Virgil, I forgot the nature of theauthorization, but in the 1980 law I remember we stuck in a provisionwhere there is the authority to pay interest on these--MR. MELZER. Supplemental balances.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. --clearing balances or supplementalbalances in a context in which the Board makes a determination ofwhether those supplemental balances are needed. I don't think it wasjust for monetary policy or even for clearing purposes.MR. KOHN. No, I think it was for monetary policy purposes.MR. MELZER. We had our lawyers look at that and their viewwas that we can't use that escape hatch right now. I think somebodyelse ought to check it out, but our view is that it can't be used.MR. KOHN. I think the other point was that we can't reducethe reserve requirements--say, take them down to 8 percent and thenput them back again and pay interest on the difference between 8 and12 or 14 percent or something like that. There was some protection, Ibelieve, in the [law].MR. MULLINS. If we do see a legislative proposal forinterest on required reserves, I'm afraid we'll have a[unintelligible] attached to the bank insurance fund. Peter, youmentioned the three-year auction. How did that go today?MR. STERNLIGHT. Quite well. There was strong bidding. Ijust got a brief report on that and it came out about where we wereexpecting, at a 6.98 percent average.MR. MULLINS. What about noncompetitive bids? Anything onthat?MR. STERNLIGHT. I did not hear.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anything further for Peter? If not,would somebody move to ratify the actions taken since the December18th meeting?MS. SEGER. I'll move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We now move to thechart show, with Messrs. Prell, Promisel, and Slifman.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We'll be utilizing thechart package that everyone should have. If you haven't found it, youmay have another.MESSRS. PRELL, PROMISEL, and SLIFMAN. [Statements--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for our colleagues?-15-2/5-6/91MR. PARRY. First, I'd like to say that the presentation wasvery useful--particularly the last exercise, which was quite helpful.I'd like to press a bit more on this issue of the credit crunch. Ithink I understand how you characterized its impact but I wonder ifyou would do it somewhat differently. If you were to look at thecauses of recession, such as higher oil prices, war, consumerconfidence, or--as some outside this room might say--monetary policy,etc., where would you in an ordinal sense put the credit crunch? Howwould you characterize it--as small, as the top cause, or as thebottom one?MR. PRELL. Well, I think the credit crunch was already atwork prior to the downturn. As you know, we've discussed that overthe course of the past year and we would characterize this in somenonquantitative way as a significant but not huge effect. If onecould somehow embody this in GNP growth terms, it probably would beless than a percentage point--maybe much less than that.MR. PARRY. Some rather to these other--MR. PRELL. By our reckoning, the oil price shock--just thedirect normal type of oil price change that we run through econometricmodels--would have had a larger effect as of the end of last year. Wethink during this recent period that [other factors had] a much largereffect than oil prices. Certainly at this point we ought to be seeinga turnaround in terms of the oil price effect and we'll be seeing whatother things are in train. The even greater unknown in all of this is[what] psychological damage was done by the oil price change, whichprobably summoned up in people's minds recollections of a couple ofearlier major shocks that were followed by recessions. I suspect thatit created in many people's minds the specter of rising unemploymentand so on. There also was the war aspect of the situation, which maynot have been a very positive factor in people's thinking, though Imust say historically--for example, in the Viet Nam war--it's notentirely clear that people become grossly negative in theirexpectations and their sentiment as there is an increase in militaryactivity. But my sense is that that has not been a big plus forsentiment. And we had last fall this debacle over the budget. If weall think back to that period, we'll remember what an appallingspectacle that was; and it probably had at least in the short run arather devastating effect on people's assessment of whether thegovernment here in Washington really had a handle on economic affairs.I haven't seen any concrete evidence that this financial fragility andthe failures of banks and so on stand out as factors in people'sthinking; but I think it has to be a negative, too, for consumersentiment. On top of all this, we've had fiscal restraint of a modestdegree in train for a while. These things cumulate to a veryconsiderable damping effect at least on economic growth. And with theoil price change and the war I think it put us into negativeterritory. That's my crude [analysis].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, I too, would like to compliment thestaff on a very good chart show. They're always good, but this onewas particularly helpful.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It was really quite innovative, I think.-16-2/5-6/91MR. FORRESTAL. Very innovative, yes. I might ask a questionabout the alternative export forecast: If that turned out to be thecase, how much would that shave off your real GNP forecast? Would itbe a substantial decline?MR. PROMISEL. Well, at $15 billion, if you take the $9billion out of net exports it is something on the order of--MR. PRELL. It's something under 1/4 percent [on] real GNP.But, as Larry pointed out, that was on the assumption that you stickto a previously assumed monetary expansion path. If you wanted tooffset that, you would raise money stock growth and let interest ratesfall and you would have some offsets through exchange rates andeffects on the interest-sensitive sectors of the economy. So, itwould not be such a large shock and not at all difficult to offsetthrough a moderate policy adjustment if you saw it coming.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions? Bob.MR. MCTEER. I guess the most striking thing about the realGNP forecast was the abrupt turnaround from the current quarter to thenext quarter. I notice from your Chart 13 that over 1/3 of it isinventory investment and, since that happens again in the nextquarter, I assume that's intended inventory investment rather thaninvoluntary. What makes you think that inventory investment is goingto be so strong in the next three quarters?MR. SLIFMAN. First, it turns out that in the second quarteritself we still actually have some liquidation going on but the rateof liquidation is slower than in the first quarter, so in a GNPaccounting sense it shows up as a positive number here. We do,however, start to get some accumulation beginning in the second halfof the year. But the amounts of accumulation are very, very small indollar terms. Again, it's because of these swings from rapidliquidation to slower liquidation to a small accumulation that in GNPterms that winds up adding to real GNP. That is really what I wastrying to show on the preceding chart, Chart 12, where you can seethat even during part of that projection period we still have GNPbelow final sales and then it rises just very gradually. We thinkit's a very modest amount of inventory accumulation that takes place;in fact, the inventory/sales ratio that's consistent with thisactually falls for a while and then basically just flattens out atthese historically low levels.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mike, several people have commentedon the chart show, which really was first-rate, but let me just add tothat. I thought the paper that you circulated on potential GNP, etc.,was absolutely marvelous. I don't know what your practices are aboutpublishing those kinds of things but I would hope it would bepublished. It's really an excellent piece of work.MR. PRELL. Thank you. We haven't really thought aboutpublication but we'll have to give it some thought.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It really is, as I said, anabsolutely first-rate piece of work.-17-2/5-6/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Dick Syron.MR. SYRON. Mike, just a question, going back to what Bobasked. Though it's not enormous, the swing in the impact ofgovernment [spending] in the second quarter is 0.3. How much of thatis state and local and how much is federal? It may be reflecting whatwe see all the time but I'm becoming more and more bearish on thestate and local [sector].MR. SLIFMAN. Actually, it's a very small amount, as you cansee. In terms of our forecast we see it basically all coming fromstate and local purchases. But they're very small; they're growing0.3 percent, which is a very small number. The federal net realpurchases are falling. What we really have in terms of the state andlocal sector is some construction going on but not very much.MR. SYRON. But the 3/10ths might be just GNP?MR. SLIFMAN. Right. And it turns out that that also happensto be the growth rate as well.MR. SYRON. Okay.MR. SLIFMAN. They happen to match up in that one instance.MR. PRELL. Are you referring to the second quarter?MR. SYRON. Yes.MR. PRELL. Well, in the second quarter there's actually alittle uptick in federal spending, but it's only 2-1/2 percent. Butyour point on state and local [spending] is well taken. In fact,we've lowered our projection of state and local real purchases in thisforecast and we only have a 1/2 percent increase this year, whichassumes probably some decline in construction spending--an area thatreally had been surprisingly strong through last year. We've beensurprised on the up side fairly frequently over the past year or sothat this apparent fiscal problem has not shown through on spending.Obviously, on some of it there's a lag. They sold bonds earlier andare going to go ahead with some of these infrastructure investments.But we expect that there will be some crunch there; obviously, anumber of you are familiar with rather dire situations in yourlocales.MR. SYRON. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob Black.MR. BLACK. I have a question to which probably everybodyexcept me knows the answer on Chart 3.MR. PRELL. That's promising; that's my kind of question!MR. BLACK. This is shown as a percent of real federalpurchases. What is the fiscal impetus there?MR. PRELL. I'd be happy to send you a descriptive memo, butit's a measure we developed that unlike the high [employment] budget-18-2/5-6/91surplus--which you know is a measure of discretionary fiscal policy--basically rates various components of the budget according to theirimpact on aggregate demand as revealed by econometric relations. Itstrips out some of the trend elements and gets rid of some of the one-time sorts of financial effects that at times distort the highemployment budget. For example, in the high employment budgetcurrently those contributions from foreign countries would show up inthe normal calculation as additional revenues and greater fiscalrestraint. And it's somewhat counter to [logic] to think that ifsomebody else pays for it instead of having to pay for it ourselvesthat that's additional restraint on aggregate demand. So, thismeasure doesn't include that sort of thing. And we think it'sprobably a better way of capturing things. We've run this in terms ofhorse races against other measures of fiscal policy in determining GNPand this seems to work better.MR. BLACK. Yes, I would be interested in seeing your memo.I'm sorry I was the only one who didn't understand.MR. PRELL. I hesitate at times to use this because I knowit's a more obscure measure, but I thought that under thecircumstances--MR. BLACK. I was just curious. I was trying to figure outwhat it could be and I couldn't come up with anything.MR. MULLINS. It's a way to characterize a $300 billionbudget [deficit] as fiscal restraint.MR. PRELL. Clearly, there was a package of cuts inexpenditures and hikes in revenues enacted last year and that's thebasic process that's going on here.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Lee Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I, too, want to compliment the staff on itsprofessionalism and objectivity in presenting this very interestingreport. I have one question with respect to the longer-term averagesthat you present here. A naive and uninitiated person--nobody at thistable, of course--could read this as saying that with the baseline[policy] we will average 2-1/4 percent [real growth] for 5 years andif we have an easier monetary policy, a pro-inflation policy, we willaverage 2.6 percent. So, over long periods of time it looks like ifwe have a pro-inflation policy or rapid money growth, we'll havehigher rates of real growth. And that simply doesn't seem to [happen]over the longer periods of time. I presume your answer is that 5years isn't [a long] enough time period.MR. PRELL. A different way to look at it is that there's anaggregate supply function out there and an aggregate demand function.If monetary policy keeps pushing the growth of aggregate demand outthere faster than aggregate supply will support, we're going to end upwith accelerating inflation. And that's the message that this isintended to convey. There will be a lot of dynamics over a period oftime if we are right and you kept pressing against that. But that's,I think, the interpretation of this data. Obviously, there aresignificant uncertainties, and I think we underscored this in thereport. Larry's reason for presenting the band on it was to suggest-19-2/5-6/91that on a statistical basis 2.6 percent is almost as good an estimateas 2.3 percent. Where the issue arises is if you take the moreoptimistic view, say, of the Administration and you're talking about 3percent plus [real growth]. That begins to press pretty hard againstour confidence intervals here; that's stretching it. But there arelots of assumptions made about the future in this and this is just ourbest guesstimate--as careful an analysis as we could do.MR. HOSKINS. If you were to run your model with expectationsof some degree of credibility or full credibility, would you expect toget the same results?MR. PRELL. I don't think credibility would be--MR. KOHN. Are you referencing the Bluebook?MR. HOSKINS. Yes, the one that has the five-year average.MR. KOHN. Right. It's our view, which we expressed in theBluebook, that we could get either the [unintelligible]. However, if[the Federal Reserve] had some credibility, we think the tighteralternative would give you some combination of higher output and lowerinflation than presented here. These simulations embodied entirelybackward-looking expectations.MR. HOSKINS. Built on the 2.3 and 2.6 percent projectionsfor--MR. KOHN. I think that's also noteworthy with respect toyour observation about real GNP over this time. In some sense ithelps that we've started above the assumed natural rate so that youcan push the economy for a little while. It's a bit like Mike'salternative simulation. Inflation takes a while to begin picking upbecause we don't drop below the natural rate for a time. So, in somesense this was a favorable starting point for a more expansive policy.But you'll note that when we get out to 1995 finally, we do have lowergrowth in output; it's a little higher level of output and we do havea soaring inflation. At some point, presumably, the Fed would have to[rein that inflation] in.MR. PRELL. And the same point is made simply in ourGreenbook forecast: in essence that over the next seven quartersafter this one the economy is growing at a rate clearly above ourestimate. But it's an environment of decelerating prices becausewe're above the natural rate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions? If not, whydon't we take a coffee break and come back and do the tour de table.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Who would like to start the round table?Bob.MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Twelfth Districteconomy continues to blend recessionary problems in California withrobust growth in the rest of the region. The California economycontinues to experience weakness similar to that of the rest of the-20-2/5-6/91nation, although some data indicate that conditions may be improving.Employment in January registered a 1.1 percent decline from a yearearlier, with weakness reported in durable goods manufacturing,construction, and retail. Agriculture has suffered at least $1billion in crop losses because of the freeze and it looks as thoughthere could be significantly greater damage if the water cuts actuallytake effect as a result of the very serious drought. The remainder ofthe District states continue to report relatively strong growth.Outside California, employment in the past year has grown 3.3 percent.Individual state growth rates range from a low of 2.3 percent inHawaii to 6 percent in Nevada. But Hawaii is a very interestingsituation. They're not growing because they don't have a growinglabor force; they have an unemployment rate of only 2.8 percent.Despite relatively sluggish retail sales, trade employment still hasgrown 3.2 percent in the rest of the District. And employment inservices has grown a solid 5 percent.I have two interesting vignettes about the effect of the waron the economy, who is a very large retailer withstores predominantly in the West but also on the East Coast. He saidthat they didn't have the best Christmas but that sales really startedto pick up right after Christmas and then just went down the tank onthe 16th of January. I called him last Friday and he said that saleshave started to come back a bit, so apparently there must have been avery quick reaction, probably because people were watching theirtelevisions.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The CNN effect!MR. PARRY. The other vignette is fromHe said that the Prime Minister of Japan made a speech about theinappropriateness of people vacationing if they are draft age males;it wouldn't look good to the rest of the world. And in the week afterthe speech there were 2,000 cancellations [by Japanese tourists] ofreservations in Hawaii, each one of whom typically goes for 4 or 5days and spends $500 per person as opposed to $125 spent by U.S.tourists. I just thought those stories were rather interesting.If I can turn to the national outlook, we are expecting ashort recession and a moderately strong recovery, assuming that thewar in the Gulf is over by spring and oil prices remain low. Ourforecast, as it turns out, is very similar to that of the Greenbook.And we do expect the inflation rate to come down to about 4 percent ora little lower both this year and next. However, I'd like to add thatto prevent a subsequent rise in inflation, it seems that we're goingto have to respond to the economic recovery by tightening policy in atimely fashion, which of course is assumed in the Greenbook forecast,just as we've recently eased policy to prevent a deep recession.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, starting with a comment about thenational economy: Our forecast is considerably more modest thanMike's rosy scenario. But I am pleased that our forecast iscomfortably included within the central tendency. We have a couple ofparticular differences: First, and this really relates to theGreenbook, we expect a pretty significant reduction in consumerdurables in the second quarter rather than a very large pickup. That-21-2/5-6/91difference probably relates to the automotive sector, which seems tous to be very much on the optimistic side in the staff forecast. I'llmake a comment or two about the automotive sector in just a moment.The second significant area of difference is on the export side. Ourexpectation for import growth is a bit more modest than the Boardstaff's, but the difference is more particularly on the export side;we just don't think that exports are likely to grow to quite the levelthat the Board staff shows in their forecast. And that reallyaccounts for the differences in their forecast and ours.Turning now to the District: As I have been reporting, theDistrict really is doing quite well compared to other parts of thecountry but we are now catching up. Clearly, a shift is taking place;certainly, more and more within the recent couple of weeks, our regionis taking on the aspects of a fairly classic manufacturing recession.So far it's mainly auto-related. The Middle East events have resultedin an almost total shift in attitudes with regard to the outlook inthat sector. At this point it's very hard for automakers to keep anysemblance of a normal production schedule. Normally, they set theirproduction schedules pretty far in advance. But now they are meetingfrequently--about weekly--and the tendency is to reduce productionweek-in and week-out. As a result of significantly reduced retailsales, dealer inventory is building up in terms of the number of daysstock on hand. And, therefore, the dealers' attitudes are justterrible and dealer orders have been cut back substantially. [Theirsales] are running at about 50 percent of last fall's levels, and lastfall was pretty weak to start with, particularly if you take out thefleet aspect of that. So, the dealer orders from the manufacturersare very, very low. Employment levels and production schedules havebeen reduced substantially and at least one company that I talked towould expect that production this quarter will be down 11 percent fromlast year, which was not in itself a strong period. They wouldfurther expect that the risks are on the down side with respect toincoming orders, and it's entirely possible that their production inthe first quarter will come in 24 percent below last year. As theyadd their production and the production for the other manufacturerstogether they would expect that this would have a negative impact onthe first quarter GNP by about 1 percentage point. It's far too earlyto tell what is going to happen to auto production in the secondquarter, but certainly it's going to be down compared to last year.And as you would expect, [the impact of] autos is now moving into thesupplier community and the suppliers are seeing very, very sharpcurtailments of purchases.That's the bad news. There is some better news. The steelbusiness--and I found this surprising--is quite good. The orders arecontinuing to come in at reasonably good levels and firms areoperating currently at a level of about 83 percent of capacity. Thecurrent estimate for shipments this year is 81 million tons. That'sdown from 85 million tons last year but is still a pretty good year,at least as they see it now. And I think, encouragingly, they areexporting steel at pretty good levels even to Japan. I do think thesteel industry is one where the competitive aspects have improved verysubstantially just in going through the last three or four years.Machine tool orders are surprisingly strong; some of that goes intothe auto sector. There will be substantial retooling in the autosector as they come up with some new models over the next year or two,so that has been strong. Agricultural equipment certainly is going to-22-2/5-6/91be down; they have cut production substantially in this quarter butnot nearly as much as the auto sector. The production plans for theremainder of the year are expected to be down about 12 percent.I end up with a comment--an anecdote really--on retail salesnot unlike Bob Parry's. I talked with a guy who runs a specialtychain store that has operations all over the country. They had a goodyear last year and a good Christmas season. But as of January 15ththere was just a complete shutdown of retail sales, unlike anything hehad experienced in his life,. He mentioned one story about aconversation with one of their salesmen he had seen when he was in NewEngland. The salesman had just completed the sale of a large couch tosomebody. As they were completing the paperwork, the buyer was justfilled with apologies that she was buying the couch. She made thepoint that she thought it was a bad time; she was embarrassed to bemaking a purchase at this particular time but the family desperatelyneeded a couch to sit on and that's why they were doing it. Hesuggested this is symptomatic of the attitudes that people have; theyare quite worked up about this [war in the Gulf]. And as aconsequence, his retail stores are really quite void of people. Hedoesn't think this will be a continuing effect, but for now it has hada very significant impact on their sales.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Starting with the District, Mr. Chairman,conditions in the Sixth District remain weak, although it does seemthat the earlier deterioration is ending. The unemployment rate isaveraging higher than in the rest of the country and we think it'sgoing to continue to be that way for some time. The export sector isdoing fairly well, although we've noticed that we've lost exports fromthe Sixth District to the Soviet Union and the Persian Gulf in recentmonths. That reflects some agricultural products, particularly rice.And I was very surprised to find that we're losing the sale of carpetsto Saudi Arabia. I didn't realize we were selling carpets there, butapparently it has been a big factor.MS. SEGER. They put it on the desert to keep down the dust!MR. FORRESTAL. Is that what it is?MR. BLACK. They're not Persian carpets, are they?MR. FORRESTAL. Obviously not. The energy sector seems tohave softened somewhat after it became pretty clear that increasedOPEC production and heavy inventories would keep prices down. And theDistrict's [energy] producers are still seeing quite a heavy shortageof skilled workers, as we have talked about before. The rig count inLouisiana was down 9 percent from a year earlier and the offshorecount was 7 percent lower. Even though the data we have continue tobe uniformly negative, I would say, based on the contacts that I'vehad personally and that our staff has had, that there seems to be alittle less pessimism about the situation, even with the war in thePersian Gulf. People are convinced, I think, that the steadydeterioration has slowed up if not stopped. And bankers are seeing abit more light in terms of the demand for funds. As a result of allthis, we are looking for a somewhat better situation in the District,-23-2/5-6/91although in my view the recovery in the Southeast as well as in thenation is still pretty fragile.Looking at the national economy, our forecast is quitesimilar to the Greenbook forecast but it is weaker. We show asomewhat smaller decline in the present quarter but the rebound overthe rest of the year is not quite as robust. One of the differencesthat we have--and this has been alluded to by someone else--is that wedon't see as much of a contribution coming from the export sector. Itseems to us that the improvements in net exports are not going to bequite as strong [as in the staff forecast]. As a result of this lowergrowth rate than the Greenbook, we obviously see a higher unemploymentrate toward the end of 1991. But our estimate of inflation issomewhat better--in fact quite a bit better--than the Greenbook. Weare anticipating inflation, measured by the CPI, of about 3 percent;looking at the chart, I think we're at the low end of the forecasts.These forecasts, of course--both the Greenbook, I assume, as well asours--did not take into account the easing action of last Friday. So,if you look at those forecasts in that light, perhaps they represent aworst-case scenario. But I'm not convinced that that's the case. Itseems to me that the recession could last somewhat longer and be a bitdeeper than we're forecasting. Both our forecast and the Greenbookforecast seem to me to be quite reasonable. But I think theuncertainty surrounding the general economic situation and thesituation of the Persian Gulf threatens any potential rebound inconsumer confidence and consumer spending.The deterioration of public confidence or the lack ofconfidence in the banking system also is going to be a major factor.The credit crunch perhaps is not getting any worse, but theannouncements that keep coming forth from the press and on the talkshows about weak bank earnings and the potential FDIC losses and adeficit in the FDIC are really quite adversely affecting sentiment andraising considerable concern about the public costs of dealing withthese problems. And the rise of bankruptcies may be working in thesame direction. My point is that even though I believe the Greenbookforecast is a reasonable one, although a bit rosy, I think the risk isstill very much on the down side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. In the District, weakness is widespread. Isuspect we have several more months of downturn, with the beginning ofthe recovery more a second-half phenomenon than a second-quarter one.Attitudes are really very, very cautious both among business peopleand individuals. And we see bank assets continuing to slide, with acouple of banks close to the edge. Real estate is probably severalyears away from recovery, especially on the commercial side.In the nation, I think the staff forecast, while well thoughtout, is on the rosy side. We can't be very sure of any forecast atthis point. I think we just need to keep an open mind and stay alertto incoming information. I'd rather err on the side of too muchstimulus at this point rather than too little because I think thecosts of misjudging and having a prolonged and deep recession are very[high]. Having said that, I think we have to be prepared to offset itwith some tightening at some point. But we simply can't afford to-24-2/5-6/91have a prolonged, deep recession, given what is going on in thefinancial system.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Actually, Ed Boehne and others have said much ofwhat I wanted to say. In terms of the situation in New England,unfortunately, I don't think one can characterize it any other waythan as dismal, with pessimism on the edge of panic. At this pointthere really is no source of strength with the possible exception ofPatriot missiles for which Raytheon is running three shifts a day,seven days a week. When people turn on CNN there is almost a perversedesire to see another one go up because it means more production!MS. SEGER. How many people do they employ?MR. SYRON. About 2,000 in that particular facility.There is some export strength. As for employment, though westarted at a substantially lower unemployment rate and a higher percapital income [unintelligible] the 1973-75 recession years, thedecline in employment we're seeing in New England now is at asubstantially faster rate than at any time in the postwar period.That also holds true for the change in growth in personal income.This is having the impact you'd expect. Retailing is extremely soft;we're seeing very widespread discounting of all merchandise. When wetalk to retailers they say: "Once this inventory is gone we are notbuilding any inventories. We're tired of doing this." Actually, thatmay be somewhat favorable in the longer term. We're seeing a changein the composition of the retail outlets, even in fairly affluentneighborhoods, more toward discount stores. Tonier places are closingand there are more vacancies. And we are seeing price improvementsgoing along with this.As you have all read, we have an extraordinary degree offinancial nervousness. It's to the extent that on the talk showsevery morning as you're driving in you can dial up and get the TracyReport and for $20, which you can charge to your Mastercharge, youwill be sent a list of safe Swiss banks where they say you should besure that you have some of your money. We've shipped out close to$400 million in the last several weeks in emergency cash payments[because of] runs in Rhode Island. People are calling in to questionthe safety of the FDIC. There are some real concerns about our largerinstitutions. and some other mutualfunds and insurance companies are raising questions with us about howthey can be sure that they'll be protected if they have a fail in arepo transaction during the day and it goes into overnight or if theysend in funds in anticipation of funds in an ACH transfer and aninstitution is closed. In fact they have come with proposals to havethat stuff essentially swept off the bank's books onto our booksovernight. The surprising thing is that the banks are so panickedabout it that large institutions have come to us and asked if we cando this. I think the only way to look at the economy is that we havea long way [to come] back. A friend of mine just did a real estateforecast which is being hailed as greatly optimistic because he showsthe beginning of some bottoming out and a snapback in 1995. Comparedto a lot of other people's forecasts, actually it is relativelyoptimistic. The recovery there is going to be quite slow.-25-2/5-6/91As far as the national economy goes, it seems to me that anawful lot has to do with what happens to confidence. Mike I thinkpulled everyone's line and appropriately so by saying "rosy scenario."I have been inclined, as have others, to accuse the forecast of beingsomewhat rosy. But in particular I think the simulations that Mikeshowed at the end are very useful in dealing with that. So muchdepends on confidence. No one knows how long the war is going tolast. My own naive view of this was that if we had a sort of Nintendowar that was over in a week, there might be some great exuberance andpeople would feel like they should go out and spend. But even if thiswar goes on for several more weeks or a couple of months, I don't seeit leading to a great bounceback in consumer confidence. As far asthe oil price impact on confidence, relatively recently we've seensome improvement in oil prices. And I do have to admit that I boughtthe credit crunch story late in New England and now have to eat crowwith a lot of people and admit that they were right. I think thechart you showed was very useful but we're not at the high pointnationally in terms of where we'd be [with respect to] a credit crunchnumber. All those things weigh a little on the down side, so I'minclined to think that the forecast may be slightly or a little morethan slightly optimistic. But if that's the situation, as I say, Ithink the simulations or the scenarios that were shown at the end [ofthe chart show] are the way to go. Because of my own, perhaps biased,concerns about financial fragility, I'd be prepared to take out someinsurance now with the notion that we would, as Ed said, make acommitment that we'd be willing to turn quickly if we're wrong and wedon't need it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, I was hoping I wouldn't follow Dick becauseI don't have any colorful adjectives to use to describe the Districteconomy! I guess I would have to say it's mixed. The rural areas,because of the importance of agriculture, continue to do reasonablywell. One exception is the areas where wood products are important.It took a little longer to hit them than I might have thought, butclearly because of the weakness in housing that sector hasdeteriorated. On the other hand, in the Twin Cities there is a lot ofconcern about many of the issues we've already touched on thisafternoon. And while the objective measures of economic activity arestill reasonably good, there are lots of signs of at least imminentsoftness in the economy.With regard to the war, I haven't been able to judge what ithas meant psychologically. There are a couple of objective things.Some of the large corporations have either eliminated or severelycurtailed foreign travel as a consequence of the war. On the otherhand, some of the firms that clearly have military business said theirorders have just taken off. There is no question about that. Theresponse has been large and very quick, and they, of course, are quitepositive.With regard to the national economy, like many others, Iguess I'm not as confident as the staff about the recovery occurringquite as quickly and quite as robustly as the Greenbook suggests. Itseems to me that even if this turns out to be a garden varietyrecession, it could well last into the spring and maybe even into thesummer. In that regard, I thought the latest employment report was-26-2/5-6/91more or less consistent with that--suggesting that maybe this is agarden variety recession but that it has a way to go.I can't resist commenting a bit on the credit crunch and thereal estate situation. I think maybe we are exaggerating the effectsof the credit crunch, at least in that area. In a sense we do have aninventory problem in the economy. It's not in manufacturing; it's inreal estate. We simply have too many office buildings, too muchretail space and, in many parts of the country, too much residentialspace. We know that prices are going to decline in that environmentand they have. I don't happen to think that additional creditavailability would help the situation at all. I can't think of anyresponsible way of addressing this problem. We're really paying forthe excesses of the 1980s both in the real estate market and infinancial institutions. We have to work our way through those. Wehave to let the market deal with this because the excess supply isapparent. As I say, I don't see any responsible way out of that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. After only a couple of days on the job, I don'thave a lot of firsthand knowledge of the economy in the EleventhDistrict except for the residential real estate market. I find myselfbuying into a rebounding market and selling into a market which isdeclining fairly rapidly. The Eleventh District, as I'm sure you areaware, ended 1990 out of sync with the rest of the country. It waseither somewhat stronger or less weak, depending on what measure onelooks at. Employment growth held up much better than it did in thenational economy. In the fourth quarter there was employment growthnot only in the government and private services sectors but evenslight employment growth in the manufacturing sector and fairlysubstantial employment growth in nonresidential construction. Most ofthe growth occurred in the first two months of the fourth quarter andthen the weakness started in December. Of the states in the EleventhDistrict, the strongest was New Mexico with total employment growingby 3.6 percent at an annual rate; in Texas and Louisiana growth was atannual rates of about 2.5 and 0.6 percent, respectively. Part of thishad to do with the composition of the energy sector rather thanprimary oil or primary gas. Gas has been very weak and employment hasbeen shrinking there. Oil drilling hasn't gone up very much in theTexas and New Mexico areas, but employment in that industry has grownsomewhat as existing wells have been worked more intensively. Also,the additional profits and incomes that are resulting from the higheroil prices have added to the liquidity and spending power of thesector and have helped that part of the country do a bit better thanthe rest of the country.As for the national economy, I believe I would be describingthe Dallas research staff's view accurately in saying that they reallyhave no quarrel with the pattern of the Greenbook forecast. They justbelieve that the expected rebound is not likely to be as sharp as theGreenbook has it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The overall pace ofeconomic growth in the District appears to be slowing somewhat, duemostly to weakness in manufacturing and construction. Automobile-27-2/5-6/91manufacturing, for example, which we share with the St. LouisDistrict, has weakened further. But the District aircraftmanufacturers reported improvement in sales of business jet aircraftand as a result are showing a good deal of strength. Constructionactivity in the District remains weak overall but public worksprojects, such as a large public project in Kansas, continue to offsetthe weakness in both residential and nonresidential building activity.I might also say in reference to state and local spending thatthroughout several of our metropolitan areas there appears to be onthe shelf--the bonds have been sold--infrastructure construction thatwill be commencing in 1991 and will hold up that sector somewhat. Theoil price volatility and uncertainty about the outlook for oil pricesis slowing activity in the District's oil patch. And sluggish exportdemand has led to weak prices in wheat, corn, and soybeans. On theother hand, the livestock prices continue to bolster farm income, andI would characterize the rural areas as being fairly optimistic.There is one vignette I'll add to Bob's: In talking with arestauranteur who has stores across the United States in the mid toupper range of restaurants, they also found that [their business]virtually closed down on January 16th, 17th, and 18th. But by thefirst of February they were back at a level that they foundencouraging. They attributed it largely to CNN and people sitting infront of the TV to determine what was happening in the Gulf war.As to the Greenbook forecast, we also believe it to be rosy.That is, the pickup in the second quarter seems unlikely to us but webelieve there will be the start of a pickup in the second half--probably in the mid to late part of the third quarter. We have growthabout a percentage point below the growth projected in the Greenbookfor the year 1991 but a percentage point above that projected in theGreenbook for 1992. So, averaging it out, the staff forecast does notlook unreasonable to us; it is simply the timing and the contour ofthe recovery that we believe may be different than in the Greenbook.I would say that if the war continues beyond midyear, then all betsare off as far as we can tell. As I understand it, the best guess isthat it should be over by mid-April.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The 18th!MR. PRELL. In the a.m!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Saudi Arabian time.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the staff has done a verythorough job in putting together their economic forecast but, like somany of the other speakers, I believe that it may be a bit on theoptimistic side and that the risk of error with respect to real GNP isat least moderately tilted toward the down side. I think the staff isprobably about right on its guess that the war may end in the springbut my fear is that it will be the late spring rather than the earlyspring. In any event, while the war is going on there are going to bea lot of continuing uncertainties and periodic setbacks and it's goingto damp both business and consumer confidence as well as sentiment in-28-2/5-6/91the financial markets. Now, these negative impacts are going to beamplified, I think, by three big problems: the situation in theNortheast; the perceived fragility in the banking system; and theextreme weakness in commercial real estate in substantial parts of thecountry. So, we think there's a significant chance that the economywill recover later and probably less strongly than the staff isprojecting. Our guess would be that the recovery might begin in thethird quarter rather than in the second. And we expect only about 1percent growth in real GNP on a fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarterbasis, which does not put us comfortably within the central tendency,as Si was, but labels us as an outlier in that the staff is predictingabout 2 percent growth over this period. We also are an outlier onthe inflation side because we're more optimistic about inflation underthe assumption that we can avoid a long and destructive war in theGulf. In addition to the effects of the declining oil prices on theCPI, we think that the underlying trend rate of inflation is going tobegin to respond in '91 to the considerable deceleration that we'vehad in the growth of the aggregates over the last several years. Ithink it's quite possible that our core inflation rate for the CPI maybe down to around 3-1/2 percent or lower by the end of the year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. On the national scene, we're very close to themedian; I'm not sure that has ever happened before but there's somestatistical probability of that and I guess it occurred. In the shortrun, not surprisingly, our staff would view the major risk as beingwhether the assumption with respect to money growth, something in the4 to 5 percent area, is realized. I guess I'm a little schizophrenicabout that because I'm worried that it may be realized and then some.And in that context I think Mike's scenario 2 here is very instructivebecause we could have some considerable challenges ahead of us. Wehave to get through the one we're in right now but, as we've discussedin the past and as Bob Parry mentioned, I hope we will be ready torespond in the other direction when we need to.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That 8 percent funds rate is a quarterlyaverage. What is the peak?SPEAKER(?). [Unintelligible] percent.MR. MELZER. In terms of our District, I don't have a lot tosay. Our economy is stagnant, probably declining slightly. Perhapswith what is going on in autos and cancellation of the A-12, we'llhave some further weakness showing up. Essentially, what has beengoing on is that manufacturing weakness, which is not as great as itis nationally, is being offset by strength in services--healthservices and business services, generally.Just one last comment on the banking sector: I would saythat when the year-end numbers come out, some weakness probably willshow up; but our banks are still in relatively good shape. I was atour Memphis branch a couple of weeks ago and one of the bankers said"This kills me to do this, but I've got to tell you that I don't thinkadditional stimulus from the Fed is really going to help. We'reswimming in reserves; we don't know what to do with them. And theproblem is that when we try to lay them off, eventually we get to theNew York money center banks and we don't necessarily want to sell very-29-2/5-6/91much!" Another banker--these were both large bankers in that area--said that they have cut their fed funds selling by 70 percent in thelast year. I took that to mean in terms of approved names on thelist. So, that's a pretty dramatic shift.MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, if I might just inject a point thatperhaps we should have made in talking about that last simulation:According to our model, the additional M2 in 1991 would be about 2-1/2percent. So, to give you some--MR. MELZER. That's the incremental amount, Mike?MR. PRELL. Yes, incremental M2 growth in 1991.MR. MELZER. To bring it up to a total of what, Mike?MR. KOHN. Seven percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. On the anecdotal side, the onlything I can say that is unambiguously good is that the weekend beforelast in Tampa, Florida, there were actually no signs of a recession.Quite to the contrary.MR. KELLEY. Playing for the championship for the SecondFederal Reserve District!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's right. But on a more seriousnote, the impression that I get from talking to businessmen and womenand directors and others is that the statistics have basically caughtup with their expectations, which had been distinctly sour for sometime prior to the point when [the weakness] really showed through inthe statistics. As I've said before, I do think that the real estatesituation, at least in the greater New York metropolitan area--whilenot in the same category as it is in parts of New England--has notbottomed out. I think Gary's point is absolutely right: The excessinventory of real estate of all kinds is going to take a long time towork itself out. It's not just in the Northeast; I get the impressionthat this is pretty much a nationwide problem. Also, as severalpeople have mentioned, one does get the impression that at least for awhile in mid-January the so-called CNN effect was quite real in termsof retail operations and restaurants. They say it even showed throughin the theaters in New York City. I have no independent evidence ofthat.But notwithstanding all of that--and this is where we come tothe great dilemma--if you go through the exercise of looking at theeconomy sector by sector, regardless of whether you rely on a formaleconometric model or rules of thumb that you may have acquired overtime, it's not that hard to see a short recession. Based on my ownpurely subjective instincts, having spent a lot of time going throughthat kind of analysis, if I had to make a guess I would probably saythat the chances of an outcome that is somewhere around the center ofthe central tendency are probably 50/50. Indeed, I would thinkthere's at least some chance that we could get as robust a recovery asMike has in his forecast. But, of course, if we do get that, then we-30-2/5-6/91have an obvious problem of the second scenario on the last page of thechart show.On the other hand, I would say that the chances of an outcomethat is weaker than the central tendency--again this is not scientific--are probably about 15 percent or 20 percent. But unfortunately, Ican't rule out the possibility of an outcome that is verysignificantly weaker, either. Now, I don't think that's the likelyoutcome but if you asked me whether we could have a long and reallydeep recession I think I'd have to say there's at least a 10, 15, or20 percent possibility of that. Again, I don't think it's anywherenear the likely case, but I don't think one can rule it out. And thereasons it can't be ruled out in part get to the things that Gary wastalking about: the overhangs of the excesses of the '80s. Some ofMike's charts on corporate cash flow positions and debt positions andthings like that I don't think really capture how much of an overhangthose things are. But on top of that I do think what we have is arecession that in the first instance is being driven by expectationalfactors, some of which are conditioned by those earlier excesses. Butwhatever the precise anatomy of the recession, the character of it, asI see it, is different enough that it is that much more difficult tojudge how things will work their way through it, even in terms of thisquestion of how much bang for the buck do we get from lower interestrates. I'm not sure. And because of some of these behavioral andexpectational characteristics of current patterns of behavior it'svery, very difficult to make that judgment.On the credit crunch issue, again, I essentially agree withGary's point. But I think there's also a little more to it than that.One really does get the impression--it's more than an impressionbecause I have been told point blank even by the best banks in theSecond District, and at least one or two of them are among the bestbanks in the country--that the banks simply are not doing things onthe credit extension side anything like the way they used to, even tothose who would have been considered good customers 8 or 9 or 10months ago. And the rate of foreclosures as opposed to restructuringsor stretchouts, especially in the real estate sector, is anothersymptom of that phenomenon. So, while I think it's fair to say thatthe credit crunch is exaggerated, especially in political circles, Ithink it's entirely fair to say, as Gary did, that it tends to reflectthese excesses of the past. I still think it is a very importantconsideration in the current setting, especially as it bears on thisall important question of confidence and expectations. That is one ofthe many reasons why I find that I can be so ambivalent about what Ithink is going to happen. I sit down with Dick Davis and his guys andthey convince me in two hours that Mike Prell is right, or more orless right, and not to worry. Then I start thinking about it and Isay: "I guess I am worried." And that's about where I am, Mr.Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Lee Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. The District's [economic] activity has softenedsince October but is still generally stronger than the nation's. Theunemployment rate in Ohio is up about 1/2 point but employment isabout the same; it hasn't changed much. In fact, if you look at[initial unemployment] claims, the peak seems to be in the first weekof January at 44,000 and they declined gradually each week to around-31-2/5-6/9124,000. The hardest hit, of course, are autos and auto-relatedindustries; that has impacted steel companies, which are operating atabout 70 percent. [Unintelligible] cited a recent survey by a bank ofits customers and 85 percent of respondents said that in terms of newprojects they have no trouble getting credit; in terms of operatingmonies, 91 percent said they have no problem. As for straight-outanecdotal information, the international airline with which I'mfamiliar, since my wife works for it, has offered a month off withoutpay to anyone who wants not to work. That's clearly associated withthe war and lack of travel.And you're probably all waiting for my stainless steel stripindex, but I'm not going to give it to you because I've latched onto anew one: the Smuckers Index! I had a chance to talk with PaulSmucker, an elderly gentleman who has been through many businesscycles and he told me that apple butter sales remain relatively softand that's a good sign because during deep recessions apple buttersales soar. [Laughter] So, I'll be reporting to you on apple butter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It sounds to me as though business is ina jam! [Laughter/hoots]MR. HOSKINS. I'll make my comments on the national economyreally short after that! As I look at it, I agree with the staff'sview and also with what the Chairman has been saying. This isprincipally a situation where the downturn occurred as a result of thewar and the consumer sentiment associated with that. With respect toproblems in real estate, I think Gary Stern has it right: It's a long-term problem; there's no easy way out of it. And I don't thinkmonetary policy can help either one of those situations. Now, I'msitting here looking ahead at policy. There's a lag that we all knowabout, and we have a forecast that says the economy will be reboundingat about the time that the average lag says [current] policy is goingto have an impact. So, I have some concerns about that, but I'll savethose for Don Kohn. What I think we, from the point of view of acentral bank, ought to be focusing on--[unintelligible] some of theconcerns that people around the table have particularly from the areasthat have been impacted hard--is what is happening to money. Perhapssome of you are interested in credit, but I would tend to focus onmoney. If we're going to worry about anything, I think we ought toworry about making sure that we don't permit a procyclical monetarypolicy at this point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. My view of the economy is that the fourthquarter was not quite as bad as I expected; it looks like acontraction that is accounted for mostly by inventories, with much ofit in the auto industry. The downturn still seems to be synchronizedin the sense that inventories are in line with no serious imbalances,with the one exception of the commercial real estate inventories whichare out of balance. But we have yet to see the imbalances. Morerecent data continue to have a sour cast to them, although the leadingindicators were up in December; durable goods were also up but, ofcourse, that [increase] was focused in certain areas. It bothers me alittle that the purchasing managers index is still dropping andconsumer confidence has yet to bottom out. Indeed, I agree with Jerrythat the hard data are kind of catching up with the attitudes, and I-32-2/5-6/91wish the attitudes would stop moving for a while. I noticed thisafternoon during the break that the 10-day auto sales reported thisafternoon were at a 5.2 million annual rate whereas people wereexpecting a 6.3 million rate or something of that nature. When I lookat corporate finance, it doesn't lead me to forecast a vigorousrebound either. I think the Greenbook mentions that 1990 was a yearof record defaults; that's really probably just the overhang of thejunk bond market. But 1990 was also a year of record downgradings inbond ratings and almost a record in dividend cuts--probably thegreatest number of dividend cuts and eliminations since the late1950s. And that just suggests that corporations, like banks andconsumers, may be in for a period of retrenchment--a period in whichthey will rebuild their capital structures and bond ratings beforethey're ready for aggressive growth again. Against this doom andgloom of recession and financial fragility, the stock market continuesto charge ahead and [the DOW] will approach 3,000 if it continuesanother few weeks at the current pace. Why is this happening?Perhaps the most common indices we look at are more weighted towardmultinational companies and reflect the prospects in some of the--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But the stock prices of smallercompanies have gone up even faster.MR. MULLINS. [Yes], the difficulty is the smaller companieshave gone up even faster. It is an interesting scenario when ourstaff says we will have downgradings this year. I assume fromwatching the screen that the downgradings are continuing at a prettyrapid pace, yet their stock prices are going up. Now, of course, thatcan happen in a period of uncertainty; when you're a highly leveragedcompany your bond prices can go down but your stock prices can go up.Still, I think it's hard to escape the conclusion that the stockmarkets see better times ahead. And while it is true that a lot ofpublicly traded companies do have access to the public debt marketsand commercial paper markets, when you get down to the broad equitymarkets this is not true and that includes some of the growthcompanies. So, I would say that the long bond rate, which is nowapproaching 8 percent, confirms that the recession is here andinflation is under control; but the stock market tends to suggest thatthere's a light at the end of the tunnel. I don't know how muchconfidence one would want to put in the stock market as a forecaster,but the stock market has a rosy forecast. So, overall I see theeconomy still contracting at a slow pace. There's real uncertaintyabout the war. What will happen when the ground war starts? Whatwill really happen to consumer confidence in that case? I tend toagree that the prospects are good for a rebound this summer. I alsotend to agree with what a lot of people have said: that it's notlikely to be quite as robust as [the staff] forecast. I think this--the war, the recession--has been a pretty sobering experience. Peoplehaven't experienced a recession in a long time. And with all the badnews about the financial system, it may take consumers and businessesa while to rebuild confidence.As for the banking system, the credit crunch has beendiscussed pretty thoroughly here. I think some progress has been madein the [banking] industry. They made it through the end-of-yearfinancing pressures and now not only has the fed funds rate come downbut the other money rates--the CD rates and commercial paper rates--have come down pretty substantially, by [125] and 175 basis points.-33-2/5-6/91This has really helped to open up the margins it seems to me; evenbank stock prices have rebounded a little. And it has opened up aspread that might accelerate the process of financial healing in someof those institutions. We also have gotten through the fourth quarterand the results of another round of commercial real estate problems.The industry has absorbed another round of publicity about the bankinsurance fund being broke; and also the public impact of the failureof Bank of New England is behind us. That was the most visible weakinstitution overhanging the market. Looking ahead, we may haveanother quarter or so of bad results to get through. And I'm afraidwe will have a lot more publicity on the bank insurance fund thatwe'll have to put up with as well as a lot of publicity about thebanking reform legislation, which will be accompanied by commentsthat the banking system is in trouble. I'm also concerned about theweak elements in the banking system and the need to get some of thoseweak components cleaned up rather than just waiting for them to failinto the bank insurance fund. I don't know exactly how to do that,but I think they could be a drag on the economy and on the psyche fora long time unless we can think of how to do that. So, overall on thebanking system, I think we've had some progress, primarily in that thelower rates have helped the banking system; but there is a way to goin working through the bad news. I noticed noncompetitive bids in thethree-year note auction were only $769 million, which is far below the$2 billion that people were expecting and the $2-1/2 billion that wasthe record. And what bothers me about the financial system is notonly the direct impact on lending but also that the bad news aboutbanks feeds directly into consumer confidence it seems to me. Andthen there's also the low probability but serious outcome of a crackin the financial system.As others have mentioned, I think we have a good dose ofstimulus in the pipeline: the reduction in the dollar--even as wespeak, probably. Oil prices have come down without a real rebound inconsumer confidence yet, as Dick noted, which would suggest that it'sthe war that is affecting confidence and not just the oil prices. Andthe fed funds target has come down 200 basis points since the summer;[rates on] long bonds are down probably about 100 basis points. Mostof this has taken place without disrupting markets. I know there is alot of uncertainty left relating to the war, and I still have concernsabout the financial system; a lot of these concerns are captured inthe money and credit data and I continue to think we should focus onmoney and credit, which are ultimately and appropriately ourresponsibility.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, there are three things that puzzleme about the staff outlook for the economy as reflected in theGreenbook. First, the projection is based on far from firm andcertain assumptions that there will be a quick and decisive end to theGulf War and no substantial damage to Saudi productive capacity thatwould interrupt supplies. These assumptions underlie the furtherassumptions that oil prices will stabilize in the low $20s andconsumer confidence will rebound promptly and decisively at war's end.No "what if" alternative, or worst case scenario is offered againstwhich to make judgments pertinent to the proper course for monetarypolicy. Second, the degree of fragility in the economy is not reallyaddressed. There is no quick end in sight for commercial real estate-34-2/5-6/91problems, and certain large segments of the banking industry arecontinuing to downsize and restrain loan growth. The current timidityof bank lenders is being compounded by depositor anxieties and depositerosion to the perceived safer haven of government securities or moneymarket funds. Third, it is not clear in my mind what role the banksare expected to play in the projected recovery. If fund flows are notto depository institutions but rather to Treasuries and to the moneymarket funds, they won't be reflected in lending activity. In my viewthe economy is [experiencing] a paralysis of confidence which may notrespond to the classic monetary policy moves to increase reserves andlower rates. Anxious consumers are loathe to spend or borrow.Businessmen are looking for clearer signs to invest, whether ininventories or plant. Governments plagued at the federal, state, andlocal level by unmanageable deficits are in a weak position to offerstimulus. And bankers, paranoid about overdiligent examiners, worriedabout capital levels, uncertain about the economy, and findingprospective borrowers weakened by recent economic trends, are refusingto lend. This spells out to me a recipe for economic stagnation. AndI'm at a loss to understand how monetary policy can deal with itbeyond sending signals that we hope the lookouts will see andinterpret properly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I would accept the staff'sforecast or something close to it--maybe a bit less robust--asprobably the most likely outcome. And, certainly, it's positive anddesirable. But the concerns I have turn out to be ones that have runthrough this discussion over and over again. That is, I am struck ina way that I've never been struck since I've been here that the riskof war analysis is very, very heavily skewed on the side of caution.If we get a recession that is mild and ends soon and the rebound thatfollows it, that is going to present questions for monetary policy,without any doubt. But they will be happy kinds of questions, if youwill, and they are going to be in a positive context. Again, that'sprobably the most likely scenario.But I think the positive consequences that would flow fromthat result are not nearly as significant as their mirror image on thedown side--the negative consequences that could flow if we get theopposite scenario. If the situation turns out to be much more severe,along the lines that Jerry described a few minutes ago, that couldhave some very nasty consequences that are much larger in scope thantheir positive counterparts on the other side. They're broader inscope as far as their impact on our society goes, and I think they arefar longer-lasting in the effect they could bring. That has somelikelihood, whatever it is, and it's certainly greater than zero--perhaps 15 percent. I don't know [the precise number], but there iscertainly the statistical probability that we could get a much moresevere result. If we do, and if we wind up with the seriouslycrippled banking system that John LaWare fears, for instance, it wouldbe very difficult for that kind of a banking system to make it to thetime when the economy was coming back around. I'm not sure where thefinancial contribution and support would come from if the banks havebeen crippled before that outcome started to take effect.Obviously, the process of watching the banking system becomecrippled, if that should evolve, would have a severe impact on-35-2/5-6/91consumer and business confidence and would exacerbate the situation.We could have a very, very large deficit built up, which would have avery long tail as far as its consequences go: a much larger debtburden; the further fragility that would result from leveraging up theeconomy; and all those kinds of things that would follow from theleveraging up that we're all familiar with. I think it wouldforeclose--or at least for a very long time severely impinge upon--avariety of social and political options that we need to have availableto us in this country as far as rebuilding our infrastructure goes,[ranging] from education needs to rebuilding bridges. It would have avery severe impact on business investment down the line and on variouselements of our international position. And I would think that itwould have to have severe inflation implications that really aren'tnecessary for us to have to undergo. Another point that I don't thinkis inconsiderable in the long-term scheme of things is that it wouldhave a very severe impact on the possibility of constructive bankingreform in the near future. We think that the time may have come foran effective reform movement. And if we got into a very severerecession right now, that would certainly doom the possibilities ofthe passage of a good package in the near term. So, we have a severeskewing that I haven't been conscious of in my thinking before, and Ithink it necessitates our looking at some things that sometimes wedon't have to spend a lot of time on--a broader array ofconsiderations and potential downside concerns as well as some verylong-lived potential downside results that we would all hate to seeensue. All of which leaves me intrigued with the thought ofinvestigating and considering further scenario 2 on the last exhibit.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. This event clearly is an event that doesn'thappen very often. We really haven't seen [in a long time] such aswitch in preference from wanting to be leveraged to wanting to haveliquidity. We haven't seen such a period in which the creditors arenot anxious to lend. This is a very significant event and it's anevent that I don't think we've seen since the 1930s. This economy hasa lot of factors that make for a very significant departure from theway we went through the events in the 1930s and the way we're goingthrough them today. I agree with the staff's estimate in regard tothe areas in which there are strengths. There are considerablestrengths. And I tend to believe that of the factors on the exportside particularly. It seems to me that this $20 billion per yearpayment from abroad--I don't care how you classify it--is really likean export of a military service. If you put that together with theother factors, our balance of payments certainly swings ratherdramatically. But that swing in the balance of payments does meanthat a saving rate move is going to go with it, and certainly thegovernment sector is not going to be the source of that savings. AndI doubt that the corporate sector is apt to add to that savings. So,I tend to think that there is somewhat less robust final demand in theconsumer sector than I would expect. Frankly, if it occurs in thesecond quarter and it becomes evident that there are no more interestrate declines, then I would expect the foreign exchange value of thedollar to make a very significant turnaround. I would expect theforeign exchange value of the dollar to head back to the highs of 1989in rapid order. That, of course, may then mean that later on we wouldget a slowdown on the export side. There is a significant downsiderisk that if monetary policy focuses on what I call a fairly weak-36-2/5-6/91economic scenario, monetary policy will not be neutral but in factcould be quite damaging to the spot [dollar] prospects. That is themost dangerous event that we're looking at here: to have the foreignexchange value of the dollar move into a decided destabilizedposition, which I think could cause the bond markets and the stockmarkets to reverse rather rapidly.So, I'm looking at a scenario that I think is somewhat like[what was described by] some of the rest of you, but I tend to believethat monetary policy, if we're not careful, will make it worse ratherthan better. From June of 1989 we've decreased the fed funds rate by365 basis points; that's a rather significant move. But it focusesupon the wrong rate in regard to what ails us. The right rate is therate that the real estate market is facing, which is the long bondrate. And now for the first time in a long time we actually have longbond rates lower than they were a year [earlier]. And it seems to methat we are in a rather precarious [position] if we believe--and Iguess I take this from Gary Stern and many others--that thesecorrections don't have to take place. If we believe that, I think weare mistaken. I think the correction with regard to household savingsis underway and is going to take place and I think the use of monetarypolicy to deal with that has to be very, very carefully done so as notto make it worse rather than better. If we do not destabilize thesituation, it seems to me that the rebound is going to occur. Thereare many factors [signaling] that. But if the dollar becomesprogressively weaker, I don't think that will help us a bit on exportsbecause in the mood of a war economy, with many countries inrecession, that kind of environment could foster protectionistsentiment that could be very, very explosive.So, even though I'm not quite as optimistic on the real sideas the staff, I do agree with the staff's [assessment of the] sourcesof strength; I think they are there. And I'm comfortable with that,if we do not harm this situation. I would admit that I am ratherbullish in that if the Federal Reserve policy doesn't destabilize thesituation--and I'm going to sound a little silly perhaps when I saythis--I would not be surprised if my forecast of the CPI at 3.2percent [is wrong] for 1992. The reason my CPI is so high is becauseof what the foreign exchange value of the dollar put us through; andonce the dollar begins to rebound I can see CPI inflation doing very,very well. And then [we could] get the correction that we need, whichis mortgage rates in the 7 percent range in order to bring this aboutwhere we need it. You see, real interest rates cannot be homogenizedat this point; there are real interest rates in every market. And thereal interest rate for houses right now is pretty darn high. In afalling real estate market--when one does not expect house prices torise, and even expects them to fall--real interest rates even aftertaxes may be extremely high. So, I think the key is getting long-termbond rates down; and that's a lot harder than getting short-term ratesdown.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I think most of my points have been made--12times--but I will start off just by explaining an experience I hadwhen I dug into my files to see what I had sent in this time last yearfor a forecast because I try to key off that when I do the next go-around. Last year I was the source of the low end of the range, in-37-2/5-6/91case any of you have forgotten. I had 1 percent real growth fourthquarter-to-fourth quarter, which was off the bottom of the chart. Andwhat is making me nervous is that that turned out to be too high; asyou know, it came in at about .3 percent. Anyway, having said that, Ilove Mike's forecast and I hope it is realized. Even though I'mleaving, I certainly hope that this is what materializes. But I mustsay that I'm a little skeptical that it will.I'll just mention a couple of things. One relates to theassumed bottoming out of housing or the investment in residentialstructures. I realize I'm biased because I just met with a couplehundred homebuilders last month, but I really think there is a problemthere. I think the credit crunch is still present in that industry,particularly on the side of builder financing. The United States is abig country and housing markets are local; there are zillions of them.They are not all like Boston or Denver or Dallas. There really is ahousing shortage, especially in low and moderate income housing. Wecan use some more structures. So, I hate to dismiss this as somethingthat we don't need to be concerned about. And I don't believe thatwe've seen the bottom yet on this; I don't think it's going to bottomout in the second quarter because of this credit situation. Also, onthe consumer side: I would love to see the consumer come roaring backinto the stores. It used to be VE day or VJ day--I'm aging myself; Idon't know what this would be--[VS] or something.MR. SYRON. VI.MS. SEGER. VI or VIQ. Anyhow, I would love to assume that[that will happen]. I have no idea when the war will end but,whenever it does, I just don't think that in and of itself is going tocure all the consumer confidence problems because I think part of theconfidence problem involves the war but another big part involves thiscontinuing flow of bad news about the financial system. It's likehaving cold water run down your back continually and a lot of peopleare reacting that way. That's part of it, but also consumers arestill very overloaded with accumulated debts. I saw in one of thepresentations the quality of consumer debt deteriorating, mortgagedefaults growing, and that sort of thing. So, I just don't thinkconsumers are in shape to run right out and go on a spending spree ifthey feel like it.Finally, on the assumption that exports are really going tocarry a big part of the load: again, I would like to assume that.I'm impressed with how we have gotten our exports turned around. Butas I hear about the conditions in other countries, such as Canada,that are our major trading partners and I think about their problems,I just wonder how strong those markets are going to be and, therefore,whether our exporters--no matter how good they are and how good theirproducts are--in fact can achieve these kinds of results. Anyway,this certainly would be my preferred outcome; there's no doubt aboutit. But I just have a feeling that the timing is somewhat toooptimistic and that whenever the bottom does occur the rebound fromthat low point will be more gradual and less sharp.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Why don't we recess untiltomorrow morning at 9:00 a.m. You may leave your papers here.[Meeting recessed]-38-2/5-6/91February 6, 1991--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Kohn.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--SeeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thanks. We're open for discussion onthis issue. Let's do questions first. Any questions? Dick Syron.MR. SYRON. Don, I find myself in great sympathy with whatyou said. I have a technical question having to do with this issue ofV2 and the credit crunch--not the New England credit crunch, but thenational credit crunch. The chart we saw yesterday in the chart showindicated that, in terms of this particular measure of the creditcrunch, we are not in a much different place than we usually are atthis stage in the cycle. But part of your velocity forecast assignssome weight to the credit crunch, doesn't it? It may be consistentwith the earlier data; that's what I'm trying to get a hint on.MR. KOHN. My interpretation of the charts--and I think Mikehad the same interpretation--was that something unusual did seem to behappening in the depository sector. It was hard to see it reflected--in his charts, anyhow--in total credit or total borrowing really. Theflow of credit relative to GNP didn't look all that different frompast recessions--although it was consistent with a recession, which weweren't anticipating at the beginning of the year.MR. SYRON. But the smaller business borrowing would bemostly from banks.MR. KOHN. Right. The banking depository credit wasextraordinarily weak, and we think that's what is being reflected inM2. Now, part of the reason we have a velocity shift is because somepart of that weakness in depository credit doesn't matter. As Mikepointed out, to the extent that it just reflects easily securitizedconsumer credit or mortgage credit that flows through differentchannels, the final borrowers--for example, households in this case--don't even know who is holding their credit. It doesn't matter tothem whether it's a bank or someone else. But when it seems to cut alittle further into small businesses, where information is importantand where the cost of rechanneling the credit may be rather high, then[it does]. So, to the extent that it's easily rechanneled, we couldget an increase in velocity because the banks wouldn't need to issuetime deposits. GNP would be whatever it was anyhow and M2 would beweak relative to GNP. But to the extent that it cut into not soeasily rechanneled credit, it would have an effect both on M2 and onGNP. That's why I say I think some of the weakness we saw in M2 wasreflected in GNP over the year and some of it was this velocity shift.But the velocity shift persists. To the extent that it does persist,we don't need to worry about that amount of shortfall in M2 relativeto GNP. And I think that is the part that's easily rechanneled in ourdepository institutions.MR. KOHN. Further questions for Don? Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Don, I really have a two-part question. I wantto precede the question, though, by the comment that I thought this-39-2/5-6/91section in the Bluebook on page 8 and the following pages on long-runstrategy was most helpful. I thought you put it in the context thatis just right for decisionmaking. And I'm not trying to set you upfor the question. You mention on page 10 in that paragraph about inthe middle of the page--this is about strategy II--that "nominalinterest rates, while higher than in the baseline in the first twoyears, thereafter move below those in the baseline as inflation comesdown more." I didn't see those interest rates in the chart. Did Imiss that somewhere?MR. KOHN. That's because in the past we haven't shown thoseinterest rates in here. In the baseline forecast, for example, wewould have interest rates averaging about 5-3/4 percent by the end of1995--just to give the end point.MR. ANGELL. Okay.MR. KOHN. We have a 5-3/4 percent funds rate in the baselineand about 5-1/8 percent in the slower M2 [growth scenario].MR. ANGELL. Okay. Could you give me those numbers for 1993also?MR. KOHN. Sure. In the fourth quarter of '93 it's 6-1/2percent, rounded, in the baseline and it's about the same actually [inthe slower M2 growth scenario]. The fourth quarter of '93 is aboutwhere the crossover occurs.MR. ANGELL. I presume these rates are short-term interestrates?MR. KOHN. That is the funds rate.MR. ANGELL. Now, Don, the tough question, which I've set youup for: Could you tell me about the pattern of long rates with thosetwo scenarios? And to make it really tough, I'd like to know thepattern of long rates without credibility and the pattern with, youmight say, enough extra effort to bring on credibility.MR. KOHN. Governor Angell, I can give you the deviation fromthe baseline. I don't have the charts showing the actual rates in thebaseline, but I can tell you for the corporate bond rate that by theend of 1995 it is lower in the tighter alternative than in thebaseline by about 15 basis points.MR. ANGELL. Yes, but what I really want to know about is thesecond half of '91. Would the long bond rate be higher or lower ifyou add credibility?MR. KOHN. Certainly, without credibility it would be higher.The way this works is that in the slower growth scenario--in order todamp money growth even more than the staff forecast, given themomentum of GNP--you have to raise interest rates. You have highernominal and real interest rates that damp spending gradually. Thatthen feeds through to inflation. How fast it feeds through mightdepend on credibility effects; in the model there aren't anycredibility effects. And then the [lower] inflation will bring downnominal rates, although you'd still have higher real rates, at least-40-2/5-6/91with a backward-looking expectations [model], and a higherunemployment rate at the end of this period under the tighteralternative, as you see from the table.MR. ANGELL. So, in other words, you're saying that the firstpart of any tightening would give [rise to] expectations of furthertightening, which alters the opportunity cost of holding bonds, andthereby bond prices would be somewhat lower than they otherwise wouldbe until the improved inflation effect overcomes it?MR. KOHN. Right.MR. ANGELL. And that's where credibility would be soimportant?MR. KOHN. Right. If there were credibility effects,obviously, that would feed through faster and bond [prices] wouldprobably rise; but [the markets] have to believe us. In my mind, thecredibility comes mostly from our actions rather than from our words.So, it would take a while for that credibility to build. But once itdid, then I believe that bond yields certainly would come down fasterthan we've captured in here.MR. ANGELL. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions for Don? If not, let mestart off with general comments on this issue. I have been puzzled,as I think everyone has been, by the extent to which our equationsforecasting M2 and the various interest rate assumptions becameprogressively worse through the fourth quarter and kept a fairly largegap in the first quarter. That's suggestive, obviously, of twopossibilities: that there has been a shift in the function and thatwe're now on a different slope, or that it's going to snap back. Andif it snaps back, that implies a dramatically different outcome thanif the existing divergence continues. My impression of the differenceis that it is really quite substantial. In short, at this stage wereally do not have a feel for how this is going to come out--not in away that would make us feel rather comfortable about it, I wouldsuspect.I conclude from this that we have very little basis on whichto move from our preliminary position. I would say we pretty muchhave to make a fairly strong judgment in order to move one way or theother from alternative I, because I am fearful that if we chooseeither of the other two alternatives we probably would be settingourselves up for things to go in the wrong direction. I think thereis just as much of a probability that we soon will be engenderingdouble-digit M2 as zero; if we could somehow hedge that until we get amuch better fix on what is going on in the numbers, I must say I woulddo that. So, I prefer to stay basically with the preliminary rangesof alternative I. Dick Syron.MR. SYRON. I fully support what you suggest. I think we'rein a time when the course of the economy is uncertain, the course ofworld events is uncertain, and the course of the behavior of theaggregates vis-a-vis the economy is uncertain. And in the context ofall of this, we are also in a period when everyone is watching what wedo extraordinarily closely. It seems to me that it makes all the-41-2/5-6/91-42-sense in the world to bewould presume thatfairly-44-2/5-6/91the throws of the agonies of the unemployment rate and reduced output,we have the potential to run [over on] the other side. And we'regoing to need the excuse to come back. And I think a 6 percentceiling gives us the excuse to come back and raise interest ratesquicker than the 6-1/2 percent ceiling.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would maintain the ranges that yourecommended.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I agree with the argument that stability is goodand that there is great uncertainty. But I was just looking atAppendix B [in the Bluebook]--I realize this is ancient history but Ido pay attention to the monetary aggregates and the targets we set--and I just thought I'd remind you about M2 growth, looking back: In1988 we missed the midpoint on the low side; in 1989 we missed themidpoint on the low side; and last year we missed the midpoint on thelow side. And to me, at some point anyway, there ought to be aneffort to think about at least a modest catching up. I guess that isthe main reason, along with the desire for some stability, that Iwould prefer to carry forward the targets that we had for last yearrather than use the tentative ranges that were set last July for thisyear. I think we've been assuming our targets were half-wayappropriate but we've been low-balling it right along. I remember afew years ago, when Beryl Sprinkel was at the CEA, he made some passat that idea in one of the Economic Reports to the President. Anyhow,I just feel more comfortable not drawing a line at the end of eachcalendar year and acting as if January 1 isn't related to December 31.So, I would go with a mix, using alternative III for M2 andalternative I for M3. That would just carry last year's rangesforward, which is a nonexistent alternative.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Well, I want to repeat my skepticism about thepower of monetary policy to affect the economy, at least temporarilyat this stage of the game and the preference I stated yesterdaygiving signals that might jiggle the thing off dead centerbelieve it is stuck. On the other hand, I worry aboutsignal. In spite of the fact that we have associated ourselvesconcern about the aggregates , I worry about the effect ofgrowth in the aggregates particularly M2 as a possiblelower interest rates at a point when we have not had recent moves insee where the dollar is going to settle down after the circumstancesthe discount rate and the funds rate. And under thatI think alternative I is the safest course of action although it mayraise some questions about whether our concern aboutaggregates is genuine.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. M2 still has not gotten back into thealternative I range yet.GOVERNOR LAWARE. Well, I know and understand that2/5-6/91MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I support alternative I, as yousuggest. I think we've been talking about two sets of effects thatthe ranges have: the signal effect and the guidance for actualpolicy. Looking back at Appendix B, I note that over a period ofyears actual experience does track along with our intent in the sensethat both the ranges and actual growth have been coming downgradually--since 1983 in the case of M2. But in any one year [growth]varies substantially inside the range. So, actually, any of thesethree ranges would give us ample room to conduct policy as we mightneed to in order to accommodate the events over the course of theyear. But in the case of the signal effect, I think we're ratherlocked in to alternative I. If we were to raise the ranges, it wouldsend a bad sign to the market relative to our inflation [credibility];if, on the other hand, we were to lower them, it would send a bad signto the economy relative to our desire to help check this recession.Therefore, I feel comfortable with the actual policy guidance effectof any of the three, but the signal effect leads me to alternative I.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think Wayne Angellhas probably made my comments--rather well, as a matter of fact. Itseems to me that there are only two real and important aspects to therange for M2--and that's the only aggregate I'd be concerned about.One is the midpoint, which gives us ample opportunity to achieve thestaff's forecast for the year, and the other is the top of the range.The real test if we do get the bounceback [in the economy], whichimplies vigorous growth of M2, is going to be whether or not we havethe courage to do what I think we should do fairly quickly. Thesecond part of that is that we only have 5 months, or 6 months maybe,before we take a look at these ranges again. I think the message thatwould be received well by the markets is that we are indeed stillconcerned about inflation. All the rhetoric about the short recessionI think plays well with the longer-term view that inflation is ourmajor target.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I support your proposal, Mr. Chairman, and yourrationale. We have seen an extended period of low money growth rates,[with growth for 1990] the lowest shown in Appendix B [for any yearsince at least 1979], and also falling growth rates in recent years.I'm comfortable with the existing ranges. In the last 10 months M2growth has been at the low end of its range; I don't think it's a goodidea in the current environment to reduce the range. I think we wouldappear to be lowering the target so we'd have a greater chance ofhitting it. I also think it's not a good idea to raise the range;we're unlikely to achieve it and it's not a good idea to reverse thetrend of reducing the range gradually through time. And even the 2-1/2 percent low end of the current range is roughly consistent withthe long-term real growth potential of the economy. I think this isan important decision, given the heightened public perception thatwe're interested in M2 and the aggregates in general. I think anydecision other than alternative I risks confusion. We should focus onachieving actual money and credit growth within the ranges and leavethe ranges pretty much alone.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.-45-2/5-6/91MR. MELZER. Let me just comment first on the strategies thatDon laid out. I strongly favor strategy II. Given our role as acentral bank, I can't see associating myself with any other strategy.The only thing we can affect in the long run is inflation; that's theonly one that really shows any progress. That does not lead me,however, to alternative II in terms of the ranges; I would supportalternative I. As Bob Parry already acknowledged, there's already areduction in the ranges implicit in the tentative ones, so in my mindthat's consistent with strategy II. My own view is that a furtherreduction in the ranges, given the environment we're in right now,really wouldn't be seen as particularly credible. I don't think wewould buy any credibility by ratcheting them down any further. Whatis credible and what we need to do in this environment is to make surethat we acknowledge that the one thing we affect in the long run isprices and that we're still committed to price stability. [I meanthat] not in a saber rattling short-term context, but we have made somuch progress over the last four years in bringing down the growthrate in money that, as I've said before, I think we have a tremendousopportunity here to make a permanent impact on inflation. And I wantto make sure we don't lose sight of that. I'm sure we won't as aCommittee, but in terms of what we're conveying to the public we needto convey that we have some short-term problems to work through nowbut we still have our eye on the right ball.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think not moving the ranges up in theface of this recession gives that signal. It's cyclically adjusted!MR. MELZER. What I'm suggesting is that we can't rely onthat alone to convey the message.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Well, I'm pretty much in the same mode as Wayneand Roger and Tom. Our job is to reduce inflation over time. I thinkall of these ranges allow us to do that, as Mike Kelley pointed out.Midpoints are important and I would hate to have us think that if wedo come out for your suggestion, we have to hit the midpoint becausethat's above where growth has been averaging. I think that wasWayne's point. So, I'm for strategy II, a tighter [M2], becausethat's the one that makes inflation disappear on this piece of paperin front of us. I'm not sure it will, in fact. But I'm not troubledby marching the ranges down slowly over time because there's aconsistency in that that does lend itself to credibility. And we aremoving down a notch. So, while I would prefer to be more aggressive,I can understand your arguments and would support them.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I support your proposal, Mr. Chairman, and Iagree with Tom Melzer that we have an opportunity here really to makesome progress on the core rate of inflation if we conduct our affairs[unintelligible].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. I would associate myself pretty much with TomMelzer's statement. I could buy the economic case for alternative II,but I don't think I'd want to put you in a position of having to-46-2/5-6/91announce a reduction in the targets in the middle of a recession. So,I would support alternative I.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. We're sending a rather powerful signal thesedays with our short-run policy movements, and I think it's importantthat we not confuse that signal. I think staying where we are withalternative I is least likely to do that. We already have lowered theranges one notch and by not going back [up] we send a signal that wehaven't given up on inflation. To go to alternative II in the currentenvironment of bringing interest rates down would send some mixedmessages, which I don't think we want to send. In terms of operatingroom, I think all of these ranges give us operating room. And if weget a shift in the function, these ranges aren't going to be terriblyrelevant. So, I come down for alternative I on both counts: thesignal effect and the operating room.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. With the exception of Governor Seger, Iassume that when the preferences for alternatives were being cited itwas across the board, with no differentiation being made with respectto the ranges for M2, M3, and debt. If that's the case, it appearsthat we have a--MS. SEGER. Oh, I can go with alternative I.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I was just trying to get [thatclarified]. What I'm saying is that alternative I generally seems tocapture the center of this particular group, and I would ask theSecretary to take the role on that motion.MR. KOHN. Do you want to read that portion, Norm?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, you better read it.MR. BERNARD. I'm reading from page 23 in the Bluebook orline 43 in the other handout, starting near the bottom of page 2:"The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financialconditions that will foster price stability, promote a resumption ofsustainable growth in output, and contribute to an improved pattern ofinternational transactions. In furtherance of these objectives, theCommittee at this meeting established ranges for growth of M2 and M3of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent and 1 to 5 percent, respectively, for theperiod from the fourth quarter of 1990 to the fourth quarter of 1991.The monitoring range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debtwas set at 4-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent for the year"--MR. KOHN. 8-1/2. Let's not swallow it back too much; it's4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent.MR. BERNARD. --"4-1/2 to 8-1/2 for the year. With regard toM3, the Committee anticipated that the ongoing restructuring of thriftdepository institutions would continue to depress its growth relativeto spending and total credit. The behavior of the monetary aggregateswill continue to be evaluated in the light of progress toward pricelevel stability, movements in their velocities, and developments inthe economy and financial markets."-47-2/5-6/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal NoPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Mullins YesPresident Parry YesGovernor Seger YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We'll now move on to current monetarypolicy. Don Kohn.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don?MR. HOSKINS. Don, what does your model tell you for M2 forthe first half, given the [policy] moves that have been made?MR. KOHN. If we build in the error that seems to be in trainfor the first quarter--that is, if we put in the 4 percent and the 5percent that we had for February and March--that would give us 2-1/2percent for the first quarter. Now, the model has something like 6percent for the second quarter but we wouldn't expect anything likethat. We'd be looking probably at something more in the 4 to 5percent area as a judgmental forecast. We're looking at a 1-3/4percent approximate shortfall from the model for the year; we have asubstantial part of that in the first quarter but not entirely. Idon't have a projection for the first half that really goes withalternative B, but I would guess off the top of my head that itimplies something like 5 percent, which would be about a 1-pointshortfall from the model; the latter was saying 6 percent.MR. HOSKINS. But our confidence in the model has fallen?MR. KOHN. It never was very high.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions for Don? If not, let mestart off with my appraisal. First of all, to me the most fascinatingaspect of the last several weeks is the stock market, which I thinkessentially is clueing in to the fact that the war will be eithersignificantly contained or short. Now, I'm not sure it makes all thatmuch difference. If, for example, we cauterize the major [enemy]forces around Kuwait and wait for their supply of food and water torun down, which could take months, and it appears as though theiroffensive capabilities in the area--scuds, aircraft, and so forth--arepretty much eliminated, I'm not sure it matters whether the war isover at that point or not. But I think the market essentially readsit that way. What is really important about the stock market is notso much whether it is forecasting correctly or not but that the verymood of the market itself has economic implications in the context of-48-2/5-6/91what I would call an add-factor economy in which most of our equationsdon't work and what really moves the forecast is how one fiddles withthe add-factors. In that sort of environment, confidence is theproblem, essentially. I would think at this particular stage that thenews is possibly better than we feared, if I may put it that way. Andwhile we've all taken pot shots at the Greenbook forecast, it is not azero probability forecast by any means. [Laughter]MR. PRELL. [Damning with] faint praise!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm willing to go at least 15 percent!MR. PRELL. Can I get you to 60?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. With all seriousness, I'm a littleconcerned that we may be looking at the January data with a longer-term view of what it all means than it may in fact mean, especially ifone realizes that it [reflects] the climate going into the war or theuncertainty it raised. One thing I found fascinating yesterday washow many people around here are getting feedback around the country onthe CNN effect. Usually we only hear it anecdotally in one place; weheard it virtually all around this table. I hope it doesn't get out;it's terrific for CNN business!In any event, I do think that in the context of our successin bringing down money supply growth, we're beginning to see thebenefits on the inflation side. That's one area where I actuallydon't quite agree with the Greenbook because I think the inflationforecast is too high. From what I can sense, looking at the internalprice structure of a lot of companies and talking to a lot of peopleabout market resistance [to higher prices], it may turn out to bedoing better than we know. I think it's showing up very specificallyin the obviously crucial wage area. I think this has given us room tolower the interest rate structure, which we have done, withoutengendering inflationary effects. And I think the way in which it hasbeen done to date, with a rather slight lag probably, has been veryhelpful in preventing inflationary pressures from moving up over thelonger run. Ideally, I would suspect that we would like to have therate structure, to the extent that it is relevant, come down and juststabilize as we go into the expansion phase. But trying to ease intothe equilibrium in that manner strikes me as really quite unrealistic.I have come to the conclusion that we may have to move it down furtheras insurance but be prepared to back right up when and if that becomesnecessary. Unless we seriously believe that we have the capability ofbringing rates down to a point, including where we are now, and thenflattening them out at that point, we have to be [operating] under thepresumption that we are going to move them down and then we are goingto move them up. I think we have to be prepared to do both, buthopefully in a less volatile manner than has been the case formonetary policy in the past. I would say certainly that in recentyears we've been able to do that and I hope we can continue.What this leads me to, granted all of what we were discussingyesterday, is that it seems extremely unlikely that this economy willstart to move up, or more importantly that the money supply will startto move up, at a pace that would induce us to be moving in a directionof tightening rather than easing prior to our next meeting. I canconceive of our easing further--not immediately, but certainly in-49-2/5-6/91response to additional events. I would conclude, therefore, that theappropriate policy at this stage would be "B" asymmetrical towardease. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I'm in agreement with everythingyou have said. I think you put it exactly right, so I'm not going torepeat any of that because I think you hit it right on the mark. I'dalso like to say, Mr. Chairman, that I could detect in Don Kohn'sstatement not just a pure analysis, but I thought he also was leaningin exactly the same direction that you have indicated.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are you suggesting that I influenced DonKohn?MR. ANGELL. Yes, I am; he's easily influenceable! In goingwith your outline, I would like to mention that the one thing Idisagree with you on is that I think the probability of this scenariois more like 45 percent rather than 15 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I said "at least"!MR. ANGELL. Oh, at least 15 percent! I'm going to go to 45percent even though I tend to think the recession is going to be alittle longer and the recovery a little shallower. But the fact ofthe matter is that I think we do have ahead of us some moredisheartening news on the first quarter. Not only do we have the CNNeffect, which I think really is there--people have been watching TVmore than shopping--but there's also the travel factor. I have beenat the airport in Zurich and at Heathrow and JFK, and there just isn'tanybody there. There is a real impact. Harrod's runs a beautifulstore at Heathrow and they had about 30 sales people and I think 2customers. So, it does seem to me that travel is going to be downsharply; that along with the CNN effect means that the first quarterwill be down sharply. So, I think we do have some bad news ahead ofus and we need to steel ourselves for that.Now, if the staff is correct regarding the bounceback, onething I do believe is that once the capital markets recognize that theU.S. economy is in a recovery phase, there'll be no more cuts--andpossibly increases--in short-term interest rates. And I do believethe dollar could have a very sharp bounceback effect once we get pasta period of stability. So, I did a little calculation. We have what--about $56 billion of deutschemarks? Is that close?MR. CROSS. That's close.MR. ANGELL. I was thinking that we may have a window of,say, 90 days to get rid of 2/3rds of that. If we want to get rid of2/3rds of the deutschemarks we hold--I'm not counting the interestbecause so far this year the $50 million we've done is only 1/5th ofthe interest we've earned--we're going to have to sell quite a bit. Icalculate $620 million per working day over the 90-day period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That will get their attention!MR. ANGELL. It really is a very substantial item, and Iwould suggest that the budget deficit for 1991 does not need to have ahuge foreign currency exposure because we've marked the gains up in-50-2/5-6/911990 on a mark-to-market basis for our payments to the Treasury. So,Mr. Chairman, I appreciate very much that you have gotten done the $50million and just would suggest that you carry on with more enthusiasm!MR. SIEGMAN. Governor Angell, we have $33.9 billion in DM,in recent values.MR. MELZER. He wants to go short!MR. SIEGMAN. We did sell--MR. ANGELL. Oh, I was looking at the totals.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Including Treasury holdings.MR. ANGELL. I was including the Treasury too, but I thoughtthe Treasury probably would want to do the same as we would.MR. CROSS. Are you [using] DM or dollars?MR. SIEGMAN. No, this is dollar values.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I would agree that alternative B isthe best. We have just taken a fairly significant, strong, anddramatic policy action and any further move now would appear to me tobe sending the signal that we had pushed the panic button. The staffmay be right in saying that we won't have to ease further in thiscycle: I certainly hope that that's true because it's in that area andthe failure to tighten up promptly that we've usually made ourmistakes. But in my own forecast I see it somewhat weaker than thestaff does. So, I think it's possible that we may have to do a bitmore [easing] before we start upward, though I hope not. But becauseof that possibility, I would go with your asymmetric directive tiltedtoward ease. Lest anyone think that a hawk has become a dove, I thinkI will be among those who will argue the strongest quite early for anincrease in the federal funds rate, if the economy does turn around.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation ofalternative B since it appears that the economy will be recovering ata satisfactory rate 6 to 9 months from now, especially in light of thepolicy moves that were taken recently. However, I do have a strongpreference for a policy directive that is symmetrical. If newdevelopments in the next several weeks suggest greater weakness, Ibelieve there should be a full discussion of the implications of thosedevelopments for the outlook 6 to 9 months from now before policy ischanged. It seems to me that that kind of discussion runs thegreatest chance of avoiding the error of going too far in thedirection of ease in response to weakness in the statistics that areconveying information about the performance of the economy in therecent past.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.-51-2/5-6/91MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, we have done a lot over thepast several months and the most recent action is just behind us; forthat reason I would support your prescription. I do think, as I saidyesterday, that the risk continues to be on the down side and that wemay get some bad economic news over the next several weeks. And forthat reason I would support also your prescription for an asymmetricdirective. I'm glad you said what you did about our moving on the upside when that becomes necessary because I think it's important for usto remember that we're not on automatic pilot with monetary policy andthat we have to adjust to conditions. I might say, going back to theasymmetric directive, that we have a long interval between thismeeting and the next one and I think it's important to be able to movepromptly if the information is negative. On the CNN effect, I mightjust say too that Jane Fonda is very happy with that!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Si Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation. Itseems to me that we've done quite a bit and we ought to sit back andpause here. Having said that, I think the chances are that we aremore likely to ease than to tighten before the next meeting and,therefore, I think the asymmetric language would be appropriate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation. Iwas particularly encouraged--and you have said it all the way along,so it should be no surprise--[by your] preparing this group for havingto tighten if things start to grow. However, on the asymmetriclanguage, I'm comfortable for different reasons. I hope we will beemphasizing slowness in money growth as the reason for moving ratherthan weakness in the economy. The errors in our ability to predictthe economy one quarter out by anybody's forecast evaluation arereally quite large. I think our best chance of getting to where wewant to be in the long term is to continue progress on relativelysteady money growth over time. So, I would hope that the asymmetriclanguage would be exercised if we get bad news--that is, slower growthin money than we anticipate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I certainly would support thesuggestion you put on the table, but I would just elaborate a littleon one or two aspects of policy beyond that. Everybody has put his orher own probabilities on outcomes of various forecasts and, as I saidyesterday, my own sense of it is that there's at least a 50 percentchance that we'll get something along the lines of the centraltendency of the Federal Open Market Committee members' forecasts. Andwe certainly can't rule out the kind of [outcome] that Mike talkedabout. But if we're going to get either of those--a modest recoverybeginning sometime around midyear or even a fairly bouncy one as inMike's forecast--it seems to me that either outcome is already bakedin the cake in policy terms. There is enough there, if policy isworking, to produce that result.On the other hand, there is a 10, 15 percent chance--again,pick your number--of it being a lot weaker. Now, especially if itturns out to be a lot weaker, then we're looking at a very deep-52-2/5-6/91recession with all of the [attendant] financial problems. That, bythe way, I think would blow the stock market right out of the water.Then we really would have a terrible situation not only in terms ofwhat it implies for the economy and unemployment and all the rest, butin those circumstances I think policy would be judged universally asthe culprit. Moreover, the risk of the whipsaw effect sometime out inthe future, which is embodied in Mike's second scenario on the lastpage of yesterday's handout--even in the case of a steep recession--gets much greater under any scenario like that.Now, I think the problem for policy and the appearances ofpolicy is a bit further complicated by this credit crunch issue.There are two schools of thought about the credit crunch. One schoolof thought is that it's very real and that the Fed in particular isn'tdoing much about it. I don't happen to agree with that school ofthought. Gary's analysis yesterday comes much closer to the mark asfar as I'm concerned. But there is that other school of thought:that the Fed itself is overstating the credit crunch because thatrather suits its purpose. And the argument that grows out of thatessentially says that the weakness in money is really due to policy,not a credit crunch--that the credit crunch is a smokescreen and theFed is hiding behind that smokescreen. Indeed, that argument goes onestep further and says that the Fed is targeting the funds rate, thatreserves are strictly demand determined, and that it's the policyprocess itself that is producing the weak growth in money supplyand/or the credit crunch, or even worse for the Machiavellian typesthat the Fed is hiding behind the credit crunch. The reason I bringthat up is again in the context of what happens--regardless of whetheryou think the risks are 10 percent or 20 percent--if it turns out thatthe economy goes down the tank. That leaves me in this quandary ofdesperately searching for what I like to think of as a low-costinsurance policy. To me, a low-cost insurance policy is somethingthat either in substance or in form tries to defuse some of thosearguments without bringing with it the necessary result that we go toofar in underlying policy terms and set ourselves up in the kind ofconundrum that Mike so graphically described yesterday. So, I ask:Is there a low-cost insurance policy? That is somewhat of acontradiction in terms, of course; there really cannot be.While I don't think it's germane to the Committee'sdiscussion this morning, I have this rather crazy idea that runsaround in my head that might deserve consideration as a low-costinsurance policy. Essentially, what is running through my mind isgoing a good deal further than we have been thinking to date abouttrying to bring the discount window to bear in this process. Theconcept that rolls around in my head--and I understand it can be shotto pieces, but maybe Don and Mike and the staff could think about it alittle anyway--is a 6-month period, for example, within which we wouldhave a highly advertised program of more liberal discount windowaccommodation, including term discount window loans. The programwould be structured to say that its purpose is to ensure liquidity toindividual institutions to meet the needs of creditworthy borrowers.We might have more liberal collateral requirements, but we'd haircutthe devil out of them so there would be no risk to the FederalReserve. But the thought would be that people could have easieraccess and more generous collateral requirements--in terms of what isput up [as collateral], not in terms of how it is haircutted. Itwould have a market rate of some kind or other. The way I think about-53-2/5-6/91it is that if it's used, I don't see that it has to have any materialimpact on the broad thrust of policy, at least if one thinks of policyin terms of interest rates or exchange rates. I think we couldengineer those effects out through Mr. Sternlight's operations. So,if it's used, fine; I don't think it has to compromise the basicthrust of policy. And there would be no risk to the Federal Reserve.On the other hand, if it's not used, I'm not sure that that's the endof the world either. Indeed, if it's not used, it seems to me that itgoes at least a little in the direction of helping us to defuse theargument that our unwillingness to provide liquidity either throughopen market operations or otherwise is the cause of the credit crunchand all these other things that go with it.Now, as I said, there really is at the end of the day, ofcourse, no such thing as a low-cost insurance policy. This has smokeand mirrors to it. But I am worried about the danger that is inherentin an outcome in which [the economy] really goes south on us. I askmyself what other alternatives there are that do not involve the riskof compromising the basic thrust of monetary policy, and I look withBill Taylor and others at some of the things they are talking about onthe supervisory side. Now, the problem there is that the ones thatmight do something by their very nature are going to raise the specterof forbearance on the thrift situation and all the rest, and I thinkin a global setting relaxing capital standards or something like thatwould be crazy. On the other hand, the kinds of accounting thingsthat are being talked about I don't think are going to do anything.As a matter of fact, I think they will be viewed transparently as notdoing much at all. Again, maybe we don't need a low-cost insurancepolicy; but that, I think, is your judgment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, no. On the contrary, that is notmy judgment. I think we may need it; I'm not saying that we don't; wemay and I think we should consider it. But it might be useful tocontinue on and get some comments on that issue at the luncheon, okay?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation withasymmetry. Many of the reasons have been given before; one is thatthere's a long interval before the next meeting. I think we may haveto do something before the next meeting, and [it makes] sense to takeout insurance on the fundamental policy side. I do agree verystrongly with the comments that Wayne made--and it's reassuring thateveryone has made them--on the importance of recognizing the scenariosthat were shown. [I'm pleased] that we're willing to pay the premiumsinvolved in this insurance policy if we do have to [ease] in theintermediate period rather than being tighter and I think we allshould realize that there may be a difficult period coming out of thisone. The only comment I would make is--and again this may be moreappropriate for the [non-FOMC] lunch discussion--that we may well haveto do something more on the discount rate before doing more on thefunds rate because with a 6-1/4 percent funds rate and a 6 percentdiscount rate, given people's aversion to borrowing, effectively, wehave a penalty discount rate right now. I think it's equally likelythat the next move may well be a cut in the discount rate without afurther change in the funds rate.-54-2/5-6/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without the funds rate showing throughand with the spread opening up again?MR. SYRON. That's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I support your recommendation with theasymmetry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I also support the proposal. I do think thatwe will have to get through another bout of unsettledness when weconfront the possibility of a ground war, which could give us anotherCNN effect for a week or two--although it may be less popular becauseit may look less like a video game. I agree that there are risks onthe down side and I think that's understandable, given the 6 to 9months of very slow growth in money and credit we have had. I wouldthink that we'd be facing a pretty tough period, although lookingbeyond that we have a good dose of stimulus in the pipeline already.But I still think, given the uncertainties, that it's wise to beasymmetric toward ease and watch events.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, when I read the Bluebook, I wrotein the margins "I like the interest rate implications of alternative Abut that alternative puts us on too steep a growth path for money inthe out years." So, I would recommend alternative B. And theasymmetric language toward ease sounds good to me, although I like LeeHoskins caveat about that being focused largely on the growth of theaggregates.I can just confirm the CNN effect. In anticipation ofmoving, we had our cable disconnected last week and I've beensuffering withdrawal but I haven't gone to the mall yet!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I agree with your recommendation and yourcomments surrounding it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I certainly support alternative B. With regardto the question of the language: Looking to the future, if all wewant to consider is asymmetric language toward ease, that certainlymakes sense because I find it very hard to believe that between nowand March we will get enough coincidence of events to suggest that wewould want to raise the borrowings target and the funds rate.However, we have moved a lot recently, and I think we do have toconsider the lags in all this. In light of that, I would have apreference for symmetric language just because I think we run the riskof not allowing the actions that we've taken to date to have an effecton both the aggregates and ultimately on the economy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.-55-2/5-6/91MR. MELZER. I support alternative B also. Let me just pickup on some things Jerry said. I was writing some notes here and whenhe started talking I thought he was going to say the same thing I am.But when you hear what I have to say, you'll realize that that wasvirtually impossible. Basically I agree with this focus on slow moneyversus weak current economic numbers. I think that's what we ought tofocus on; that's what we have influence on. But I'm also sympatheticto the uncertainties with respect to the short-term behavior of money,particularly the broader aggregates. Don has talked about it--therestructuring that's going on in depository institutions and so forth.And I guess we also know that the base is distorted by currency flowsoverseas. So, if it were up to me, I would pay some attention toreserves. That's what we affect directly. And over the last yearthere has been virtually no growth in reserves. Now, I'm not beingcritical here, because I think we've tried to respond to that to someextent by bringing rates down; and we have recognized in thisCommittee the perils of funds rate targeting and we've been trying torespond to that. But we shouldn't sit around and be surprised thatwe're not getting any money growth if we're not providing anyreserves.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But we are. Supposing reserve balancesstretched across not only transaction balances but across the wholespectrum of various depository obligations. Required reserves underthose conditions obviously would have been going up a great deal more.How would money in that environment have moved differently from theway it has?MR. MELZER. I'm not sure. My only point is that I don'tthink we can expect money to grow if we don't provide the basic fuelthat's necessary; we're demand driven.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What I'm trying to get at is that it isreally an excess required reserves problem and we've locked ourrequired reserves into an instrument that has become increasinglyobsolete. I think you may raise the question on excess or freereserves or something like that, but I'm uncomfortable with totalreserves as an issue.MR. MELZER. Well, I'm not proposing a specific approachhere. I'm just saying that I would pay some attention to what isgoing on there. We have some uncertainty about how the aggregates arebehaving; that's what we can influence. And I think we should paysome attention to it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That would be influencing by increasingreserves. I don't know any other way of doing it.MR. MELZER. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What I'm trying to get at is this: Isthere additional information here other than the money supply datathemselves that you feel we ought to be targeting?MR. MELZER. I guess what I'm suggesting, picking up onJerry's point that we're vulnerable, is that where we're vulnerable isthat somebody may look at it and say basically that by targeting thefunds rate we haven't provided any reserves to permit an expansion in-56-2/5-6/91the aggregates. And my answer to that is not smoke and mirrors; ourbest defense against somebody taking a shot at us is trying to do theright thing. And I think we have been--MR. ANGELL. But Tom, if we focused on reserves, don't youthink that we could end up with a 2 percent fed funds rate rathereasily? Are you willing to pay that price?MR. MELZER. I'm not suggesting that we target reserves. I'mjust saying that in this uncertain environment it could be helpfulbecause if we're sitting here pegging the funds rate at the wronglevel and we're shrinking the supply of reserves, we are not going tosee the money growth that we are going to need. I think that couldjust be helpful to us in this process. I think you all know what I'veadvocated over time; I'm not one who would be inclined to go nuts onthe easing side, but I think this could be helpful in the otherdirection as well. My main point is that our best insurance policy isjust to assure ourselves that we are doing the right thing. Andthat's going to be the best defense. We are going to be vulnerable ifthe record shows on a continuing basis that we're still not providingadequate reserves. And I'd be the first one to say on the other sidethat it's a problem, too, if those [monetary growth] rates shoot up todouble-digit rates over a sustained period of time, as they verylikely could with what has already been done. Anyhow, I support theChairman's proposal.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob Black, do you have a comment?MR. BLACK. Yes. I was just going to say that I have a lotof sympathy for what Tom said. I think that reserve measures can berefined, though. There are several things that are reservable thatare not part of M2. The whole [reserve structure] is set up with theidea of controlling M1 but we know ahead of time, because requirementsagainst interbank deposits and government deposits are lagged, whatvolume of reserves we need for that. And we could put those in at thebeginning of the period. Those against the M2 portion are not laggedquite as much. So anything we put out over and above that, whichwould be something of a refined measure of total reserves, would beavailable for supporting M2 and nothing else. I think we could get tosomething like that. Another thing I'd like to see us do is to try tomake some estimates of the amount of currency that is going abroadbecause that [outflow means the] currency component is badly distortedand if we think that's part of our domestic money supply, we're beingbadly mislead. But I really think the rate of growth in theaggregates is demand-determined now, and I think as Tom does that itought to be supply-determined to some degree and that's not easybecause of the reserve structure we have. Also, I think financialinnovation would create a number of instruments that would not bereservable; indeed, a lot of them in M2 are not reservable now. But Ithink we can get something better by moving in general in thatdirection. And I would support--MR. MELZER. I forgot one other point I was going to make,which is that I think we can best defend ourselves by sticking topromising things we can control and we can affect. We cannot solve anintermediation problem in the economy, and I think that creates falseexpectations. But what we can do is make sure that we're providing-57-2/5-6/91adequate reserves to the System so that the financial intermediariescan do with those what they will.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But no matter how you measurereserves or anything else, in the kind of situation we're in right nowthe only way that we can deal with this conundrum would be to run apolicy, in effect deliberately, that is prepared to accept the risksof very large amounts of free reserves or excess reserves in theSystem. And by definition if there is something real to this so-called credit crunch, that approach to policy--no matter how youdefine the base or how you define reserves--carries with it the risksof a 2 percent federal funds rate.MR. MELZER. Which, of course, we haven't seen.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We haven't seen it because [of how]we're conducting policy. But the only fail-safe experiment--andthat's what it would be--that would resolve that issue, no matter howyou define the base and no matter how you measure reserves, would bethe willingness of this Committee to run a policy that carries with itthe risks of a 2 percent federal funds rate.MR. MELZER. I'm not suggesting that we use it as anoperating target.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I know you're not.MR. MELZER. I'm just saying that if it were up to me, inthis environment where we're worried about getting the money growthpath, I'd hate to be sitting here three months from now with a slopeon that line of total reserves that was still totally flat as it hasbeen over the last year.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's part of the reason why I madethe suggestion about trying to get some reserves out through thediscount window in a way in which Peter could do a pretty good job ofprotecting against--SPEAKER(?). Sterilizing!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Protecting against--well,sterilizing them!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation forall the reasons that have been articulated here. I would like at anappropriate time, now or later, to suggest a change in the order ofthe priorities of our considerations in the operational paragraph. Idon't know whether you'd like to pursue that now or do it as aseparate item.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's do it separately. Governor Seger.MS. SEGER. I support your view, Mr. Chairman, but I wouldsay that the risk is definitely on the low side if for no other reasonthan the auto industry situation. As you know, it's responsible forthe biggest chunk of the decline in the fourth quarter. Both auto-58-2/5-6/91sales and production in my judgment are going to be a disaster in thisquarter and right now I can't think what is going to bring them offthe floor in the next quarter. That is simply one reason. Inaddition, there is the confidence factor. I think that is partiallyrelated to CNN and the Gulf War but I think there's another big chunkcoming just from this nervousness over the financial system. I wishthat weren't the case but I think it is. Certainly, a lot of easinghas been done. But in order to compensate for the credit crunch,which in my judgment is definitely out there, there will be a need todo still more to offset that. I think it would be good to look atJerry's idea, too; it strikes me as sort of extraordinary toaccommodate a special challenge of this nature, which I haven't seensince the 1930s. So, I would go with [alternative B], asymmetrictoward ease.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Alternative B. I would prefer a symmetricdirective, given the background of the easing that already has takenplace and the closeness of the easing just last Friday. A symmetricdirective does not imply that you do not have the flexibility to takea cut at easing between now and the next meeting on your own. Andthat is the insurance that I would feel comfortable with rather thanthe asymmetric directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. At the risk of getting in over my headprematurely, I want to raise a point in connection with Tom's concernabout reserves and in connection with the comment about excessreserves and free reserves. I wonder if we might have some parallelnow to the situation in the late 1930s when the Federal Reserveperceived [the existence of] a lot of excess reserves in the Systemand took action to raise reserve requirements to mop them up only tofind later that the bankers didn't necessarily regard them as excess.They were excess in the legal sense, but not necessarily excess intheir own minds in view of the uncertainties in the economy. I wonderif we might have a situation now where there's a difference betweenwhat bankers themselves perceive to be excess reserves and what areexcess in a legal sense. If that's the case, then I think there maybe some room to be concerned about the flatness of the reserveaggregates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's the reason I raised that;because Peter has that problem every day as to what the demand forexcess is and it doesn't mean it's going [unintelligible].We're going to move now to the directive and vote onalternative B, with asymmetric language toward ease. But prior todoing that. Governor Kelley has the floor--with a proposal I wouldpresume?MR. KELLEY. Yes sir, if I may. As it appears in lines 72and 73 of the operational paragraph we have stated for some time thatour order of priority was "price stability" followed by "trends ineconomic activity." My suggestion is that, to the extent we'd like tobe forthcoming in this document, it might be an appropriate time toreverse the order of those first two priorities. That would be-59-2/5-6/91consistent with the reasons for our recent actions and I think itwould be consistent with the Committee discussion that I've heard hereyesterday and today. We have an awful lot at stake in this economyand that is what we've been discussing. But I don't think that areversal of that magnitude would in any way indicate a downgrading ofour consideration of inflation. It's certainly going to continue tobe vitally important to this Committee, and it shouldn't and won't beforgotten. But at this time I think, for the record, it would be amore accurate reflection of the reality of the Committee's concerns toreverse the order of those first two priorities.MS. SEGER. Shouldn't we also move up monetary aggregatesthen, Mike?MR. KELLEY. Well, I don't know where--MS. SEGER. As I've sat and listened here today, that hasreceived a lot of discussion.MR. KELLEY. Somehow I'd like to have everything be first,but that's difficult. My suggestion would be simply to reverse thefirst two.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You'd like to comment?MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I'm only going to talk about aquestion of the way that we conduct our business. I feel so stronglyabout this issue that, if we're going to do it, I'd really want tohave a recorded vote on this.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. On this?MR. ANGELL. On this.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Indeed, that we will.MR. ANGELL. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is an important issue.MR. ANGELL. Okay. In other words, a recorded vote on theamendment?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. PARRY. So, what is your view?MR. ANGELL. My view is that price stability needs to bethere first and that it really does help the long bond market to getlong rates down to have price stability as the first priority.MR. LAWARE. I don't often argue with my colleague on myleft, [Mr. Kelley], but it seems to me that price stability and theprogress toward price stability is the thing that has enabled us tomake the recent moves toward ease, or one of the things that hassupported that. I wouldn't want to lose sight of that as a primarytarget. I'd be more comfortable leaving it where it is.-60-2/5-6/91MR. PARRY. I would agree with Governors Angell and LaWare;in fact, I'm a little concerned that recent trends in economicactivity may be a bad basis for current policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob Black.MR. BLACK. I agree with what Governor Angell suggested. I'dalso like to move monetary aggregates up [in the list]. I'd ratherhave them before trends in economic activity, but that's raising anissue I don't think you want to get into.MR. BOEHNE. I think there are times when you don't want tokick sleeping dogs and this is probably one. I know that GovernorAngell feels very strongly about this issue but, frankly, I would hopethat we could resolve this informally one way or the other. We have agreat deal of unanimity in the Committee now, and I think that'simportant given all the problems out there in the economy. I think tohave a separate vote on word ordering is not in the best interests ofthe big issues that we face. I would urge that we--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We may not need it.MR. BOEHNE. Well, I would hope so.MR. KELLEY. It doesn't look like we do.MR. HOSKINS. I probably don't need to comment.MR. MULLINS. My preference also would be not to change theorder and not to appear to be responding to the current economicconditions, but rather to respond with policy actions. And I wouldagree with [unintelligible].MR. KEEHN. I agree with Mike's thought; but having saidthat, changing the order at this point I think would imply more thanwe want to. So, I'd be inclined to leave it as it is.MR. FORRESTAL. I would feel the same way.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mike, you probably want to withdraw itat this stage and resurrect it at a later time.MR. KELLEY. Consider it withdrawn for lack of a second!MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. Depending upon progress towardprice stability, trends in economic activity, the behavior of themonetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and domesticfinancial markets, slightly greater reserve restraint might orsomewhat lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in theintermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expectedto be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period fromDecember through March at annual rates of about 3-1/2--"MR. KOHN. Can we say 3 to 4 percent, using round numbers,rather than 3-3/4 and 3-1/2 percent?-61-2/5-6/91MR. BERNARD. So it would be "growth of both M2 and M3 overthe period from December through March at annual rates of about 3 to 4percent."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We're changing the 3-3/4 percent? Isthat it?MR. BERNARD. We seldom use quarters.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm thinking of 3-1/2 to 4 percent asmore capturing what the Committee discussed because we're not going toget up to our range if we don't stipulate that kind of range.MR. ANGELL. The reason is that the current lags keep us fromgetting up there within this period, but it does get us to the rangelater.MR. KOHN. We have it projected up there by March.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But is 3-3/4 percent what you'reprojecting?MR. KOHN. 3-3/4 percent for M3 and 3-1/2 percent for M2.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's make it 3-1/2 to 4 percent; Ithink that may capture the point.MS. SEGER. May I just ask one question? Has there ever beena directive put out that just went one way? In other words, do wereally think that in the next six weeks or so greater reserverestraint might be pursued?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MS. SEGER. I'm just asking if that is true; that's all I'msaying.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's conceivable, in the spirit ofPresident Boehne's remarks.MS. SEGER. This isn't a criticism. I'm just asking if thathas ever been done.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I know that.MR. BERNARD. Governor Seger, this is ancient history, butgoing back to the late 1960s the directive was quite different in formbut in essence at times it was one way.MS. SEGER. Thank you.MR. KOHN. We're going to write 3-1/2 to 4 percent in there?MR. BERNARD. For both M2 and M3, 3-1/2 to 4 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.-62-2/5-6/91MR. BERNARD.Chairman GreenspanVice Chairman CorriganGovernor AngellPresident BlackPresident ForrestalPresident KeehnGovernor KelleyGovernor LaWareGovernor MullinsPresident ParryGovernor SegerCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If anyone[Humphrey-Hawkins] projections, I thinkchanges by close of business Monday.would like to change theirMike would like to have theMR. PRELL. Monday is fine.MR. BOEHNE. Your testimony is when?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [February] 20th and 21st, I believe.The next meeting is March 26th.END OF MEETINGYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYes-63-