Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 26, 1991A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 26, 1991, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBlackForrestalKeehnKelleyLaWareMullinsParryMessrs. Guffey, Hoskins, Melzer, and Syron, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas,and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Kohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Deputy SecretaryCoyne, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPatrikis, Deputy General CounselPrell, EconomistMessrs. Beebe, Broaddus, R. Davis, Promisel,Scheld, Siegman, Simpson, Slifman, andMs. Tschinkel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Madigan, Assistant Director, Division of MonetaryAffairs, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Divisionof Monetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Lang,Ms. Munnell, and Mr. Rosenblum, Senior VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis,Cleveland, Kansas City, Philadelphia, Boston,and Dallas, respectivelyMs. White, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank ofNew YorkMr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal ReserveBank of MinneapolisTranscript of Federal open Market Committee Meeting ofMarch 26, 1991CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is the first time in a long timethat [the Committee membership] has been addressed as "Messrs." Whowould like to move approval of the minutes?MR. KELLEY. So move.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Don Kohn willdiscuss the [report] of the task force on the relationship of thediscount rate and open market operations. Don.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I can summarize ourpoints briefly. First, the task force noted that over recent historythere have been periods of fairly automatic passthroughs of discountrate changes to federal funds rates and periods in which on a numberof occasions only part or none of the change in the discount rate wasechoed in the federal funds rate. The first regime has tended toprevail since late 1979; the second in the 1970s. Under a borrowed ornonborrowed reserve operating target for open market operations, thepassthrough tended to be automatic. When open market operations weregeared to achieving federal funds rate targets, discount rate changesoften flowed through but the decision was more discretionary; theadjustment was often not basis point for basis point. And whenintermeeting ranges for the federal funds rate were narrow, as in thelate 1970s, chances of inconsistencies were heightened and thepassthrough became less frequent.Second, we did not attempt to resolve what was meant by"pressures on reserve positions" in the current directive. Clearly,the FOMC has in mind a specific federal funds rate level. And theDesk operates with an anticipation of that level being achieved withonly secondary thought given to the borrowing objective. At the sametime, the Committee has deliberately avoided explicit announcedfederal funds targets and explicit narrow ranges for movements in thefunds rate objective over the intermeeting period.Against this background, there seems to be something to besaid for at least a fairly strong presumption of a passthrough ofdiscount rate changes in many, if not most, circumstances. Such apolicy would retain one element that has fostered a degree offlexibility in federal fund rates in the 1980s, avoiding therigidities that became built into the system in the 1970s.Inconsistencies between passing through changes in discount rates andthe FOMC directive are likely to be rare. Whatever information causesthe [Reserve Bank] boards of directors to vote for a change and theBoard of Governors to approve the change would usually also call foran adjustment under the directive. At the same time, there arecircumstances in which the potential federal funds rate response to adiscount rate adjustment would seem to call for a discussion by theCommittee. One such circumstance might be when the change in thediscount rate was not intended to show through entirely; this wouldinvolve an adjustment to the borrowing objective. Another would be ifthe full passthrough of a discount rate change implied an especiallylarge change in the federal funds rate between Committee meetings.3/26/91The task force suggested enhanced consultation in these circumstances.If possible, this would include advance notice to Committee members ofthe action contemplated and an opportunity for thorough discussion ofthe alternatives. Now, I'd like to give my colleagues, PeterSternlight, Karl Scheld, and Virgil Mattingly a chance to add theirthoughts. I think Peter does have a few things to say.MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't have much to add to Don's summary.Clearly, the discount rate and the anticipated funds rate have tendedto move broadly together, and I think that's to be expected given thatthey are responding to similar sets of information as interpreted bysimilar and partly overlapping sets of policymakers. Our paper triedto strike a balance between the presumption of similar movement and atthe same time some recognition of the value of flexibility anddiscretion in those cases where full uniformity in the size and timingof moves could be questioned. Reasonable judgments may vary a bit onprecisely where one draws the line as to how strong the presumption isof parallel movement. Consultation, of course, need not meansomething other than parallel movement. It's just an opportunity toreview the situation in light of additional information. That's all Ihad to add, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I thought you gentlemen had animpossible job, and as best I can judge you came out with about thebest compromise that one could conceive of. I must say I'm stillquite reluctant to cave in, if you will, on this question that we cando nothing but target the federal funds rate. This issue ariseslargely because what we are doing de facto is targeting the fundsrate. I'm not sure that any of us believes that that's the rightpolicy. What I think this compromise does is to recognize that thatis what we're doing and that it does require enhanced consultation inthe form in which Don Kohn suggested. But it probably would be unwiseto go to anything very specific or very detailed if for no otherreason than that if we start to get very rigid in this area, we'llhave to publish exactly what our guidelines are, and I think thatprobably would restrict our capabilities somewhat. So, as far as I'mconcerned, the enhanced consultation notion strikes me as the way tocome at this question in a manner which brings together what reallyare statutorily two fundamentally conflicting forces. If we reallyhad to operate the discount rate independently from open marketoperations, we probably would get a monetary policy that was less thanterrific. Indeed, I think that's the experience we had in the 1970s.If we can possibly avoid that and find a way to come off rigid fundstargeting, I think that would be the ultimate solution to thisproblem. And even though de facto on a day-by-day basis I think weare targeting the funds rate, in the longer-term sense I'm not surethat's right. I would say that in the recent periods we probably didmore monetary aggregates targeting in a sense than funds ratetargeting, although operationally we were using the funds rate as thetarget. Considering all of that, it strikes me, frankly, that the[staff] committee has come out almost Solomon-like if that's evenconceivable in this kind of situation. Does anyone else havecomments?MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I agree completely with your pointabout federal funds targeting. I've felt for a long time that weneeded to find something else, preferably some kind of reservemeasure, but that's not all that easy with a lot of the parts of M2-2-3/26/91not reserveable and with the proclivity of the financial markets forinnovating if we did slap reserve requirements on those. But I thinkwe need to move in that direction, and we probably need a little moreconsultation than we've had. The problem I had with the memo was thatI didn't think the authors necessarily were suggesting moreconsultation. I think you've been unusually good in calling ustogether, but there have been one or two instances when I wished wehad gotten together and we didn't--the change in the discount rateright before the last Federal Open Market Committee meeting, forexample. One of my colleagues called and said: "You know, you'vejust been disenfranchised on your vote." Well, I happened to agreewith that move; we were one of the Reserve Banks that had sent in [arequest to lower the discount rate], and I didn't really feeldisenfranchised. But he felt very strongly that that [action] hadprecluded the FOMC from determining the federal funds rate, which hethought was the province of the FOMC. And I can understand thatargument. So, I would opt for slightly more consultation, but I thinkyou've been better than anyone else has ever been in providing that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob.MR. PARRY. Given the current operating procedures, thisrecommendation of enhanced consultation makes a lot of sense. If wewere to do that, I think some of the concerns that several of us feltwould be much allayed.MR. GUFFEY. I guess I don't know what the term "enhancedconsultation" really means. I don't want to define it and put it instone, but it has the right ring to it in the sense that I don't thinkthe discount rate should dominate open market activities in theintermeeting period or vice-versa necessarily. And as a result, itdoes require some discussion and more frequent discussions; butwhether or not this [enhanced consultation suggestion] implies thatisn't clear to me. I happen to agree with Bob Black's comment withrespect to the further action taken before the last FOMC meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Lee.MR. HOSKINS. I'm not sure what "enhanced consultation"means. I don't know if it means we're going to take a vote morefrequently. I think the issue here clearly focused on whether or notthe FOMC as a body had in some sense authorized the extent of themoves that occurred. And that was in conflict, I think, with theBoard's view of what the discount rate function was. I find thestatements somewhat ambiguous, particularly when I read the last pageon the legal section which states clearly--at least it does to me--that the authority for monetary policy actions at least with respectto this group is with the FOMC. That's the way I read the conclusionon page 9. And that seems somewhat inconsistent with what you'resuggesting. Maybe Virgil has a comment on that.MR. KOHN. I would only comment that it wasn't clear to usand we deliberately did not attempt to specify exactly what openmarket operations meant. This goes back to the ambiguities as to whatthe directive really [unintelligible]. It was clear, I think, from1979 to 1987 when open market operations were aimed at borrowedreserve and nonborrowed reserve targets. Now, it's less clear. So,3/26/91the legal appendix didn't really help much--it didn't help me anyhow--in a policy sense of deciding what ought to happen.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. My first reaction is that in the period from1984 to the present things seem to have worked rather well in terms ofthe balance that's there. Now, that's [using] the assumption that Ihave, which gives the FOMC certainly decided power. If the FOMC usesa borrowing or reserve target of any kind, it in effect causes certainpressures [in reserve markets], and that makes the funds rate move insuch and such a way in relation to the discount rate. I don't seeanything inconsistent with the FOMC deciding that they would like thefunds rate to be approximately 50 or 75 or 100 or whatever basispoints above the discount rate. In that scenario, if the Board withthe advice of the Reserve Banks changes the discount rate, the FOMCstill has the last word in the sense that they could choose to make anadjustment of the spread between the discount rate and the fed fundsrate. So, it seems to me that in switching from reserve targeting tofed funds targeting, the fed funds targeting could be seen astargeting that [spread or] cushion of the fed funds rate above thediscount rate. And I don't see why that infers such new territory.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, as you indicated earlier,we have two statutory provisions that on the surface at least do seemto be in conflict. But I think it would be a big mistake for us toget too bogged down in jurisdictional questions here. After all, boththe Board through its [oversight] of the discount rate operation andthe Federal Open Market Committee [have] the same objective, and that[requires] a unified monetary policy. But having said that, weobviously need to preserve our own prerogatives in these areas. Ithink what is needed here, since these statutory provisions as I readthem are somewhat in conflict, is to have a bridge between the two.And that's exactly what [the staff report] suggested with this[enhanced] consultation. I think that really is the way to get at it,and I would urge us to have more frequent consultations. But we oughtnot to get too bogged down in the rights of the Board versus therights of the Committee. I think that's counterproductive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Tom Melzer.MR. MELZER. I would agree with what Bob Forrestal said aboutgetting too technical here; I think it could be a problem. Where Iwould come out, because I have sympathy for what Lee said on the legalside, is that if a discount rate action causes a change in theinstructions that the FOMC has given to the Desk, in a very simple-minded fashion it's hard for me in a very technical sense to let thathappen without consultation. As a practical matter we are on a fedfunds targeting regime now. We have chosen not to say that to theworld. I think it's bad public relations, basically, to say that thatis what we are doing, and I think it's right not to; but internally weall recognize that that's what we are doing. Those circumstances callfor greater consultation, not less. So, I have some of the problemsthat were expressed earlier by Bob Black and Roger Guffey aboutexactly what this language means because it seems to define verylittle. I really don't think we could define a specific rule; but in3/26/91the circumstances we're operating in right now it argues for erring onthe side of more consultation, not less, when in effect we're changingthe instructions to the Desk.The other observation I would make, Don, is that I don't knowhow to interpret the historical evidence but, as I look back at acouple of situations that I happen to remember quite well, generallyall we've done is to relate discount rate changes to fed fundschanges; no one has ever looked at whether or not consultation tookplace. But I can remember in a strict borrowings regime--for example,in July and August of '86--there were discount rate changes thatshowed through to the funds rate and there was consultation with theFOMC. The FOMC basically acted at its meeting to ease policy andrecognized that that might be effected through a discount rate change.I'm not saying it's possible to get it nor that it would necessarilyclarify things all that much, but the evidence that we have is in somesense not the right evidence.MR. KOHN. I think there were instances in the middle '80speriod when it went both ways. Norm and I looked in the record beforethe last FOMC meeting and found at least one meeting in which theBoard had acted right before an FOMC meeting and then another meetingseveral months later during which the FOMC members had a discussionsuch as the one at last December's meeting. So, it went both ways.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ed Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think the people who did the paper did apretty good job. We should not be too technical in how we divide thisup, and I think if we err, we ought to err on the side of morecommunication. Just in the last few months we've seen [a case], atthe last FOMC meeting, where the discount rate came down just beforethe meeting. That clearly is going to rub some people the wrong way,although in the meeting before that the FOMC essentially precludedwhat the Board needed to do.MR. ANGELL. That's right.MR. BOEHNE. And the Board had to change the discount ratethat day or the day after--I've forgotten how it worked. I thinkwe're just going to find ourselves in these kinds of situations, andthe way to minimize the unhappiness that shows up from time to time isto err on the side of talking rather than not talking.MR. MELZER. One thought I meant to mention is that there's alot of potential value added in terms of conveying any technicalitiesof interest to one group versus another. I think there is a potentialfor a higher quality decision, even though it may be more difficult toget, just through the consultative process.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think that's actually what hasworked in the past.MR. SYRON. I think enough has been said about this and Iagree with the gist of what has been said about more communication. Ihave what may be a more technical question on this issue: Just howdoes having what may be close to, or effectively considered to be, apenalty rate by many people affect the implementation of policy by3/26/91Peter Sternlight? I know we've had some discussion and I'm notdirectly addressing what has happened, but I'm wondering as we proceedif it's worth at some point having someone crank out something on howmuch of an issue or concern this is for the Desk--i.e. therelationship between the funds rate and the discount rate when we'rein a period such as we're in now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Peter has obviously confronted thatissue in some detail. Maybe it wouldn't be a bad idea to put downwhat you said orally in a short memo and circulate it. I think it'san interesting issue how the Desk--MR. SYRON. Well, just in my own thinking about it, I wouldfind that helpful.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. Can you and Don put togethersomething like that, Peter?MR. STERNLIGHT. Sure.MR. SYRON. I was thinking that as we go forward thisprobably won't be an issue; but if it comes up again, it would behelpful to know.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It raises an issue that Wayne Angell,who now has the floor, has raised at some length.MR. ANGELL. I'm responding to Tom Melzer's comment because Ithink Tom is right at the heart of it. I turn to the operationalparagraph. Now, maybe the operational paragraph is not accurate inregard to what we're doing. But if it is not accurate, maybe we oughtto change it. The operational paragraph says the Committee seekseither to maintain or to decrease [or increase] the existing degree ofpressure on reserve positions. That's what we say the FOMC is doing.And if we do that, we then are determining more or less the gapbetween the discount rate and the fed funds rate rather than the levelof the fed funds rate. Now, if the FOMC is determining the level ofthe fed funds rate, the operational paragraph doesn't say that.Frankly, I like the operational paragraph as it is. I think we canmake it work well that way. But if that's what it is, then the FOMCis not in a sense determining the fed funds rate; it's determining thepressure.MR. BOEHNE. Of course, those words are more like what wewould wish the case to be rather than what it is. [Laughter]MR. ANGELL. The thing about the discount rate, which doesn'thave any notion of the Board of Governor's or the FOMC's posturethat's so important [unintelligible]. We really have two policytools. One of them is a more subtle one. That is, the open marketoperations can be more subtle and can have no announcement effect ifwe're not pegging the fed funds rate. And I think all of us wouldprefer to have one tool that was subtle and not announced. The othertool is an announcement tool. And it has never made much sense to meto hit the gong, to make the announcement, and to say nothing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anybody else have anything to add?3/26/91VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just a quick comment. My basic viewon this was captured very well by what Ed Boehne and Bob Forrestalsaid. I have just one added thought in the context of this enhancedconsultation process, whatever it means, that I think we all have tobe sensitive to. And that is that within the framework of a so-calledenhanced consultation we have to be mindful that that process couldbecome counterproductive if it deteriorated into people insisting upona formal vote of the FOMC every time there was a consultation. Ithink we all have to have an open and flexible mind on that because ifit degenerated into a process--which I don't think it will--where weended up with frequent recorded votes in intermeeting intervals, Ithink that would be potentially damaging and at the extreme couldproduce an inertia problem with the monetary policy process itself.So, at least from my perspective, the spirit of what Ed and Bobparticularly said captures it very well. I do think we have to bemindful that within the process of enhanced consultation that sameneed for flexibility will be there.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anything further? If not, let's see ifwe can implement in some way the inclinations that have been expressedhere both in the memorandum and by various members of the Committee.And we'll look back after a while and see whether or not we're doingit right; and if not, we'll recalibrate it again until we feelcomfortable. I thought the [task force] report did help us in thisparticular area; let's see if we can benefit from it. Let's go now tothe regular formal agenda and start off with Sam Cross. Sam.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Cross? Lee.MR. HOSKINS. Sam, you were in on both sides of the market,buying and selling. Is there some intent to re-establish or confirmtarget zones by the G-7?MR. CROSS. No, I think it's more just an indication of theevents of this period. Certain parts of the Treasury had at timesshown a keen interest in trying to get some G-7 interest in somethingapproaching [that], but I wouldn't say target zones. But there hasbeen a considerable reluctance on the part of the other G-7 members todo this. I think the intervention that we saw in this period wasreally not so much a concern about the specific level that the dollarhad reached as it was the fact that the dollar had moved up very, veryrapidly--by about 16 percent in a few weeks. At times the marketswere really quite disorderly. Last Thursday there was a movement ofsix pfennigs in one day. And the markets were very unsettled at timesalso in response to the proposals, specifically by the Germans, toparticipate in some coordinated intervention because of their concernsabout the threats on the mark.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions for Sam? If not, wouldsomebody like to move to ratify the transactions?MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I would move without enthusiasm.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So recognized. Is there a second?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I second.3/26/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Sam, do you want togo forward?MR. CROSS. Well, Mr. Chairman, to move to another subject:Questions have been raised about the level of U.S. foreign exchangebalances and whether it would be appropriate to take some moves toreduce those balances. I would like a few minutes to discuss thismatter with the Committee, if I might. The U.S. authorities combined--that is, the Federal Reserve and the ESF--now hold marks with amarket value of about $30 billion and yen with a market value of about$18 billion.Let me mention some of the pros and cons of having thesebalances. First, on the positive side, looking at it from theperspective of where I sit, there certainly are some distinctadvantages of our owning for the first time ever substantial currencyreserves. Without having to belabor the obvious, not having to dependon the Bundesbank and other foreign central banks for all ourfinancing at times of need gives us a great deal of independence aswell as more of what I would call policy flexibility to deal with anyexchange market flare-up, without necessarily having to change some ofour policies at a time when that might not be wise or appropriate.Also, I would say that's one reason we got through the heavy downwardpressures on the dollar that we faced in February that I justdescribed--and got through it really with relatively little pain andanxiety compared with previous problems of that sort. A lot of thathad to do with the fact that we have more credibility and more marketconfidence because we do hold substantial balances. The market isaware that we hold them and that we are able to take action if we wantto. I think that did help to keep the dollar's decline from gettingout of hand at a time when our currency was at all time lows. Also, Ishould say that our currency balances, which are certainly far higherthan ever before, if compared to international standards in othercountries don't really show as a high currency reserve currently.On the negative side, our reserve holdings do entail exposureto the exchange rate risk. At present the ESF and the Federal Reservecombined have a cumulative net profit--that's the difference betweenthe present market value of our currency holdings and the acquisitionvalue--on our currency balances of around $4 to $4-1/2 billion ofwhich the Federal Reserve share of the profit amounts to about $3.2billion. Of course, we regularly mark-to-market on these balances,and these translation gains have already been reflected in our balancesheet. This means that the Federal Reserve's share of the profitshave been used when they were accumulated to increase the level ofFederal Reserve profits that we hand over to the Treasury.Accordingly, if the exchange rate moves up from this point, the levelof those cumulative profits declines. Only if the dollar goes downdoes this [backtrack] the other way. And if the dollar goes up, thatreduces the Federal Reserve profits going to the Treasury. There's aconcern that this exchange rate exposure and the possibility of thesetranslation losses could lead to public and Congressional criticism.There is no real loss in terms of the interest these days. Ourinterest rates are presently below those of both Germany and Japan;[so that goes] the other way.If there were a need to cut back on our currency balances, itseems to me it's important that we have a clear and well understood3/26/91rationale for the action. Of course, we could reduce them by moreactive intervention operations and that's perfectly understandable.But if we simply adopted a conscious policy of getting rid of asubstantial part of our reserves, it seems to me that that could beseen by the market and by foreign officials and by the general publicas a move by the United States toward withdrawal of its role ininternational responsibilities and its role in helping to maintain thestability and smooth functioning of the [international financial]system. One possible rationale for selling reserves other thanthrough our intervention operations is to unwind some more of thewarehousing. Last year we did succeed in selling off a substantialamount of foreign currency balances as part of the unwinding of thewarehousing arrangements with the Treasury. We sold some both off-market and on-market and we explained it publicly after the fact.That did not cause problems and was accepted as a reasonable andunderstandable action to reduce the warehousing; it is generallyagreed that drawings under the warehousing are not to supposed to bepermanently outstanding.Another possibility would be to adopt an approach of sellingthe earnings on our reserve holdings from time to time as we have theopportunity and putting those out into the market or elsewhere asconditions permit. Other nations sometimes follow approaches not toodifferent from that. For example, the Germans accumulate their troopdollars in this manner and then feed them off; they may keep them fora considerable period and then feed them off into the market even whenit seems desirable to do so or when conditions are favorable forabsorbing them without market disruption. Similarly, we might lookfor opportunities to make sales to other central banks whose reserveneeds might be complementary to our own. So, an approach of somesales along these lines for reducing the warehousing or for disposingof some of the earnings would provide some considerable scope forflexibility in disposing of some of the balances. However, at themoment, I should say that the prospects for such sales are not veryencouraging. With the dollar strengthening very sharply, neither theGermans nor the Japanese would like to see us putting more mark or yenbalances into the market under present conditions. Also, theBundesbank has just paid a substantial amount of its dollar reservesto us for its Desert Shield contribution and that, as well as theintervention, reduced their dollar reserves. And the Bank of Japanhas just paid us a little under $6 billion in dollars as we convertedthe yen that they have contributed for the Desert Shield operation.In light of these circumstances, I would suspect that neither of thosecentral banks is likely to be interested in either further off-marketexchanges right away or market [sales]. But over time we could thinkof ways to utilize some of these currencies along these lines and waysto provide us some more flexibility if that is the Committee's wish.Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Cross? PresidentBoehne.MR. BOEHNE. If this warehousing arrangement with theTreasury were unwound, how much would that reduce total U.S. balances?MR. CROSS. The Treasury's present warehousing is $4-1/2billion. I think they would not be happy to reduce it totally, but we3/26/91did reduce it by a considerable amount last year, and I think somefurther reduction would certainly be possible.MR. BOEHNE. Assuming for the moment that we want to be amajor player in the foreign exchange market and have enough ammunitionto play those type of wars, what [amount] of reserves do we need tohave a credible balance? Setting aside the amount we have now, if youwere starting out as a strategist, what amounts do you think we wouldhave to hold to get respect from the market?MR. CROSS. Well, it's very difficult to be at all precise inthis.MR. BOEHNE. You don't have to be precise.MR. CROSS. Even in interest it's hard to say how much--MR. BOEHNE. $50 billion, $20 billion, $100 billion?MR. CROSS. Well, I really do think it's difficult to set aspecific target level. It seems to me that the reserves that we haveaccumulated as a consequence of what we've done and not done--. Oneof the problems is that it's very difficult to say we don't need $48billion, we need $42 billion or $55 billion. It's very hard tojustify that kind of decision, it seems to me.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think Ed is raising a questioninvolving three choices: $20, $50 or $100 billion.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Right.MR. CROSS. $50 billion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins is first.MR. MULLINS. I guess Ed was getting at what I wanted to askwhich is not the number but: What conceptual basis is there fordetermining an appropriate balance? Could we start with that and thenthink about what that means in terms of numbers?MR. CROSS. Well, as I say it's very difficult to know thekind of reserve needs we may have because we don't know whatcircumstances we're going to face. The fact that we have them in asense makes it less necessary to use them. So, to impress the marketand to impress the rest of the world, it seems to me we need asubstantial level--along the lines of what we have. Our reserves arenot high relative to, say, those of Germany or Japan or even Taiwan,which of course has the highest in the world. By most internationalstandards we do not have a level of reserves that shows us to beexcessively endowed by these kinds of comparisons. You can argue howmuch the United States should have, given its position, whether that'smore or less. But it seems to me that the United States should be upwith the big players, as it were, and that we should have amounts thatdon't look quite small relative to what other major countries have.MR. MULLINS. It does seem to me that we're kind of at seaunless we can think a little more precisely about the conceptualbasis.-10-3/26/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If I may just piggyback, it's not thatwe have in the past always had to go to foreign central banks toborrow currencies for intervention. We did, remember, have a periodwhen we actually went out and sold Swiss [franc and] deutschemarkdenominated Treasury securities to raise those funds in the markets.MR. CROSS. That's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We do have alternative means ofaccumulating currencies should we need them. It's not only the level[of our foreign currency holdings that matters] but our standbyoptions [to acquire more] to meet alternative rather than prespecifiedrequirements. In other words, it's not an issue of just havinginventories of some physical commodity which when they get to zero itmeans something. It doesn't mean that much in foreign currencies, ifwe have a realistic capability of borrowing fairly substantialquantities in open markets. And I think that's an issue [relevant] towhat Governor Mullins is raising in terms of the conceptual framework.MR. CROSS. You also need the cooperation in order to borrow,and that's what we obtained the last time. But it takes time and soforth and so on. Obviously, the ability to borrow in the open marketis one potential source.MR. MULLINS. As an aside, how much have we lost over thepast six weeks in value?MR. CROSS. Well, we intervened in the amount of $1.4 billionduring the February period; that's the only intervention.MR. MULLINS. Not intervention. What is the change in marketvalue in the past six weeks?MR. CROSS. Well, I don't have the precise--MR. MULLINS. Is it $5 billion or something like that, wouldyou guess?MR. SIEGMAN. In the past six weeks, on the balances of DMthe United States in total lost approximately $3 billion, notincluding yesterday's appreciation. And on the yen the United Stateslost close to $1 billion.MR. MULLINS. And we will report that? So, it's the sameorder of magnitude as 3 or 4 big S&Ls?MR. SIEGMAN. But those are unrealized [losses].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. I'm not clear about what the point is. Are youseeking advice on what to do with this stuff?MR. CROSS. Well,--MR. HOSKINS. I'll repeat where we started, or at least whereI started in late '87 and early '88: The discussion around the tableat that time, as I recall it, was that there was some sense of-11-3/26/91agreement in some parts of this body that in large open economiessterilized intervention does not impact exchange rates over time andthat, therefore, intervention is nothing but churning and noise to themarket and it can interfere with our policy efforts. At that time theargument was--and I think it was an appropriate argument--that weought to have some [foreign currency balances] at least forcooperation purposes, to show the flag and to be part of this process.But then we were talking about less than $10 billion. If I remembercorrectly, that limit moved up and there was a dissent at $12 billion;then it went to $15 billion. And now we have backed ourselves into asituation here where we're turning this accumulation into a rationale.There was no rationale; we just did it. And for a body that has someconcern about Congress and its inspection of the Federal Reserve andits willingness perhaps to change the Federal Reserve Act it seems tome that we're in a bad situation if we continue to run these kinds ofpotential losses plus the warehousing. I think that's a potentialproblem for us as well. So, if you're looking for recommendations, Iwould bring [our holdings] back down to some level where we can showthe flag and be part of the process but where we don't exposeourselves to the other kinds of political difficulties.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Sam, what was the maximum dollar guide on theseholdings before we began to pull back on the Exchange StabilizationFund? What was the maximum you said we--MR. CROSS. $15 billion. Do you mean the amount of thewarehousing?MR. ANGELL. No, what was the maximum market value of thetotal Federal Reserve and Treasury holdings of deutschemarks and yen?MR. CROSS. Probably $53 billion; I don't have the precisenumber, but I would say around $53 billion.MR. ANGELL. All right. So, if you want to be able to buyand sell--you feel some handicap in regard to being that close--do yousee the $53 billion as kind of a ceiling?MR. CROSS. Well, I don't see that $53 billion particularlyas a ceiling or anything else. I don't see any need for us tocontinue to accumulate [foreign currency] reserves, if that's yourquestion.MR. ANGELL. Let me put the question another way. Let'ssuppose in the process of officially determining the U.S. foreignexchange position that there is more of a tendency to want tointervene when the dollar is strong than there is to intervene whenthe dollar is weak. Let's suppose we had that kind of postureofficially. What would tend to happen to the size of your fund overtime if you're operating in that circumstance?MR. CROSS. Well, you've asked a rhetorical question. But itseems to me the question is whether you agree with the approach on theintervention, not the question of what is the level of reserves.-12-3/26/91MR. ANGELL. No, I'm asking what would happen to the size; Ithink you know the answer, Sam. What would happen to the size of thefund?MR. CROSS. If we always intervened when the dollar rose andnever intervened when the dollar fell, our reserves would accumulate.MR. ANGELL. They would accumulate. Now, some of us are notquite as purist as Lee is on the intervention issue, although I dounderstand Lee's position. But if we get ourselves in thecircumstance where we are selling yen and deutschemarks when thedollar is weak and is very low by any measure of purchasing parityestimations, no matter how bad they are, then how in the world are wegoing to get the size of the fund down so that when the mark gets to200 or 220--? I presume you're going to want to be buyingdeutschemarks then. Is that the general assumption?MR. CROSS. You're not getting any assumption from me. WhatI was talking about was the possibility, if the Committee has thedesire, of looking for occasions to feed out some of these currenciesas we did last year. We could look for opportunities to put them outin ways that don't have an exchange rate effect--just sell off a fewand announce that the only [reason] that we are [selling] is to helpbring down the warehousing or that we have an approach of disposing ofsome of the earnings from time to time. That was the concept I was--MR. ANGELL. Well, Sam, I guess I'm really asking you: Doyou think it's possible or do you know of a way that we can bring morebalance to the game in terms of [as much] enthusiasm for buyingdollars as we have for selling dollars?MR. CROSS. Well, I do think that's more a question of theapproach to intervention than of reserve determination.MR. ANGELL. I think I know Sam's answer to these questions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, for starters I'd say that I amnot inherently troubled at all by the fact that the Federal Reserveeither on its own or in collaboration with the Treasury has foreigncurrency balances; that doesn't bother me at all. The only pointwhere that would bother me inherently would be if the mere fact orsize of those holdings in and of themselves tended to undercut therole of the dollar as the world reserve currency. That I would havean inherent problem with. And I don't think that condition is withinsight. Now, that's kind of my breaking point. But having said that,the question comes up: What is reasonable and what is unreasonable?I don't know the answer, either. But I do think we should keep inmind that as recently as 1977 or 1978--I forget which year--when theperception was that the United States was going in the tank, theUnited States government, including the Federal Reserve, found itnecessary to approach the world at large, hat in hand, and establishwhat was then a $30 billion war chest. To be sure, a lot of that warchest was smoke and mirrors and some of it was subsequently financedas you pointed out through the so-called Carter bonds. But the Carterbonds were hardly a great victory from the point of view of the United-13-3/26/91States either in political or in economic terms. So, I think there isa lot to be said for the war chest theory.In terms of the size issue, the fact of the matter is that inthe late 1970s when the world was a lot smaller than it is today whatwas thought to be a reasonable war chest--again recognizing that a lotof it was smoke and mirrors--was a fairly substantial amount. That[leads] me, as does the point that Sam made about the currencyholdings of other central banks, to the view that in rough orders ofmagnitude the balances we hold right now don't seem unreasonable. Interms of the question of whether they should go up or go down, myinstinct is that if they stay roughly the same or maybe even go down alittle, that's fine so long as the reasons why they are going down arecredible. And here I must say that I worry a bit about undue--and Iwant to emphasize that "undue"--preoccupation with net losses and netprofits. I don't hear anybody asking Mr. Sternlight how much money helost for us in the past six weeks when the long bond went down 5 or 6points in price or whatever it was.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a good question, Peter!SPEAKER(?). Why didn't you sell those bonds before they lostvalue?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I suspect though, Peter, that theamount was not inconsequential in the time-frame of the past 5 or 6weeks. So, I think we have to be a little careful about latching onto the star of profitability because--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is a difference, Jerry. U.S.government consolidated purchases that the Federal Reserve--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, the precedent in my judgmentis not inconsequential. I understand your point and that's why Ididn't want to overstate the argument. [As I] say, I think we have tobe careful about making a public argument for disposing of balancessimply on the basis of trying to maximize profits or minimize losses.I think that would be a mistake. On the other hand, if the specificsuggestion is something along the lines of what Sam said--and as Iheard Sam he was saying two things--one is that in a orderly way maybewe can try to wind down the warehousing and two is that maybe we oughtto have in mind trying to work off the earnings. I wouldn't be wildlyallergic at all to something along those lines because I think hecould make a fairly coherent statement, including to our colleaguesabroad, as to what we're doing and why we're doing it. But at the endof the day--I think Lee Hoskins touched on this--what is very, veryimportant here is that whatever we do and however we do it, it shouldnot be allowed to be construed by anybody as even carrying theremotest threat that the Federal Reserve or the United States iscopping out in terms of international relationships, particularly thekinds of not very aggressive but nevertheless cooperative interventionthat we've seen in the past six weeks, for example. I'm not at alltroubled that we [were] on both sides of the market within a six-weektime-frame. In the first case it was in a context in which a numberof us were worried that the dollar was about to fall out of bed.Whether you agree with that or not, we did look to our friends abroadfor a little help and they gave it. And it doesn't seem to me at allcredible for us to say "The hell with you" six weeks later when we got-14-3/26/91this unbelievably dramatic change in psychology and they turned to usand asked if we were willing to help out a little, even if it'ssymbolic. I just don't see that as viable. So, I would be carefulhere. But if I understood what Sam was saying in operational terms, Icertainly wouldn't have any problem with the thrust of his suggestion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Roger.MR. GUFFEY. To raise an old technical question maybe, giventhat we neatly divide the holdings between the Treasury and theFederal Reserve: Do we have sole authority to determine the foreigncurrency holdings of the Federal Reserve System or is this a nationalpolicy that must be coordinated with the Administration? Where do westand? Can we just sell off $24 billion of mark and yen and forget itif we want to?MR. CROSS. Are you asking in the legal sense or the policysense?MR. GUFFEY. How does that [differ]?MR. CROSS. Legally, it is set by the Committee. We have alimit of $25 billion in exposure, which is the maximum that we can--MR. GUFFEY. Well, let me put it another way: Can we selloff $48 billion, which is the Treasury's holdings as well as our own?MR. CROSS. No, the Treasury's holdings are part of the ESFand subject to the determination of the Secretary of the Treasury.MR. GUFFEY. If we were to choose to sell off $5 billion ofour own, how do you maintain the 50/50 split between the two?MR. CROSS. Well, we and the Treasury have a different amountof [foreign currency] reserves at the present time. We have a higherlevel of reserves partly because of the warehousing. But evenexcluding the warehousing we have--do you have the number, Charlie?MR. SIEGMAN. We have $26.5 billion and they have $22billion.MR. CROSS. We have about $26 billion and they have about $22billion. So, there are some differences. But, as you know, thepolicy has been for a long time to try to pursue these things togetherand to work jointly. And almost all of our intervention has beenfinanced that way. Certainly, the Treasury is very happy with thatarrangement and would be very concerned if there were a proposal to gooff on a different track.MR. SIEGMAN. Although on intervention policy the Treasuryhas the mandated authority--MR. GUFFEY. Yes.MR. SIEGMAN. --and we have to consult and work inconjunction with them.-15-3/26/91MR. CROSS. On the intervention the Treasury has a strongerhand.MR. GUFFEY. Well, the answer to my question then is that ifwe decided to reduce our Federal Reserve holdings of foreigncurrencies, this Committee could do that and you could effect it.MR. CROSS. The Committee has the legal authority to set themaximum holdings that we have.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But as a practical matter, Roger, ifthe Committee were of a mind to sell $5 billion equivalent of D-markstomorrow morning, I think we would have to consult with the Treasury;indeed, I think we would feel an obligation to consult with theBundesbank as well.MR. CROSS. Well, it would be inconceivable that we would doany such action without working with the Treasury. But also we wouldnot just be selling off other countries' currencies without working itout with them. When we did the $2 billion last year we did work itout with the German authorities so that it could be done in a way thatdidn't cause problems for them and their markets. But we're now in adifferent market situation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. On the point of the rationale for these thingsthat Lee mentioned, it seems ironic that the world's primary reservecurrency country might be trying to measure its own internationalclout in terms of its holdings of foreign countries' currencies. Itjust seems a bit inconsistent and ironic.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. David Mullins asked my question.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. As a practical matter, I think we around thistable are going to find that we have to intervene from time to time,and that means we need a war chest. And it would be best if we couldarrive at some rough amount that we feel comfortable with,intellectually or conceptually. But we aren't getting very far inthat direction, and perhaps we won't. If your brain doesn't lead yousomewhere, then you've got to go with your gut feeling. My gut tellsme that we ought to unwind this warehousing arrangement as best wecan. I think $48 billion is on the high side and my sense tells methat we ought to look for some opportunities to lower that number. Idon't know how far we ought to lower it but a lower number would makeme feel more comfortable; I doubt if we need $48 billion. So, in theabsence of some conceptual framework, if Sam is looking for advice, Iwould say: Talk to the Treasury and reduce the warehousing and takeadvantage of some opportunities to reduce the $48 billion in otherways.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.-16-3/26/91MR. MELZER. I'm going to overlap a little with Ed and agreewith David. When we started off a couple of years ago, in thebeginning the idea of that foreign exchange study was to see whetherwe could develop some rationale. It turned out to be very effectivebecause I think the weight of that effort slowed down in a broad sensethe propensity of the Treasury to intervene, but we never answered thethreshold question. I'm not sure there is any answer in a numbersense but conceptually there's probably an answer. And I think wehave to be prepared with that because there's the potential for someheat here and with good reason.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we'll get hearings on this.MR. MELZER. Longer term, I think we need to pursue that;there are some international financial considerations that the peoplewho are going to be taking the shots at the profit and loss statementdon't really appreciate. So, I think we can do an educational job andwe have to be ready to do that well. Longer term, I suspect theproblem is that most of us feel that sterilized intervention doesn'treally do any good and yet we're caught in a sort of internationalalliance in which some of our counterparts do. So, in order to playin that game, we do something that we don't fundamentally believe in.We're not going to answer that today but I don't know what thedynamics are that perhaps ultimately will lead to more sensiblecombined behavior in that regard internationally. As a practicalmatter I agree that we have to play the game. We can't just say thatwe think this is stupid, that it doesn't work, and we're not going todo it. Maybe over time there are efforts we can make to lead theworld to perhaps a more sensible approach on this. Maybe that'sidealistic; I don't know.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me ask Sam a question, which in asense comes out of this discussion. Your argument for a war chest andsome of the concern on the negative side is the associated price risksince the interest rate risk--or I should say the interest income islevel. Is there not any mechanism by which we can create swaps or RPsor something of that nature in which essentially we have fixed theexchange rate of our holdings? Is there a way in a sense to have a[unintelligible] put back to the originator of a currency so that, forexample, at this particular stage we would have a deal with theBundesbank where we would match certain parts of their dollar holdingsand an equivalent part of our DM holdings and agree that that is aswap at a fixed price and eliminate exchange rate fluctuations, whichaffect--MR. CROSS. I'm not sure I understand. We could obviously--and we have done so--enter into exchanges with the Germans and othersto give them back a portion of their currency and receive back aportion of our currency. The kind of facility you're talking about,if I understand it, sounds like what the swap was originally intendedto do.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the only difference is that thecurrency moves after the agreement. What I'm asking is: Can we movethe currency retrospectively in a sense or agree at this stage that--?I'll give you a specific case. We basically are saying that the $10billion deutschemarks and the equivalent of yesterday's exchange rate-17-3/26/91in dollars held by the Bundesbank are presumed to have been fixed-price swaps which we will at some point unwind at that exchange rate.It gives us the cushion but it doesn't give us the exchange risk.MR. ANGELL. You could have an exchange of puts. In effect,you could swap puts and thereby assume that somebody would ultimatelywant to exercise that added advantage. And that would effectivelyaccomplish what you want to accomplish.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There are lots of ways of doing that.MR. CROSS. It sounds like a forward exchange transaction.I'll be happy to try to think and see if there--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the point at issue is that it's a[forward] exchange transaction that has a date on it.MR. CROSS. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And effectively that gets factored intothe market and neutralizes your position. What I'm thinking of--and Ijust thought of it this moment, so there might be plenty of reasonswhy not--is an open-ended fixed-price mutual put, to put it in theterms that Governor Angell stipulated, so that we can eliminate partof the problem that is on the negative side of the current--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It can at least take off the tail, Isuspect.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. CROSS. We'll try to think that one through.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. In the interim, unless Imisheard, at a minimum there is support here for trying to edge thestock of foreign currencies down either by unwinding some of thewarehousing and/or selling interest receipts into the market if thatis at all feasible. In today's environment I'm not sure how much wecould do of that, but clearly something is going to show up. Icertainly didn't hear anyone here support a significant increase; weare pretty much biased in the other direction.MR. BLACK. I think there probably would be a preference forunwinding the warehousing first, too, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible] warehousing becausethat implied an issue for opening up [talks] with the Treasury, whichwe have to do. And I think we are in the process of discussing that.Hopefully we may succeed.MR. BLACK. We might be able to couple that with oppositionto letting the FDIC borrow $25 million from us and get a credit--MR. HOSKINS. That's an idea. We'll give them thedeutschemarks!SPEAKERS(?). Good idea!-18-3/26/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Give deutschemarks to the FDIC?MR. BLACK. That wasn't really what I had in mind, but that'san interesting fallout.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If that doesn't get somebody'sattention!MR. BLACK. I bet it would too. I was just thinking aboutthe monetary policy accord in the early '50s. We need a credit accordtoo, where they don't try to dictate the composition of our assets,which is what the FDIC maneuver does and what this warehousing does.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, we will be discussing this.MR. BLACK. Yes, I didn't mean to get ahead of you.MR. MELZER. I was just going to ask how you wouldcharacterize the conversations with the Treasury on reducing thewarehousing so far. Have we been pushing hard on them and have theybeen reluctantly going along or are they going to sit there and say:"Why didn't you tell us to sell this stuff?" How have thosecommunications gone?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't you go ahead, Sam.MR. CROSS. Well, I think the Treasury is sympathetic to somereduction but they are not talking about getting rid of the wholewarehousing amount or anything like that. This hasn't gone throughall their [decisionmaking] processes but the discussions that havetaken place so far indicate some willingness, certainly, to considersome decline in the warehousing; but they're not talking about thewhole amount.MR. MELZER. And have we had to push them hard to peel offwhat has been sold already?MR. CROSS. Well, I'm not sure I understand. We could--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The answer is "no," Tommy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. There's one slight addendum to this discussion:We have a reserve holding that costs us more money than what isreasonably in prospect to happen on foreign exchange rates and that isthat we really are not a small reserve holding currency country. Ithink we actually have official reserves of $85 billion, Sam, comparedto Taiwan's $75 billion. And if you mark our gold to the $358 price,we end up with something like $170 billion. There are opportunitycosts because we don't get interest on that gold as we do on ourforeign exchange [holdings]. That cost is out there also. I wouldhesitate for us to have foreign currency holdings that have swap putsthat just sit there, [which] is now becoming the case for our gold.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Charlie.-19-3/26/91MR. SIEGMAN. I just want to bring to your attention also, asyou may have heard, that Congressman Gonzalez has raised all kinds ofconcerns about the ESF and Federal Reserve holdings. He is proposingfueling that in a Congressional setting--tying all the accounts to theIMF legislation and other sorts of problems here. It's very much onhis mind and his staff is making noises to that effect. So, it's notan academic issue of what happens to our balances; it has some otherpolitical dimensions.May I just have one other word about the discussion? Theproblem is that the level of the balances and disposal of the balancesare two separate items. As we just discovered, even when we agree wehave too much, it is very difficult to sell except at a time when thedollar is under very severe downward pressure. If the pressure is inthe other direction, upward, the other side is very concerned and thetiming is not right or, as currently, we have other financing problemsin other countries. So, the problem of the disposal is as difficultas the issue of the level. The other point that I think deserves atleast to be mentioned is that there's always room for replenishment.It's a two-way situation. If one does dispose of a certain amount andfeels one needs more, when the market situation is right there is achance through intervention to acquire additional holdings.One final comment with regard to the method of sales andwhether it's off-market or on-market: On-market sales are equivalentto intervention in the broader scheme of things. If you do affect themarket at all, within a certain time it could be neutralized; whatevereffect it has is the same. But when you have off-market sales thetiming has something to do with the interpretation of whether you havea target for your rate. And you do influence your co-central bankersof whether you're trying to protect a rate and not have it go higheror lower. And that again complicates the matter of disposal.MR. SYRON. One minor point though, Charlie. I understandwhat you're saying and it's relevant to something Governor Angell andalso the Chairman said. In a sense over time the natural tendency,then, will be to accumulate more and more reserves. That's thedirection it will go in. So the cost of holding them, presuming wehad a conceptual framework where we model all this, is not completelysymmetric in the sense that at least under current arrangements we canborrow if we need to. Well, apparently we can; I know it's not alwayspossible, [but generally] we can borrow if we need to get [foreigncurrencies] but at this point in time we don't have a mechanism fordisposing of them when they get to a certain level. So, that [leadsme to] a judgment--I realize this isn't precise--that as we proceedour bias should be to sell as these [balances] begin to accumulate,given the difficulty of selling as compared to accumulating.MR. SIEGMAN. Well, as Sam just pointed out, we are in somesense a victim of historical accident. The year when we reallyaccumulated huge amounts--$22 billion--was 1989. Without that thenumbers would look very different, even if you adjusted $22 billion[down to make it comparable] to other years. So, that was the yearthat we probably overbought.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we had a very short windowearlier this year, when we could have done a significant--myimpression was upward of $10 million deutschemarks--off-market swap-20-3/26/91with the Bundesbank. But that window closed very quickly on us as themarkets began to move. What it required was the Treasury to go along,[not] for this body to go it alone. And by the time we got the system[greased] the market had run from us and made the issue moot. Thereare windows, but they're very narrow and I think rare. I did speak toKarl Otto Poehl at the Bundesbank, and he seemed inclined at thatstage. Now at this point I don't know; I don't know what else isgoing on. But there are times when large transactions could be madeif we chose to do them.MR. SYRON. It's not much, but it does seem germane to whatyou said. I think the [view] of the Committee would be that if such awindow should open up in the not too distant future, you wouldn'tnecessarily want to take the time for very extensive [consultation]with the Committee. I would interpret this discussion to mean thatthe Committee would be happy to have that happen.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, [the reason for the delay] wasn'tthis Committee but [the Treasury.] Any further questions?MR. HOSKINS. I just had one. In your earlier report, didyou talk about a swap with Romania that was paid back?MR. CROSS. Yes, by the Treasury.MR. HOSKINS. By Treasury, not--MR. CROSS. It was a Treasury participation in a European BISswap. It was outstanding for about a week.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Peter Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you want to go back and change [yourprepared statement] to make sure that what you have written is now--?MR. STERNLIGHT. [Unintelligible. Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Sternlight? Lee.MR. HOSKINS. Just a question on whether anybody, in terms ofthe market participants, is looking at money. When do you think thatwould be a concern, if it isn't now?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, they certainly had been looking at itand they had noted the concerns that the Chairman and others expressedwhen we were in the period of very slow growth. The close attentionto it seemed to fade as they no longer were looking for slow moneygrowth as a reason to be expecting further easing moves. I wouldn'tsay that I'm hearing any concern about an excessive pace of moneygrowth at this point. What I hear more is along the lines of: "Well,it looks like your M2 measure is getting into the middle of its rangeand isn't that nice."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Si Keehn.-21-3/26/91MR. KEEHN. Peter, with regard to the discount rate: I mustsay I find it a little awkward to have the discount rate and the fedfunds rate at the same level, given our interest in trying toencourage at least the visibility of [the discount window]. If wewere to reduce the discount rate and make an argument that it wasabsolutely just a technical change to reestablish the [alignment with]market [rates], would the market buy it or not?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it would. That thought could be putinto the language [of the press release about] a discount rate changeso that they wouldn't look for any change in the funds rate. On yourfirst point, though: While I realize there are others like yourselfwho have that sense of discomfort, it has not been an impediment toour operations to have the rates right on top of one another. Andeven with respect to the point we make about wanting to see a littlemore use of the discount window, I'm not sure I see it as that much ofa problem because at the times when banks would come in to use thewindow we'd typically be getting some pressure on the funds rate. So,whether it's being lifted from a 6 percent base or a 6-1/4 or 6-1/2percent base, I think there would still be that same incentive to turnto the window rather than pay such funds rates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Peter, would there have been a difference if wehad not sent out the signal that borrowings were sort of okay? Towhat extent is the way we've accommodated to this due to the slightlydifferent signal about borrowing?MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that little signal on borrowingprobably helped to trim some of the volatility that might have[occurred] on a few days in the recent period.MR. ANGELL. Since this has worked in some ways better thansome might have anticipated, what might happen if the Committee atsome point in the future--I'm not suggesting now, but sometime in thefuture--wanted to go 25 or 50 basis points lower on the fed funds rate[than] the discount rate and we had at least this generous an attitudeabout the window? Would that possibly be a workable environment?MR. STERNLIGHT. It might be a little more awkward than whatwe have now. I still think it would be workable; there might perhapsbe a little more volatility in the funds rate, but I'm inclined tothink it would not be impossible.MR. ANGELL. What you're saying then is that if there's somereason the Committee at some point in time wished to do that, youwould not be alarmed about at least seeing what that's like?MR. STERNLIGHT. That's right.MR. MELZER. Wished to do what, Wayne? I didn't understand.MR. STERNLIGHT. Have the funds rate a 1/4 or--MR. ANGELL. I chose not to call it that.-22-3/26/91MR. SYRON. I find this whole issue of where we are on thediscount rate compared to the funds rate very interesting and one thatI don't completely understand in terms of the market's reaction to it.In that regard, Peter, I just wanted to ask: Is there confusion outthere when you read the screens and you see all of these comments thatpeople are making, particularly given the strength of the dollar,about expecting that something might be done on the discount rate justfor alignment purposes? I'm not saying we should change procedureshere, but at some point it would be nice if people knew what we wereintending or not intending by this whole situation. But maybe thereisn't this confusion in the marketplace.MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, as I commented in my remarks, therewere a few days after the move on March 8th when the market perceivedthat funds were going to be trading more likely around 6 percent. Andwith the discount rate at 6 percent, there were some who were thinkingthat we had to do something with the discount rate to have a workablerelationship. But with the passage of time and with some commentsthat had been picked up by the market, I think they became reconciledto the reality that it does seem to be a workable arrangement.MR. KOHN. But, as Peter remarked in his briefing, it's notjust a technical thing. Part of the reaction in the markets was[because] we didn't lower the discount rate and it looked like weweren't intending to do anything again very soon. So, I don't think Iagree entirely with Peter's answer that if we did lower it, themarket's reaction would be entirely neutral. It would be seen asgiving a scope for further easing much as when the Germans raisedtheir [Lombard] rate and made a very loud noise about how it wasn'tgoing to affect their overnight rate and everyone assumed it was goingto affect the overnight rate eventually anyhow. It's very hard tochange [the discount rate] when the spread had been zero, [and have] aneutral effect at this point.MR. SYRON. There's a quite ambiguous statement in theBluebook about a change in the funds rate having--I can't recall theexact words--a pronounced and pretty short-term impact on the exchangerate of the dollar, etc. What's the parallelism between that and thediscount rate?MR. KOHN. Without it showing through or with it showingthrough?MR. SYRON. Without it showing through.MR. KOHN. I think it would have much less of an impact onthe dollar than if an actual cut in the funds rate had accompanied it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions? If not, wouldsomebody like to ratify the actions of the Desk since our lastmeeting?SPEAKER(?). So move.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objections. Mike Prell.-23-3/26/91MR. PRELL. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. SIEGMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. I think we ought to takequestions for these gentlemen and then break for coffee. The floor isopen.SPEAKER(?). The thought of coffee killed any questions!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let's break for coffee.[Coffee break]MR. FORRESTAL. Let me start with the District, if I may.We're getting very mixed reports on the Sixth District. Considerablymore optimism has developed, as one would expect, after the ending ofhostilities in the Persian Gulf. Realtors are reporting that sales ofsingle-family homes picked up in February and that inquiries andtraffic have been quite strong so far this month. In fact, I spoke toone of the leading realtors in Atlanta and he told me that Februarywas one of the best months they've had in a long time. That may beseasonal, of course, but the contacts that I've been talking to seemmore optimistic about their prospects as long as mortgage rates don'tback up much further. On the commercial side, because we've had somuch overbuilding and because in-migration of businesses andindividuals is at a much lower pace than just a few years ago, I thinkconstruction is likely to remain weak for some time to come. Reportsfrom retailers indicate sales levels that are below those of a yearago in real terms and there's a great deal of caution aboutinventories. Most retailers are trying to prevent inventories fromrising or are trying to reduce them through aggressive promotion.Trade show contacts report that orders for giftware are strong andorders for apparel and other consumer items are quite soft. Autodealers think that the worst in sales may be over and they expect amodest pickup in the months ahead.On the manufacturing side, the attitudes of manufacturers inthe District are really quite negative at this point. Some exportsare doing reasonably well but that has had little impact in theDistrict since the region's tradable goods sector is relatively smallcompared to that of the rest of the country. Export growth in thepulp, paper, and chemical industries slowed over the winter and thechemical industry in particular had been a source of stimulus andstrength before. This is due primarily, we understand, to concernsover the war and may prove to be temporary, although we haven't heardof any renewed strength so far. Convention business also weakenedduring the winter and reports in early March suggested no improvementin Atlanta and New Orleans where bookings are running below those oflast year. There is concern that pressures to cut corporate travelbudgets will sustain the weakness. On the other hand, contacts inFlorida, and particularly in Orlando, tell us that the number offoreign visitors has picked up since the end of hostilities. The oilproduction and exploration areas were not affected very much by theconflict in the Gulf. In February the average rig count in Louisianawas up just 3 percent from a year earlier. Permits were also up alittle. And the area is still suffering from a shortage of skilledlabor; that situation has not improved.-24-3/26/91Reports on credit conditions suggest little easing of thetighter standards imposed by banks, although on the supply side banksare telling me that they are out in the marketplace seeking loans.But most lending officers are almost totally unwilling to look at anykind of real estate related loans. We had a group of high-tech peoplein a week or so ago, and while they all report that they're lookingfor an expansion in export sales, they are complaining bitterly ontheir own behalf and on behalf of their customers about thedifficulties that they face in obtaining financing. On the wage andprice side, our directors are reporting very, very little pressure ineither of those areas. I would also just add with respect to theDistrict that our unemployment rate went up to 6.9 percent, which ishigher, of course, than the national average.Looking at the national economy, our forecast has beenrevised lower since we met last time. The larger decline that we hadexpected in the first quarter is not fully made up over the rest ofthe year after the economy turns around. In comparison to theGreenbook we don't see the expansion as being quite as strong over theremainder of the forecast horizon. We think the rise in consumptionis going to proceed at a somewhat slower pace than the staff forecast,and I think demographic factors account for a good deal of this. Ouroutlook for prices is basically different from the Greenbook. We havethe CPI rising at a slower pace in 1991, and we don't get anyimprovement as time goes on. In fact, the pace of the CPIdeteriorates a bit in our forecast. We are similar to the Greenbook,however, in that we do show a resumption of growth sometime during thesecond quarter, certainly in the second half of the year. And whileI'm a little more comfortable with that forecast than I was six weeksago, I remain concerned about how much fragility there is in theeconomy. We've had declines in asset prices and we have high debtlevels; and the continued emphasis on problems with deposit insurancethreatens to erode confidence somewhat. The recent rise in confidence--certainly the number [released] this morning--is encouraging but Ihave to wonder how much of it has to do with the euphoria over oursuccess in the Persian Gulf; I haven't yet seen it translated into anyhard spending and that may not occur. In addition, as was mentionedearly this morning, I'm concerned also about our estimates of activityfor our G-10 partners. Those estimates are being revised lower, as weheard, and it seems as if we're now dependent on activitystrengthening abroad as well as here in the second half. Even thoughthere's some offset from reconstruction demand in Kuwait, this maytake more time to develop and it does reflect a need for capital.So, in summary, Mr. Chairman, I believe that these forecastsof an impending turnaround have a fairly high probability of beingright, but I'm concerned still that the risks to the outlook are onthe down side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we've moved in a slightly differentdirection from Bob Forrestal in that we think the near-term outlookhas improved significantly since the February meeting. Back then wewere expecting the recession to last through most, if not all, of thesecond quarter, and we felt that the risk of error in the Boardstaff's projection was clearly on the down side. We now agree withthe staff that the economy is likely to turn back up in the second-25-3/26/91quarter and we think the bulk of the risk has now shifted to the upside, particularly in the second and third quarters, althoughobviously there is still some risk that we could have more down sideweakness than we see. For example, exports might not do as well as weare thinking.The main reasons why we feel a little more bullish are whatyou might expect. One has been this decidedly improved level ofconfidence on the part of businesses and consumers that followed theending of the war. The second is that we've had this flurry ofscattered statistics that suggest some little intensification ofactivity. And the third is that the grass roots information thatwe're picking up around our District is decidedly better than what wesaw at the time of our last meeting. And the improvement appears tobe more than what could be accounted for by the normal seasonalthings, which is something that businessmen have difficultydistinguishing when they're reporting on whether business conditionshave improved. For example, at our last board meeting I saw what wasthe most abrupt change in the attitude of our directors between twomeetings that I've seen at any time since I've been with the System.They were practically all on the positive side. The one exception wasour director who had been on the positive sidebefore and he has moved to the negative side now. Butseems to move in a different direction from everybody else on a lot ofissues. And then the last but by no means the least reason we're moreoptimistic is the pickup in growth of M2. It seems to be respondingto our earlier easing actions and, as Mike Prell indicated, thatdoesn't guarantee a strong recovery but it certainly does enhance thepossibility that that is what we'll get.On the price side, we were particularly glad to see that thestaff has lowered its forecast of inflation somewhat over the periodahead. We're still generally optimistic that long-term inflationarypressures are going to move in the right direction as a result of whatI think has been a very wise monetary policy over a period of severalyears now. I think we're going to hit pay dirt on that one. But I amdisturbed, of course, by the rapid run-up in both the consumer priceindex and the producer price index even after allowing for the knownspecial factors. I'd be even more concerned about that if the recentgrowth in the aggregates doesn't slow somewhat in the near future fromits pace in the last couple of months.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the Twelfth District economy hasshown some signs of strengthening in recent months. The Californiaeconomy, which contracted in terms of employment between July andDecember, is showing some positive signs. Although the Californiaunemployment rate rose markedly in February, that largely reflected asharp increase in the labor force. Payroll employment growth actuallywas up strongly in January and flat in February. Moreover, anecdotalevidence suggests that the residential real estate market is beginningto recover in the coastal California cities. And recent rains haveraised reservoir levels to a point where some of the more drasticrationing plans are now being softened. The rest of the Districtappears to have avoided any significant downturn. All TwelfthDistrict states have higher employment growth rates than the nationalaverage and most did not experience much of the slowdown [seen-26-3/26/91elsewhere] following the onset of the Persian Gulf crisis. Annualizedpayroll employment growth rates between July and January outside ofCalifornia ranged from 2 percent in Arizona to 6-1/2 percent inNevada. Increased real estate activity is also reported in Seattle.Other real estate markets, which were not as adversely impacted lastfall, remain stable. The relative strength in the West is reflectedin its commercial bank lending. Although loan growth has slowed, loanvolumes continue to rise. Total loans at the District's largest banksrose 7 percent in February over a year ago compared to only 1.2percent for the rest of the nation. District bank real estate lendingaccounted for much of the fast growth, increasing 10.4 percent overthe level a year earlier. Admittedly, some of this was a result ofchanging shares as the commercial banks successfully competed againstthe savings and loans in the District.Turning to the national outlook, we expect a short recessionand moderate recovery especially now that the war in the Gulf is overand oil prices have remained low. Specifically, we anticipate aneconomy much like the Greenbook forecast with output declining at arate of about 2 to 3 percent in the current quarter and recovery, wewould expect, before midyear. The sectors that have contributed mostto the fall-off in final sales, namely consumer spending and alsoresidential investment, should contribute the most to the recovery infinal sales. Retail sales and housing starts reports for February andthe upsurge in consumer confidence in early March are certainlyconsistent with this kind of outlook. Because the recovery in ourview is likely to be moderate by historical standards, we expect theunemployment rate to stay in the 6-1/2 to 7 percent range this yearand then to decline gradually in 1992. Temporary slack in the economyshould produce a moderate decline in the inflation rate between thisyear and next, as in the Greenbook forecast. But we also expect thatan increase in the fed funds rate will be required later this year tokeep inflation on a flat to declining path. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I sense something of a dichotomy inthe District with the end of hostilities and the arrival of spring,which in Chicago is always a welcome event, or the combination of thetwo. I think attitudes in the District are quite significantly betterthan they were at the time of the last meeting. Retailers, forexample, are reporting a significant increase in floor traffic and, inturn, improvement in sales of small ticket items. It hasn't yetflowed through to big ticket items, but small ticket items are up.Auto dealers certainly have a significantly improvedattitude. As they went through December, January, and February--avery grim period--dealers were ordering cars from manufacturers atrates lower than the retail sales level. That has now reversed; theyare ordering cars at a higher level than their retail sales. Andwhile that's typical for this time of the year, nonetheless, I thinkit is a decided shift in attitudes. But while the attitudes seembetter, some of the specific numbers really don't line up with theseimproved attitudes. The District labor markets, for example, areweak. And while our numbers had compared favorably with the nationalnumbers, we're seeing some deterioration there. Claims forunemployment insurance are rising in the District, and my hunch isthat our numbers are going to begin to take on an adverse comparison-27-3/26/91with the national average. We're continuing to experience what Ithink of as an unending series of layoffs from one plant to another--100 people here, 200 there, etc. Specifically, in the auto industry,though the outlook may be improving, it's at pretty grim levels. Themanufacturers that we talk with have reduced their sales forecast forthe full year again, down to 13 million units; of course, that's carsand light trucks. And even that number is dependent on comparativelygood third and fourth quarters. The production levels in the autoindustry in the second quarter will be higher than the first quarterbut still some 10 to 15 percent lower than last year. And as I hearit, the production risk in the auto industry is still very much on thedown side at this point.This weaker auto situation is reflecting itself in the steelindustry. That industry is reducing its forecast for shipments forthis year down to 77 million tons, which is down from 80 million tonsat the time of the last meeting and down from 85 million tons for lastyear. One manufacturer, at least when I talked to him, was producingat 70 percent of capacity. The order rate is a little higher, so theywon't do poorly in inventory. Prices in the steel industry are atbest stable but at a very low level. The competitive conditions thereare really very, very tough and as a consequence some have gonethrough some difficult profitability issues. The pricing in generalin the District, as far as steel and other things, is reflective ofthat. Competitive conditions are awfully tough and for most items Idon't sense much upward pressure. In heavy trucks, i.e. Class Etrucks, a category I haven't talked much about, conditions are reallyvery weak. Sales and production this year are off some 25 percentfrom last year; last year itself really was not a good year. And onemajor engine manufacturer, a supplier to that heavy truck industry, iscurrently running at 30 percent of capacity, so they are really allbut shut down and they don't expect any near-term improvement. Infact, normally they sell about 180,000 units in a reasonably good yearand the sales forecast for this year is between 110,000 and 130,000units; therefore, it's a pretty depressed situation. Adding to thatproblem for that industry, some of the major haulers are having atough time getting credit to finance the purchase of equipment, sothat just exacerbates the problem.The machine tool industry is a bit brighter than some of theother industries in the District. Sales and backlogs are a littlehigher. The auto industry will have to go through some significantmodel changeovers in the next couple of years, and that shows up inimproved orders for machine tools. Net, in the District context, Ihope that we are going through something of a transitional phase andthat we will see some improvement in the numbers following thisimprovement of attitudes that I certainly feel.In a national context, we have no basic disagreement with thestaff forecast, at least in pattern. We think we are moving past thelow point here. But our expectation is that the recovery will be abit more modest than the staff forecast would suggest, at least forthe next couple of quarters. The personal consumption numbers look alittle high, particularly for durables; that in turn will be dependenta great deal on the auto industry, and we'll just have to see how thatworks out. So, as we look at it, we think we are moving through thistransitional period, but at least for the moment the risk continues tobe a bit on the down side.-28-3/26/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, considering the meterologicalanalogy, spring hasn't come to New England yet either in terms of theeconomy or the weather; it was snowing when we left there yesterday.One would be hard pressed to call our situation "mixed." I think onbalance it's still pretty negative. There are a few glimmers of hope;there is some fairly significant improvement in the sales of existinghomes, consistent with what is happening nationally. That might beexpected, given that the prices probably have fallen about 20 to 25percent. We did a survey of auto dealers in the last couple of daysto find out what is going on. Some hope is being generated withincreased foot traffic but not sales as of this point yet. Actually,dealers did not believe that they would get [increased] sales thisquickly after the foot traffic went up. In manufacturing, the onlystrong point that we have--and I might be stretching to call itstrong--is that exports are still holding up. But even the defensegoods producers are having layoffs.The most hopeful sign may be that we're getting price andwage adjustments. Actually some work we've done on that indicatesthat at least for New England historically we really have to have aperiod of substantial declines in employment and substantial increasesin unemployment before we reach a threshold--and that's in bothdirections--that affects wage behavior. We now have had for theregion an employment decline, since the local peak, of somewhatgreater than 6 percent, which makes it the weakest period of declinein New England on a peak to not-yet-trough basis in history. It'spossible, but we don't have the monthly data, that in 1946 when a lotof the shipbuilding facilities closed after the war we might have hadas much of an employment decline, but that's how far back one has togo.All of this, of course, has had a negative effect on consumerconfidence; it is flattening a little but is still very low.Retailers report very soft activity with a lot more discounting goingon. In construction--and this is something that needed to happen--thevalue of what is being put in place is down somewhat more than 50percent. Financial sector problems are still prominent in the news.We expect that in addition to the Bank of New England situation we'llhave another $20 billion in institutions this year that will have tobe resolved. That will be a total roughly the size of the Bank of NewEngland and will be a further hit on consumer confidence. As far asthe credit crunch goes, I don't think there's a great deal ofimprovement with our own indigenous institutions. We are seeing moreentry of nonbank financial institutions and others coming into thismarket to pick up some opportunities that may be there.An interesting note is the fiscal problems of our state andlocal governments. If you look at either the reductions inexpenditures that are going to be required or the likely taxincreases, it comes out District-wide as a number somewhere on theorder of 2-1/4 percent of personal income. And if you add localgovernments to that it goes to about 2-3/4 to 3 percent. So, we thinkthis is something that is going to be rolling through toward the endof this year that will have a further effect on consumption. We dothink that the region will at least flatten about two quarters afterthe national economy.-29-3/26/91As far as that goes, I find the Greenbook conditionalforecast for the next several quarters pretty persuasive. The onlyplace I may question it at all is on the basis of [the inadequate]weight it gives to state and local government [spending], which theGreenbook already has as being pretty soft. But looking across thenation I'm not sure what is going to happen with that sector. I dothink, as it should be, that the risks implied in the Greenbookforecast are pretty symmetrical both on the up side and the down side.As far as policy goes, we've done a fair bit already andthere are some lags involved; and Mike referred to some of the earlysigns one might see of upcoming improvement. An important factor forus to keep in mind at least--I don't want to preach about it--is thatthe recession wasn't caused strictly by Iraq in my view. We also hadadjustments to some fundamental imbalances in the economy that were ofa balance sheet nature in some cases. I think New England was anextreme case of that, depending on some of the activity that had goneon there and that had gotten a little out of hand. And in thisenvironment I think our responsibility is to provide a climate inwhich these imbalances can be addressed in a painful adjustment periodbut over time. Again, I think the Greenbook forecast is one thatwould allow us to do that and, obviously, in periods such as this oneshould be cautious.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Springtime has come to the Eleventh District,and I have a good bit of it in my sinuses right now, as you can tell!At the last meeting I reported that economic activity in the EleventhDistrict was either stronger or less weak than in the nation. Thatcontinues to be the case, and perhaps even more so. One measure istotal employment, and employment is continuing to increase in allthree states of the District and in most major sectors of the economy.It is slow growth but it is growth. Anecdotal information fromdirectors and other community people we've talked to does not soundquite as positive as the numbers seem to look. They emphasize thefact that the economy is not so strong that it can stand up againstthe national recession, but they also emphasize continuing creditavailability problems. The reluctance of banks to lend is cited byall of our people out there as the key factor that they believe isgoing to keep the recovery fairly mild. But one of the members of ourSmall Business and Agriculture Advisory Committee a few weeks agoreported that if you went into a bank four years ago and asked for aloan the answer was "Hell no!" and if you do it now the answer ismerely "No."Given that circumstances in our area are more favorable thanthey are in most of the country, we don't find the Greenbook forecastto be implausible. We think it's pretty much on the mark, although weprobably would push the recovery from the second to the third quarterand would not be quite as optimistic about the abrupt decline in theconsumer price index as the Greenbook forecast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. The District economy is still declining, butthere are some straws in the wind that a recovery may be in themaking. There has been a shift in attitudes toward the positive side.-30-3/26/91Even in a state like New Jersey, which has some of the characteristicsof New England, I think they are beginning to feel better. And I hadthe same experience with my board as Bob Black did with his. I reallydon't recall such a dramatic shift in attitudes on the part of ninepeople over a one-month span. There are a few signs at banks thatloan demand may be picking up. Bankers are not as willing as theyonce were but there is willingness to lend; but these are more at the"nibble" level rather than anything very major. Home buying hasclearly picked up and the real estate people are--euphoric is toostrong, but they are feeling very good. That has not spilled overinto automobiles, although there is more traffic at dealerships.Nonetheless, when you look at the hard numbers, sales are still down.The retailers, particularly department store people, say that saleshaven't picked up except that right after the end of hostilities therewas a pickup for a week or so; but they haven't seen it more recently.Now, some of the specialty stores report that business has picked up.Manufacturers, while they are hopeful about the second half of theyear, say their numbers are still bearish; and the people whotransport manufactured goods report business is still bad. As for thecommercial real estate market, I think we're not talking months butseveral years to get that turned around in the middle Atlantic states.So, I would say, with the exception of what is going on in home sales,that the recovery is mostly hope and attitude at this point. Butthat's an important change and is probably a harbinger of things tocome.My judgment on the national economy is that the risks are inthe process of shifting from a decidedly downward direction toward amore evenly balanced outlook for the economy. And I think that weought to pay attention to that shift as we move into the policydiscussion later this morning.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. In our District I would agree with something Edhas said. So far there is little that one can really put a finger onstatistically; it's more of an attitude change that I've noticed. Ihad the same experience that Ed and Bob described with our directorsabout a week ago; there was a very noticeable shift in sentiment.Statistically, I guess the one thing we can hang our hat on isemployment growth. It had gotten very sluggish; it never had turnednegative in the District on a year-to-year basis, but there is someevidence that it has bottomed out and started moving up. And that's acombination of both less weakness in the manufacturing area thannationally and considerably more strength in the non-manufacturingarea. The other piece of evidence we have is not so much in terms ofthe current economy but we have year-end numbers on banking; bankperformance has continued to hold up with [delinquencies] of about 0.9percent and not a significant increase in either loan losses ornonperforming loans. We're perhaps a little behind the rest of thenation in potential real estate problems, but I don't think those aregoing to get significantly bad; we never had the boom, really.Nationally, the only comment I would make is that I'm pleasedto see that we can now look back and say that we have had somesustained growth in reserves and money. And at least for my part, I'mnot too concerned about reacting to that at this stage. There would-31-3/26/91come a point in time when maybe I would, but things are tenuous enoughnow that I'm just pleased to see it and leave it at that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, looking first to the nationaleconomy, the forecast of the staff in New York in profile terms issimilar to Mike's but there are a couple of differences. Our staffessentially has the second quarter as flat and a more modest recoveryin the third and fourth quarters. But for what it's worth, the 1992outlook is very similar to Mike's forecast with one or two exceptionsthat aren't important except in terms of algebraic signs. We have netexports turning into a drag in 1992, and I want to come back to thatin a minute. And we also have slightly less improvement in coreinflation in 1992. Mike, you have it getting down to around 3-1/2percent?MR. PRELL. Well, by the end of the year.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We're basically in a holding patternat 4 percent, which isn't great given all we've been through. Interms of even the profile of the forecast, the one substantive thingthat I am a bit more concerned about--aside from some anecdotalreports, which I'll get to in a minute--is the external side. Thekind of forecast we're looking at for 1991 even in the context ofsomething like the current pattern of exchange rates I don't think isunreasonable, but I think there is greater risk--and Bob Forrestal orsomebody already said this--on the foreign growth side, looking outfrom where we are right now. And given the tenuous nature of theoutlook, that situation at the margin can make a difference.Nevertheless, I think the case for a modest recovery sometime in thespring or early summer is not at all unreasonable at this juncture.In terms of anecdotal reports, we're hearing things notunlike a number of things others have said. For example, there iswidespread gossip, if I can put it in the proper terminology, about apickup in activity in housing. And that's pretty much true at bigbanks and small banks, upstate and Long Island; it is not true in thevery expensive New York City condominium market. But with thatexception there does seem to be something more than a seasonal pickupin housing. The retail sector is still soft, and manufacturing--atleast as we hear about it from the vantage point of very largemanufacturing firms that are headquartered in New York--is still verysoft. The credit situation is better. We do get anecdotal reports--and somebody else said this, too--that at least some banks areactually out there looking for loans so long as they're not realestate loans. Again, there are sound straws in the wind that theasset price deterioration may be beginning at least to moderate, ifnot to flatten out. It's probably a little too early to make thatjudgment in any definitive way, but it seems to be a bit better.Having said that, there is something else that seems quite clear, andthat is that people feel better. I guess there's a bit of asimilarity with where we were last spring. If you recall, last springthe anecdotal reports and the expectations were lousy and the numberswere still pretty good. Right now we seem to have a situation inwhich the expectations and anecdotal reports are pretty good and thenumbers are still pretty lousy. I blow a little hot and cold as towhat to make of that. I think there is a danger that if the postwar-32-3/26/91euphoria does not in fact reflect itself in some pickup in spendingand activity, this rebound in confidence could reverse very, veryquickly. It's awfully hard to judge that, but right now the commentthat a number of people here have made to the effect that people seemto feel better certainly is the impression I'm getting, even thoughthe numbers aren't there to support it at the moment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, with regard to the District economy, Ithink we are basically beset by the same crosscurrents that areaffecting the nation and that many people have discussed. The marketand the economy remain quite soft but the anecdotal informationclearly has a much better tone encompassing housing and autos andretail activity; people at least are feeling a good deal better andtraffic is up. In part because of the improvement in attitudes andthe change of the tenor of the anecdotes, I am comfortable with theGreenbook forecast for real activity this time. And it is also thistime very consistent with the pattern that our model produces, and ourmodel is very different in structure. That does raise an interestingtiming question, though. Even if the economy picks up promptly inApril--or maybe it already has picked up--we won't see that in thehard data on aggregate activity until May or June as those numbersstart to flow through. Given that we obviously would want to see someconsistent evidence of improvement, it really suggests that it won'tbe until sometime this summer that we will recognize whether or notthe Greenbook forecast is turning out to be accurate. I don't knowwhat the implication of that is except that it seems to me that wemight want to be even more cautious than usual in terms of respondingto information as it becomes available over the next month or two.On inflation, obviously, we were concerned too about whatlooked like a significant acceleration of core inflation; and I'malways a little suspicious about special one-time factors that one canparcel it out to. But we did run some tests to try to find out aboutthe energy prices, assuming that the run-up in energy prices in thesummer and fall may have boosted core inflation temporarily as theyworked their way through the economy. The tests suggested that thatwas in fact the case.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does Mike Prell get the same number?MR. STERN. Yes. And as the subsequent decline in energyprices starts to work its way back through, it seems to me we ought tobe looking at better core inflation numbers rather promptly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, in the Tenth District, the economycontinues to outperform the national economy modestly and that is abit of a departure from the long-term trend; we normally lag the[national] economy. But both the personal income as well as theemployment numbers show that the economy during the fourth quartercontinued to add jobs and that that will continue in the firstquarter. The District added jobs at an annual rate of about 1-1/2percent during the fourth quarter as the recession took overnationally and, as I understand it, the national employment figuresdropped about 1.6 percent. So, in terms of the overall health of the-33-3/26/91Tenth District relative to the nation, I think we're still doingfairly well but at a very slow pace. There were jobs added in each ofour seven states with the exception of Oklahoma. Overall, the regionin terms of economic health is being held down a little in themanufacturing sector because of our area of Missouri.It is, however, a time when the sap begins to rise and theeuphoria comes on the agricultural sector. In agriculture, cattle andhogs, the red meats, are still the most important addition to theeconomy in the sense that feeder cattle, for example, are now sellingfor over $100 per 100 pounds, which is an all-time high. On the otherhand, small grain, and principally wheat, does have some seriousproblems because of the drought. Governor Angell's farm probablyended up partially in Oklahoma City a couple of weeks ago when therewas a big dust storm coming out of western Kansas and westernOklahoma! If that area continues without moisture, clearly, theoutlook for wheat will be hurt. With regard to manufacturing, perhapsthe story has been told many times with regard to auto assembly.Clearly, each of the assembly plants in our District is cutting back;they actually are cutting out shifts and/or closing down for shortperiods of time. I do understand, however, that the inventory of carsbeing held now by the manufacturer and the dealer is coming down to avery low level. If there is a pickup in consumer confidence, thatshould be a real kick in terms of the manufacturers coming back onstream. The energy area is essentially flat; there hasn't been muchactivity. Drilling activity had actually decreased month-over-month,but that is so small that it makes very little difference probably.The one area that may be a catalyst, or an area of the economy thatcould give a kick start to the Tenth District, would be oil fieldconstruction and drilling equipment orders that may come as a resultof the Kuwait/Iraq situation. We do have several rather large oildrilling construction companies in the District.As far as the national economy is concerned, I would agreewith those who say that the second quarter probably will be flat andthe third and fourth quarters will be a little less vigorous than theGreenbook forecast. But overall the Greenbook is about as good aguess as I have or as most everybody else has, I think. I'd bewilling to buy it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I didn't intend to follow right after Roger'scomments about the wind. It is true that the high plains do see heavywinds in March, but we always seem to gain soil rather than lose it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't know. Would you get it fromNorth Dakota?MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that the staff's forecast isplausible. But if I [differ] in any direction on the forecast, it isnot so much in regard to the timing but that I lean toward a bitweaker view of households' penchant for consumption expenditures. Myhunch is that this recession has been different from others in regardto the [buildup] of debt and that the saving rate will tend to run alittle higher in this recovery period. I am slightly more optimisticin regard to net exports--although I know the staff is alsooptimistic--but maybe not quite enough to offset the difference of-34-3/26/91somewhat flatter consumption expenditures, if there is any difference.It just seems to me that this event, even at the manufacturing levelor the business level, is going to be one in which recovery inspending may occur prior to that in unemployment. So, I would expectthe unemployment rate to continue to move up and maybe to approach 7percent, even though we have this kind of expansion. The talk aboutmedical costs just has to be quite a factor. [Unintelligible] unioncollective bargaining power in terms of the desire [of business firms]to maintain somewhat leaner labor costs. So, I would expect it to bein the direction that the staff has but just slightly less than that,as I judge it.It does seem to me that the pickup in M2 growth is coincidingwith some flattening of the commodity price deterioration. And thecommodity prices don't look exactly the way they sometimes look in afull-fledged recovery--that is, if a full-fledged recovery wereunderway right now. But at the same time commodity prices certainlyare not deteriorating the way they were as we were going intorecession. So, it looks to me as if we're close together in regard tothe outlook, but maybe with a somewhat longer and less robust recoverypath.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. The District's goods manufacturing is prettymuch deteriorating. And for the first time we have in Ohio anunemployment rate that is higher than the national average. I ratherwish that Martha were here to hear that because she has been sayingall along that our region has been a lot stronger. It's about thesame in Pennsylvania; it has deteriorated a bit there as well. Andit's in the usual suspects--autos and steel; Si has already mentionedsteel. We are seeing some bounceback, though, in activity indepartment stores and in home mortgages. So, the signs the rest ofyou are picking up, we're picking up as well. The only anecdotalstory I want to share with you, because it was a little surprising tome, relates to my specialty steel producerI called him up before I came down here and asked abouthis order book. It has been very weak, as steel was weak throughoutthe fall and the first quarter. He started out very cautiously insaying that they were going to make it through the year and it will befine. And then I pushed him a little and he said that the export sideof his business is very strong; he has booked in the first quartermore than he booked all last year on the export side. Now, hisconcern as we went down this path a little--and I found this to be anunusual one--is that his people can book him out through the thirdquarter but if he goes ahead and does that on the export side and weget a snapback in the economy, he won't be able to service his localcustomers. So, he's almost in the position now of thinking about notbooking the export side of the business. He can't turn the ordersaway, obviously, but that was one unusual story that I heard. I don'tknow if it's typical or atypical.In terms of the national economy, as I look at the Greenbookand what we went through in the last six months around here, it justreminds me that, at least the way I look at it, we don't control muchon the real side. A lot of other things happen; Dick has mentioned acouple and other people have too. So, I don't think we should viewourselves as managing this recovery any more than we managed the-35-3/26/91downturn. What we control over time is obviously the price level, andwe put ourselves in pretty good stead to continue to do that if wecontinue to watch the aggregates. I'll save those comments for later.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Well, we are in an interesting period and Ihave a few observations on the issues. The first question isinflation and our fears: Are there fears that inflation is reignitingand is it reigniting? I think the economic logic is clear andsupports the opposite case, given the increasing slack we have; I seeno signs of trouble in the commodity prices or movement in the dollar.Despite the recent revival of M2 growth, we're coming off a longperiod of slow growth; in seven out of the past ten months, M2 growthhas been less than 3 percent. The labor costs data, one of thetoughest components of inflation, is behaving remarkably well. Andeven the inflationary expectations in the surveys are down somewhat.So, I think everyone should agree that we're making substantialprogress on inflation. The only thing that doesn't agree with that ismeasured inflation itself, which keeps chugging along apparentlyoblivious to the inescapable economic logic. We've had a couple ofpretty awful months and there are stories especially about the postalrates and the excise taxes and the like. Many people would argue,especially for those special cases, that government-induced increasesare not part of the inflationary process. But the problem is thatthey are. They respond in part to the increases in labor costs andthey also feed into the inflationary process. So, I think it's alittle difficult to ignore.The markets may also be getting concerned about inflation.Long bond rates are up about 35 basis points since the last meeting.Our Board staff argues that that is an increase in real rates ratherthan an inflation premium, and they point to a broad array of marketdata consistent with that analysis, including the stock market data,the junk bond data, the dollar, and commodity prices. And everythingis suggesting increased probabilities of an imminent turnaround. Evenon March 19th, when the CPI number was released, the housing startsdata were released the same day and the dollar went up, which israther inconsistent with a lot of fears of inflation. Some peoplebelieve another reason the long rate went up was not only because ofthe notion of a turnaround but also because the CPI numbers might keepus from easing. Peter has already talked about the bond market'sreaction to our 1/4 point ease a couple of Fridays ago, March 8th. Inthose three stories I think there is a fair amount of confusion: Somepeople said that maybe we had gone too far, but at least as manypeople seemed to say the fact that we cut the fed funds rate anddidn't cut the discount rate signaled that this was the end of theeasing. When I talk to people on the street, there's still a fairamount of confusion over exactly what signal we're trying to send withthe fed funds rate on top of the discount rate even thoughoperationally it may work okay. I think the most compelling thingthat happened that day, though, was that the Michigan survey leapedwith a 20 or 30 percentage point increase. So, it's difficult to makemuch out of that, and I'm comforted by all the market data that sayinflation is under control. To me the most troubling aspect is tolook back for seven years to the beginning of 1984 and see that coreinflation has been stuck at between 4-1/2 and 5 percent, which makesone wonder whether a short and shallow recession can really do the-36-3/26/91job. The logic is pretty persuasive but one thing we're going to haveto face, if we get a string of these, is that the bond market itselfwill stop buying the story and start looking at the numbers. I'm surewe're all prepared for that.In terms of the real economy, again, everything looks great:The war is over; oil prices are low; consumer confidence is back;money is growing; and all markets are signaling a rebound. To turnthis logic into reality, we need consumers willing to spend andbankers willing to lend. I share some of the opinions expressed byothers that while we're seeing confidence go up, there's a question ofwhether it will stick and an even greater question of what sort of lagthere is between that confidence and the actual spending. On the downside, when confidence collapsed in August, it was really a couple ofmonths before spending collapsed. I doubt if it will be much fasteron this side of the hill. Moreover, this is the first nationalrecession we've had in eight years. Many young working Americans havenever had the experience of worrying about their job security and Iwouldn't be surprised, as Governor Angell also indicated, if consumersmuch like banks and corporations don't step back and spend some timebuilding some equity before returning to their old ways. And it istrue we have some drags on the process, including the unemploymentsituation. I would also agree with Dick Syron about the state andlocal government situation; when you look across the country, by somemeasures 28 of 50 states have pretty severe problems. That's likelyto be an overhang. In terms of hard data, one thing is clear:Americans did not celebrate victory by buying a new car.In terms of the hard data, we are staring to get some uptick.Clearly, the most encouraging area is housing. Even the February datain housing, of course, could be the effect of global warming becausewe did have a warm February and that's the most highly correlatedthing with housing starts and, I guess, existing home purchases. Isee one potential problem, though, with a housing-led recovery. Andthat's this question of whether the banks will finance homebuilders,because I don't think there's anyone else around to do it. Not manybuilders have access to the commercial paper market. I don't seeinsurance companies or finance companies financing construction. And,I submit, we'll find out whether we have a credit crunch or not--whether it's on the demand side or a supply constraint. With thecommercial real estate disaster fresh in their minds and with manybuilders financially weak or bankrupt, capital-thin bankers are goingto be asked to finance a new round of real estate development. And,again, the logic looks pretty encouraging as well. The banks are inmuch better shape now and we've seen them raising capital. Theyhaven't been lending so much yet; but if we expect homebuilding toplay a major role, pretty soon we will be going through existinginventories and we will see whether they can get that financing.One important piece of evidence that many people havementioned, which is consistent with a return to more normal conditionsin the banking industry, is the growth of the monetary aggregates. Itlooks as if we finally have the engine of money growth jump-started.It may be idling at a rate that is a little high and we may need toadjust the choke a bit. After ten months of slow growth, it'sencouraging to see the pickup, but there is a question of whether it'sgoing a little too well.-37-3/26/91There is another factor that weighs on the other side of thegrowth in the aggregates and that's the behavior of the dollar. Asmentioned, since the last meeting the dollar on a trade-weighted basishas essentially retraced all the ground that it lost during the war.It stands about where it was the middle of last summer, though stilldown from its heights of last spring. I view the increase in thedollar as something that should have a contractionary effect; itshould weigh against inflationary pressures and should reduce therisks of an overly robust economic rebound. In other countries peopleview a strong currency as equivalent to monetary tightening. Indeed,Charlie Siegman mentioned that, in effect, it is equivalent to anincrease in interest rates or that to offset it we would have toreduce rates. So, my view of the increase in the dollar is that wehave the opposite of the situation in August, September, and Octoberwhen interest rates were steady and rising and the dollar was falling,which helped cushion the decline in the economy. I think we are nowin the opposite situation where the dollar can be viewed as a partialcounterbalance to concerns about too rapid growth in the aggregates, arekindling of inflation, and a rebound that is too buoyant. TheGreenbook assumes the dollar will fall back from its 11 or 12 percentappreciation to a 4 or 5 percent gain; I guess I'm not so sure. WhenI look at the position of the U.S. economy and political system comingout of this war and when I look at the troubles in Germany, easternEurope, and Russia, with the rest of Europe wired together through theexchange rate mechanism, and the prospect of lower growth and lowerinterest rates in Japan, just the uncertainty in these areas versusthe situation in the United States makes it not unlikely that thedollar will maintain its gains and might appreciate a bit more. And Iview that as a risk to the upturn and as insurance against inflation.So, in summary, I'm pretty much about where Governor Angellis. On balance, I'm a bit more pessimistic than the Greenbook on thetiming and strength of the rebound due to the strength of the dollarand the lag in the transformation of consumer confidence into consumerspending as well as a couple of other overhanging risks such as thefinancing of the housing side and the state and local government side.I can't be too pessimistic since I've spent most of my career as afinancial economist and I believe in markets. And the staff haspointed out to me that every market indicator known to man, woman, orbeast is flashing a clear signal of imminent economic rebound. Ididn't quite see those signals on the other side when the economystarted down, but at least that should temper our pessimism.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Well, like everyone around the table, I guess, Ihave some sense of encouragement that we are hearing some good news.Certainly, the return of consumer confidence has some promise. Thedecline in oil prices and the projected level of oil prices has to begood for economic activity. The slight uptick in retail sales isencouraging, but I have a little skepticism about it; this confidencemay be enough to get people smiling and walking to the mall, butwhether it has them reaching deep into their pockets for the bigticket items is another question. The housing starts look better butwe're still a long way from what anyone would describe as an ebullienthousing market. Sales of existing homes are probably one of thebrightest lights and really give some glimmer of hope, even up indarkest New England. On the other hand, auto sales, which are such an-38-3/26/91important part of the economy, are still absolutely lousy. I thinkthat industry is considerably worried because we see all these leasingopportunities as an inducement to try to get people to do somethingwithout having to commit a lot of money up front. I'm skeptical ofwhat I've heard, at least spottily around the table, about businessconfidence. I don't see the signs of business confidence; businessprofits are lousy. And I think that has contributed to the fact thatthere is not widespread significant credit demand from the businesssector. In fact, we see businesses restructuring--not restructuringin the '80s style of piling on a lot of debt but rather restructuringin terms of selling assets to pay down debt, cutting expenses, layingoff people, and shutting down plants. And that's not exactly the kindof environment in which one expects an immediate return of a highlevel of business activity. The very high levels of debt of bothbusinesses and consumers are a further deterrent, particularly ifpeople are concerned about unemployment and the possibility of beinglaid off. All of this coupled with the remaining unsettled conditionsin the banks raises some questions. I think confidence is beingsignificantly undermined by the FDIC floundering around trying tofigure out how to refinance itself--and with no clear public policydirection coming from any part of the government with regard to how todo that plus the fact that there is a possibility that the inabilityto deal with this effectively will result in a "taxpayer bailout,"which will effectively scuttle the opportunity for restructuring thebanking system and modernizing it. All of that is creating some lackof public confidence not only in the banking system but in the depositinsurance system.Then add to that something that Governor Mullins touched on,which is that the upturn in long-term rates is more likely to be areflection of higher inflationary expectations, and that kind ofenvironment especially is not going to be a contributor to recovery.So, I believe the downside risks remain very significant. But I amalso skeptical in that interest rates and interest rate adjustmentsmay not be the effective medicine if the problems that are inherent inthis economy are more psychological than financial or rational. So,I'm at the point where I think it is much too early to take the punchbowl away; but at the same time I wouldn't be inclined to refill it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, once again I'm the last leafon the bush and the day is getting long, so let me be brief. As Icontemplate this recovery, I'm mentally migrating West; I'm going tobe from Missouri for a while! We do clearly see very positivesentiment, but there are just no data as yet to support it. And Ithink Gary's point earlier is worth repeating: We have to be carefulabout this confidence business because at some point if it doesn'tbegin to get fulfilled, it will reverse on us. That could happenrather quickly and I'm concerned about that.A couple of the pillars of the recovery we're hoping forstrike me as being a little suspect. Autos are a big ticketdiscretionary item and as such they're fickle. The numbers aren'tthere yet and we're going to have to see them, I think, before we canbe sure of them. Also, in the case of exports, the G-7 countries arelargely in a slowing mode and we're in a stronger dollar period, so Ihave to worry a little about the extent and timing of how that is-39-3/26/91going to run. As for inflation, I am very chagrined and disappointedthat the core rate is so sticky so far. And as far as the Greenbook'sprojection goes, the staff doesn't show it improving meaningfullyuntil the second half of 1992, and that's a long time away. I hopethat David's inescapable logic is correct and that Gary Stern's iscorrect; I think there's good reason to hope that it may be. But weshould have been seeing it by now and we haven't as yet.So, where do the risks lie? In which direction are theyliable to fall? It seems to me that Dick Syron and Ed Boehne wereprobably right that they are approximately symmetric right now. But Iwould like to close with this point: While the risks may be symmetricin both directions, I don't think the consequences are. It seems tome that the potential consequences of an error on the down side aresubstantially more severe if we don't get--or if there is asignificant delay in getting--the recovery. The banking system, asJohn LaWare reminds us frequently and correctly, is shaky. We hope toget reform, which I think might well go away if the economy doesn'timprove. The budget deficit could really spiral up, with all sorts ofconsequences. So, while the risks might be symmetric, we should bevery conscious and especially alert to the concern about the asymmetryof the consequences.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. We will now move on to DonKohn.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's late, and GovernorMullins gave half my briefing, so I'll try to summarize what I haveleft. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don?MR. SYRON. One, coming back to the point that David raisedthat every financial market indicator under the sun seems to beindicating a rebound: Just looking at the stuff that came out, thecomments [about] the stock market really were quite persuasive. I waswondering what previous history there is of a false positive with thisdegree of [a stock market] move.MR. KOHN. None.MR. MULLINS. An increase in the middle of a recession; [haveyou] looked at it?MR. KOHN. I think the largest false positives previously ofan up movement in the stock market in the middle of a recession havebeen about 5 percent.MR. MULLINS. This is the first you see?MR. SYRON. But this would be by some order of magnitude.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There are always firsts.MR. MULLINS. It's like a yield curve predicts and rebuilds--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Don? If not,let me get started. I have nothing that's significantly at variance-40-3/26/91with what I've heard around here. I do think we can look at thepolicy outlook as essentially representing more of a bimodaldistribution in which the probabilities of events are probablydiscrete rather than continuous. By far the highest probability atthis stage seems to be that the healing process that we've beenobserving in recent weeks will continue and will gradually lead into abottoming out and an economic upturn. A crucial issue that GovernorAngell raised is the question of the saving rate. One way of lookingat that process is that what often has been the case in such periodsis that we get a run-up in existing home sales, which in turnengenders realized capital gains financed by mortgage debt, which inturn creates funds that the surveys suggest go disproportionately intobig ticket consumer items. It turns out, obviously, that the nationalincome accounts show a rise in consumption without a rise indisposable income and, therefore, a decline in personal savings. Andsince we're starting from a saving rate that is probably slightlynorth of 5 percent, we do have some possibility of getting [added]consumer spending even in the context of what is clearly a verydeficient income flow. In that context it's interesting to note thata substantial part--perhaps almost all--of the fluctuation of the GNPsince the fourth quarter is gross motor vehicle products, meaning autosales plus the steel and all the various parts; GNP ex gross motorvehicle products for all practical purposes was zero or maybe a slightplus in the fourth quarter and will be roughly zero in the first andsecond quarters of this year. That is another way of saying that it'sa recession without the capital goods relationships that historicallywere the major elements that gave us much deeper declines than we areseeing currently.That leads me to the second probability, which is not [on acontinuum], but one in which we could see a failure of the recovery totake hold, continued pressures on profit margins, business confidencefalling, and finally a real dive in capital appropriations, which wehaven't seen. And that would induce a secondary phase of therecession, which would deepen rather considerably. The probability ofthat is at this stage still rather moderate to small, but in myjudgment non-negligible.I think that leads us then to a policy stance that reallygets to this point: If the economy is healing and recovering, thencertainly no further easing is required at this stage; but if we get acumulative erosion, which leads to clear evidence that the capitalgoods markets are beginning to cave, then I think the proper action isprobably a significant drop in the discount rate. Were the economy togo in that direction and those events were emerging, obviously fromthe discussion we had earlier in this meeting about enhancedconsultations, that would clearly be on the table. As a consequence,I conclude that as a practical matter, what we're dealing with at thisstage is a symmetrical directive because anything veering off thatstrikes me as something that would be likely caused by events aboutwhich it would be useful to have a consultation of this Committee.There are other issues that we have to be aware of over thelonger term. We have finally jump-started M2 back into the range, andthe existing projections suggest that it will stay there--perhapssomewhat on the higher side rather than in the middle. And I think wemay very well have to contemplate, though not necessarily immediately,that our next move will be not down but up. As I look at it, I would3/26/91say that we have done exceptionally well in keeping money and creditaggregates over the last two or three years on a trend which, unlesswe are all wrong about inflation being fundamentally a monetaryphenomenon, will lead over the next two or three years to a markeddecline in the rate of inflation. And at this particular point wehave the luxury in a sense of responding to the recession fairlyaggressively because we've had a constricted money supply. If thiseconomy begins to recover and we begin to run into accelerated moneysupply growth, it would be wise for us to be careful not to let it getaway from us, having spent so much time trying to get it down intothis particular area.The one interesting problem, which I don't know how to handleat this stage, is the exchange rate. We cannot explain the exchangerate in terms of our standard variables. It looks to me as thoughwhat we have is an historic discontinuity in judgment about the natureof politics and property rights in the United States and hence thevalue of holding dollar claims relative to the other major currencies.I'm not overly confident that the dollar is going to reverse at thisstage. I have concerns similar to those Governor Mullins [mentioned].And the only argument at this point that raises the question ofwhether we should move rates lower for reasons other than business oreconomic activity is if we [were to] begin to view our exchange rateas creating some form of problem for us. I think that's well in thefuture and a very minor issue--certainly not something that iscontemplated in the intermeeting period, but something that maysurprise us and become the other side of the problem we have been soconcerned about for so long: mainly, an exceptionally weak dollar.So, in summary, I would say as a practical matter that I seevery little alternative at the moment other than alternative "B" withsymmetric language. Obviously, if there's a strong desire around thetable for asymmetry, which I don't feel frankly, that's not a big dealone way or the other; it's more a practical than a strategic issue.But for the moment I would stay where we are, watch the data asclosely as we can, and unless we see this cumulative deteriorationtaking form, I would suspect that we ought to be patient and wait forthe economy to turn. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I find myself in complete agreementwith your suggestion and encouraged by the mechanism that you suggest.I think that we are probably close to a turning point. You're rightthat nothing is ever certain. The behavior of the aggregates isencouraging but if we have to move the discount rate, that may well bethe way to go particularly in light of what may be nonfinancialfactors accounting for changes instead of world spirits about theUnited States [leading to an] appreciation of the dollar. And I amheartened by your suggestion that if it becomes necessary to move thefunds rate significantly as well, further consultation would beappropriate at that time. So, I completely support your suggestion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I can accept your suggestion for"B" symmetric. I suppose I have a slight preference for an asymmetricdirective on the side of tightness in that during periods of recessionas we approach the trough it's very important to guard against easingduring such a period. I suppose the reason that I'm at that position-42-3/26/91is that I notice the staff has a 6.9 percent nominal GNP growth pathfrom Q2 1991 to Q2 1992, and 6.9 percent is a pretty heavy dose. Now,I guess if I thought it were going to be 1 percent less, at 5.9percent, I would feel more comfortable; I'd feel more comfortable ifit were going to be at 5 percent because at this stage it's not theCPI or the fixed-weight deflator that counts, it's the GNP deflatorthat counts in terms of the crowding out [effect]. That is, the onlycrowding out that occurs is on the GNP deflator. And if the GNPdeflator is at 3 percent and we have 5 percent nominal, we have plentyof room. I just feel that 5 percent is more consistent with ourprogress toward price stability. I do agree, Mr. Chairman, that thereis some bimodal possibility here, but the most likely way that asignificant downturn could occur it seems to me is for the bondmarkets and the capital markets to become discouraged in regard to ourprogress on inflation. And a run-up in long-term rates could beunfortunate in the fragile situation that we're in. Now, I also agreewith you and Governor Mullins that the exchange value of the dollar ismore apt to be strong rather than weak later and I do agree that atsome point in time that might be a factor, particularly if the priceof gold were plummeting below $330 an ounce or something like that.It's always possible that we could find ourselves in that environment,but I think we could take action at that time because the bond marketswould be on our side. So, I would prefer to be asymmetrical towardtightness. I'm not giving much signal that I'm very enthusiasticabout that other group changing that other tool.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I could support your recommendationof alternative B, no change in policy, since it certainly appears thatthe economy will be recovering at a satisfactory pace several monthsfrom now, especially in light of our recent policy moves. I also havea preference for a policy directive that is symmetrical. Before anyfurther policy action is taken, consideration of the inflationaryimplications of such a policy seems necessary. I think the persistinghigh long-term interest rates are indicative of the market's concernsabout inflationary pressures in the future as well as its perceptionsof the strength of the economy. Given that a near-term turnaround inthe economy is being widely forecast, such precaution appearsespecially warranted at this time. Also, forecasts of a turnaroundwould seem to be more credible now that war-related uncertainties havebeen substantially reduced. So, I would support alternative B andsymmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, several months ago we sat aroundthis table as we eased policy and reminded ourselves--and severalpeople participated in this--that we had better be ready when the timecame to avoid the mistake that we usually have made in the past in nottightening soon enough. I was prepared to deliver that same talkagain and also to throw in a caveat that we ought not pay muchattention to our favorite economic indicator, the level of employment.You made essentially the same talk and made all the points I thoughtwere pertinent. So, I very much agree with you that we ought to staywith "B" with a symmetrical directive. I also agree that if we movein either direction, it would be desirable to meet and talk about it.-43-3/26/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I agree entirely with yourrecommendation that we make no policy change at this time. However,given my view of the economy and the risks to the economy, I wouldslightly prefer an asymmetric directive in the direction of ease. Butit's a close call and I would certainly support a symmetric directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. BOEHNE. "B" symmetrical.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Si.MR. BOEHNE. Oh, sorry! I apologize.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If that's a proxy--MR. KEEHN. I would be in favor of alternative B. I wouldhave had a slight preference for asymmetric language in favor ofeasing but I think your comments with regard to consultation in theevent of accelerating deterioration deal with that and, therefore, Isupport your position.MR. BLACK. Si is the first fellow who has ever had a hiredgun to speak for him at a meeting!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I strongly support your proposal. I think it'simportant that we go to a symmetric directive at this point, in partbecause I have an ongoing bias in favor of that largely to letevidence accumulate before we act. But in these circumstances, as Isuggested earlier, I think we do want to maintain a sense of balanceand a perspective as we go forward here. And I think the symmetricdirective is appropriate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I support the recommendation of "B" symmetricfor all the reasons that you have so much more logically andeloquently stated than I.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Oh, I do get to go before Ed! Maybe I can bebriefer: Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I yield to President Keehn!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. To the extent that we have or believe that wehave countercyclical capabilities, it seems to me they rest on ourcredibility; that's the only clothes we have to wear. And ourcredibility depends largely on our actions that support price-44-3/26/91stability. We have no price anchor; we're not tied to a price leveldirectly. And the only thing I think we can do over time, as I havesaid many times before, is to maintain money growth at a low rate.That's a long-winded way of saying that I think we ought to watchmoney growth and I support your recommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I support "B" symmetric, and I think we maywell get Governor Angell's 5 percent nominal GNP as it is, althoughit's still not inconceivable to me that we may need a gong.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I'm happy to support "B" symmetricbut I would personally have a slight preference for asymmetric towardease because of the asymmetry I see in the consequences of ashortfall.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. I will support "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would the Secretary read an alternativeB symmetric directive for purposes of a vote?MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. Depending upon progress towardprice stability, trends in economic activity, the behavior of themonetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and domesticfinancial markets, somewhat greater reserve restraint or somewhatlesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in the intermeetingperiod. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to beconsistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from March throughJune at annual rates of about 5-1/2 and 3-1/2 percent, respectively."MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, the only issue I'd raise is whether,given your tendency not to move, "might" would be a better word than"would."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think I'll change it to "might."MR. BLACK. It would be "somewhat" still?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN(?). Yes.MR. BERNARD. "Somewhat greater or somewhat lesser...might beacceptable."-45-3/26/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Mullins YesPresident Parry Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Our next meeting is May the14th. Let's adjourn for lunch.END OF MEETING-46-