Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 2-3, 1991A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, July 2, 1991, at 2:30 p.m. and wascontinued on Wednesday, July 3, 1991, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBlackForrestalKeehnKelleyLaWareMullinsParryMessrs. Guffey, Hoskins, Melzer, and Syron, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of theFederal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas,and Minneapolis, respectivelyKohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Deputy SecretaryCoyne, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. Beebe, Broaddus, R. Davis, Lindsey,Promisel, Scheld, Siegman, Slifman, andMs. Tschinkel, Associate EconomistsMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Danker and Mr. Brady, Section Chiefs, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMr. Oliner, Senior Economist, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Divisionof Monetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Ms. Lovett, Messrs. Lang,Rolnick, and Rosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Kansas City,New York, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and Dallas,respectivelyMr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank ofBostonMessrs. Guentner and Thornton, Assistant Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of New York and St. Louis1. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussionof the economic outlook and its longer-run objectives for monetaryand debt aggregates.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofJuly 2-3, 1991July 2, 1991--Afternoon SessionMR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Sam? Lee.MR. HOSKINS. Sam, what is our outstanding foreign currencyexposure now relative to the limit?MR. CROSS. We hold $20.9 billion against a limit of $25billion.MR. PARRY. Sam, has the market become aware of that swap?MR. CROSS. The market has not become aware of exactly whathas taken place. The market did notice, as I mentioned in mycomments, that the Bundesbank was selling Treasury securities, whichthey needed to do in order to position themselves for this. And themarket has seen the Treasury's balance sheet, released yesterday,which shows the change in certain of the accounts. But unlesssomething has happened in the course of the day, they are still alittle uncertain as to exactly what that means. There are some whoare interpreting these moves as positioning for large-scaleintervention either by the Federal Reserve or the Treasury or in thesale of the Treasury securities by the Bundesbank. So, they've seensome of the data and I think they will get a clearer view of this whenthe Bundesbank announces its balance sheet figures, which are supposedto come out Thursday but may come out on Friday.MR. TRUMAN. They told us this morning close of businesstomorrow.MR. CROSS. It may be Wednesday or Friday. They're nowtalking close of business Wednesday. So, there will be a statement,which will not mention the United States, but will talk about anexchange of these reserve assets for dollars. I imagine people willbe able to put two and two together at that point.MR. PARRY. And you think an interpretation would be thatthis is just something routine or--?MR. CROSS. Well, I think when they see everything that hashappened, they will begin to understand just what it was. Up untilnow they've been wondering whether it was a gathering war chest for[intervention].MR. TRUMAN. Our understanding is that when the Bundesbankreleases its statement at the close of business on Wednesday, theywill say that their gross assets and liabilities have been reducedbecause of an exchange with a foreign monetary authority. When thestatement of the System comes out, given that hint, the market willthen presumably be able to put it together as to what monetaryauthority is involved. We and the Treasury have worked out--MR. CROSS. We've given the Treasury a statement.7/2-3/91MR. TRUMAN. --a general statement just saying: "Yes, theU.S. and German authorities have agreed to reduce their holdings, havebeen working on this for some time, and have come to a mutually agreedoff-market transaction."MR. CROSS. So, by Friday when the Federal Reserve balancesheets come out, they will have all the information.MR. TRUMAN. It's not intended to provide information on thewhole [agreement involving] 10 billion [DM] but essentially what hasat that point impacted on the balance sheet.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sam, when do we release our monthlyreserves consolidated?MR. CROSS. That comes out--MR. TRUMAN. Well, that would be much later. The System'smonthly statement is only published in the Federal Reserve Bulletin.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I think it's released in the pressrelease with the Bulletin.MR. TRUMAN. U.S. reserves are released about two weeks afterthe end of each month. But that combines the valuation adjustments ofall kinds of other things, so it's not--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. These are big enough numbers.MR. TRUMAN. Well, in mid-July that will show what is on thebalance sheets as of the end of June.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It will show the Treasury [balancesheet] as well; that's the thing.MR. CROSS. It shows both.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It shows the Treasury, the ESF--MR. TRUMAN. The United States foreign exchange reserves,including Federal Reserve holdings, are shown valued at market.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Lee.MR. HOSKINS. Sam, it seems to me that there might be somemerit in having the Committee consider formally lowering the limit fora couple of reasons. One, it's symmetric; it shows that we can put areference point back around this Committee discussion of when we wantto take a look at the portfolio. That is, we have to move them down[given that] we move them up. Second, we can face some discussions inthe market that we're simply reloading--that we did a swap and we'rereloading to go after protecting [our] currency again--and I thinkthat would dispel that. Lastly, I think it's the right thing for usto do both in terms of the currency holdings as well as thewarehousing arrangement; since the warehousing arrangement is $4-1/2billion and the limit is $10 billion, it's not a real limit. I don'tthink that cuts down our flexibility. It seems to me that itindicates to a lot of other players--Congress, other central banks,7/2-3/91and the markets--what our intentions are with respect to the currency.And if there is a reason that the Committee has to move, then we cantake a look at the limit; and if we run up against it, then presumablywe'll have a good reason for moving it. But it gives a point ofreference and framework for discussing where we want these activitiesto take place and the magnitude and why we're doing them. But if weleave the limits where they are, we're working in an asymmetric way.We only bump the limit when we hit it and we never lower it.MR. CROSS. Well, we do, of course, look at these limitsevery year. We can certainly examine it to see whether the presentlimits are appropriate. The fact that it has come down from $24 to$21 billion is certainly a decline, but we do have to leave room inthese limits because we are earning interest regularly on our holdingsand we always have to consider what kind of [leeway] we need in orderto allow for the interest accruals as well as for the possibility ofbeing able to operate in the market when it's appropriate to do so.MR. TRUMAN. President Hoskins, I think there are two otherconsiderations. One is that the arrangement, while it reduces ourposition by about $3.3 billion, pertains to a forward transaction, andonly the first chunk of that has been done. So, I think there's arisk that until the full operation is completed you will confuse themarket by lowering the limit in anticipation of what is in thecontract but has not been put out. Secondly, as far as thewarehousing is concerned, the Committee did consider that in Februaryand the amount that has been warehoused has not yet been changed sincethen. Sam and I both in our conversations with the Treasury have toldthem that we think it's important, as this unfolds and they get theactual dollars, to reduce the warehousing and to bring that downsubstantially by the end of the year. So, the beginning of next year,when we have completed this operation, would seem to me the reasonabletime to consider whether the Committee wants to change the limits.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions for Sam? If not, wouldsomebody like to move [approval]?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Shall we go on tothe Domestic Desk [report]? Joan Lovett is here, I gather; hercolleague is off at some unannounced place doing unannounced things.MS. LOVETT. Presumably having a nice time! Thank you.[Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Ms. Lovett?MR. KEEHN. Joan, what is likely to come out of a refundingstudy, and will they [implement any change from] the third quarterout?MS. LOVETT. They are looking at an array of options. Ibelieve their thinking at this point is not to try to change the whole7/2-3/91structure, because it's a process that has worked very well, but tomake some adjustments around the margin. It's possible that if theydo decide to make a change, they would probably want to make thatchange known before we get into the August refunding and conceivablyeven before the next round of two- and five-year note sales.MR. PARRY. Even after taking into account the strength ofeconomic statistics in the month of May, were you surprised by theamount of the increase in bond yields, especially since there weresome indications that financial markets were feeling a little better--or at least it seemed that way--about inflation?MS. LOVETT. Yes, some people feel that the move up to 8-5/8percent or toward that level--it didn't really stay there--wasreflecting an awful lot all at once. And, therefore, the yield hascome back to the 8-1/2 percent trading range and it is sort of beingheld in that range because the views on both sides in terms of the[likely] extent of this recovery seem to be somewhat offsetting.There is a concern that even if the rate of inflation does come down,as analysts say they think it will, there are going to be sufficientpressures elsewhere in the long run that may keep that particular partof the yield curve from moving down much more. In that connectionthey keep looking at the yield environment in Germany and othercountries and feel that it just may be a factor inhibiting anypossible downward move in long rates even if inflation comes inbetter, as they think it will.MR. PARRY. Are they expecting strong real demands forcredit?MS. LOVETT. Well, there have been a lot of reports aboutdemands for credit abroad. I think right now, as far as people cansee, the major source of credit demand is in the U.S. government andperhaps the state and local entities. What the corporate issuers aredoing isn't being seen as an important part of the demand for creditbut as restructuring their own balance sheets.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions for Joan? If not, wouldsomebody like to move to ratify the actions of the Desk since the lastmeeting?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, could I briefly bringup another matter related to Desk activities?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. By all means.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The matter is a little project thatwe've been thinking about up in New York and I've touched base withDon Kohn on it very generally. I affectionately call it "save atree." The concept is basically this: I've asked the two Desks topull together a little report that is intended to remind all theCommittee members of all the routine reports that the two Desks putout, ranging from daily to yearly. What we'd like to do is to send tothe Committee members a paper that outlines those reports and the7/2-3/91frequency with which they're prepared and to raise with Committeemembers the question of whether they all are needed or at leastwhether they all are needed with the same frequency that they arecurrently being produced, recognizing if nothing else that screenshave changed the world. I am simply mentioning this for theCommittee's benefit right now. What I would plan on doing is to makethis package available to Don and his people. Who knows? They maywant to add some things to it! But after they have looked at it, thenwe'd circulate it to the Committee. It's designed so that you can getthrough it probably in 20 minutes or a half hour at the most and[provide] us some indication as to whether all these reports are stillneeded at least with the frequency with which we now produce them. AsI said, it's called "save a tree," but it's also fair to say that ifwe can whittle away at this a little, it would save a lot of time onthe part of the people who prepare these reports.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're saying that if the results comein in the other direction--that maybe if there were howls out there--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's right. Obviously, if theresults come in in the other direction--that people really find thestatus quo valuable--we'll maintain the status quo. We also in thispaper have solicited your suggestions as to whether there are somethings we're not doing that we could do. But I do think, Mr.Chairman, that it's worthwhile at least every now and then to take alook at this and make sure that all the time and effort and money thatgoes into preparing these things is producing the desired results.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mike Prell and Ted Truman.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We've distributed apacket of charts with red lettering on it entitled "Staff Presentationto the Federal Open Market Committee." Statement--see Appendix.MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, gentlemen. Questions foreither?MR. PARRY. Mike, the chart that you had on state and localgovernments was a rather dramatic chart. We're beginning to see a lotof efforts on the part of state and local governments to deal withthese'problems, and the dollars that we're talking about are notinsignificant. For example, California very recently passed a seriesof laws that are going to have an impact of $15.7 billion; and NewYork has a sizable one as well. Typically, we don't spend much timetaking these kinds of influences into account, but are we missingsomething here--especially when we have new developments like this?Is there something that we should be doing to look a little moredeeply as to what the potential micro impacts might be?MR. PRELL. Well, we've been attempting to monitor this. Weraised the flag long ago that there was an emerging sizable imbalance.And we have built into our forecast, certainly since the beginning ofthis year, a picture quite similar to what we have now of historicallyquite weak state and local real purchases.MR. PARRY. There is a tax side as well.7/2-3/91MR. PRELL. That's right, and we've built that in too. Andwe've been noting for some time that a small but not totallyinsignificant ingredient in our expectations for consumer prices wouldbe repeated increments to indirect business taxes. That plays a role,and, of course, even the property tax increases tend indirectly toshow up in the consumer price index through the rents and ownerequivalent rent figures. So, we think those are built into ourdisposable income projection. But this is a sector that is very hardto monitor. The data sources are poor; the numbers upon which allthese estimates are based are benchmarked to shaky data after longlags. We could be blind sided. But as a Wall Street Journal article,I think of yesterday, suggested, there's a very powerful momentum hereas one looks back at history. There are very strong demands forservices; there are various imperatives. The prisons have to bestaffed; there is a backlog of infrastructure investment that has tobe attended to. So, though I think the risks here are reasonablybalanced, there is an upside potential beyond our forecast as well asthe possibility of some shortfall.MR. PARRY. One of the things that is most troubling aboutthe California situation is that basically it isn't a cyclicalproblem; it clearly is a problem that is structural in nature. Andthat's why I think the limitations on the growth of spending and tosome extent also the taxes are likely to be permanent as opposed tosomething to deal with the short-run problems.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Lee.MR. HOSKINS. In the same vein, I guess: Have you lookedback at the Greenbook to see if, at this point in the cycle, there's asystematic error? Do we tend to underestimate the expansion? Myintuitive notion is that we underestimate money growth rates, weunderestimate the expansion, and we underestimate the rate of increasein inflation. Do you have any feel for that?MR. PRELL. We have on occasion studied that. Certainly,I've warned for some time now that most forecasters tend tounderestimate the amplitude of expansions; maybe the same is true ofrecessions. But I've been conscious of the fact that by presentingthese highlights of the forecast the way I have that I have focusedsomewhat on the negatives because I'm trying to explain why we'reexpecting something well short of the norm. But I think these dostand out--for example, the state and local sector--as somethingunusual in a cyclical context. The restraint on federal spending,given the budget laws that have been put in place, is an innovationthat may suggest a departure from the past. It stood up through therecession period; now, we will be into a recovery period; presumablythat won't even give them the option that they had so readily if theyhad wanted to set aside the constraints. And in the constructionsector, as I've illustrated, the imbalances seem to be well beyondanything in recent experience. So, I think there are some realnegatives. Now, we could get surprises. We might do better ininternational trade than we have in the forecast; businesses may feela greater urgency to modernize their equipment and improveproductivity thereby. Maybe we can get an impulse there. Ifeverything went well, maybe consumers would find the wherewithal toincrease their spending relative to income. But, as I illustrated,barring a radical revision to the personal saving rate, we're really7/2-3/91in very low territory. So, I think in each of these cases there arerisks on the up side and the down side; but they add up to somethingthat suggests to us that we're going to fall short of past norms.MR. PARRY. Using the average for the past may be a littlebit of a difficulty [unintelligible]. There are [recovery periods]--Ithink after the '80 and '69-'70 recessions--with increases in thefirst year that were actually smaller than what you're forecasting.So, there are some precedents; both [of those recoveries] weremoderate.MR. PRELL. Well, there has been only one since the KoreanWar, I think, that had less than 6 percent growth for the first year--ruling out the abortive '80 cyclical expansion because that ended soquickly.MR. PARRY. '69-70?MR. PRELL. Right. So, this is a distinct outlier, whichgives me some hesitation. Indeed, one of the features of therecession thus far has been a quite healthy inventory liquidation.And that is probably part of the correlation one sees between thedepth of the recession and the size of the rebound. In this casewe're looking for a sizable inventory swing because of how strong theliquidation has been. Yet we're saying the final demands are going tohold down this overall upswing. Obviously, none of this is certainand we recognize the risks on both sides.MR. HOSKINS. Just to follow up, though maybe it's more aquestion for Don later on: How do you get this--to me, troublesome--5-1/2 percent money growth [assumption] in the Greenbook? Do you viewthat as a monetary stimulus? Do you view it as a neutral [factor],even though it's an increase in money growth? I'm not sure how youget your forecast. Do you start with nominal [GNP] and back out moneyand velocity or--MR. PRELL. Well, I think we back out money via a velocity ormoney demand relationship, having derived a forecast using someinterest rate assumption--in this case stability of the federal fundsrate. That is the assumption made.MR. HOSKINS. Then you'll have a very unusual velocitybehavior for this recovery, because there hasn't been a recovery thathas had positive velocity--at least in the last four.MR. PRELL. There hasn't been a recovery in which interestrates came in absolutely stable in the short end either.MR. HOSKINS. Sure.MR. PRELL. I recognize the artificiality of this but, as Donwill be exploring, I'm sure, there are special factors in theenvironment that condition our expectations about velocity.MR. PARRY. Do you see faster money growth?7/2-3/91MR. HOSKINS. We usually have money growth for eight quartersafter recovery starts that is a couple of points faster than the trendrate prior to the recession.MR. PARRY. Right.MR. HOSKINS. And velocity is usually negative for eightquarters on average.MR. PARRY. Right.MR. PRELL. I did note that one of the things that suggeststo us that possibly there's less of a monetary impulse to thisrecovery is the fact that thus far we haven't seen much of anacceleration in money stock. If you look at real M2 in past cycles,for example, it's very clear that around the troughs and early inrecoveries there typically has been very marked acceleration.MR. KOHN. I can address this now since the subject has beenraised, and I'll skip it when I get to my briefing. We see a coupleof things that are different this time than in past recoveries.First, we are still predicting some further downward shifts in moneydemand. We've had a history over the last year of money falling shortof what we'd expect, given nominal income and interest rates. Basedon historical experience, we're predicting that that will continue,although at diminishing rates. So, we have some downward shifts ofmoney demand that we haven't had in previous expansions. Secondly, wecame in, as Mike just said, with a less steeply sloped downwardtrajectory of interest rates. I believe that a lot of the extra moneywe got early in an expansion before was a lagged effect of theprevious stimulus coming in. And we have considerably less stimuluscoming into this trough, in terms of the trajectory of the federalfunds rate, other interest rates, and certainly long-term interestrates, than we've had in other expansions. Third, this is the firstexpansion we've ever had without Reg Q or without Reg Q being removed.Look at 1983. A huge portion of the M2 growth in the first year ofthat expansion was the result of MMDAs and the removal of Reg Qceilings. So, we don't believe that deposit rates have been heldbelow equilibrium over the last couple of years as they probably werein a Reg Q environment. We are predicting that deposit rates couldedge down even further in the first couple of quarters of thisexpansion. That will raise opportunity costs and damp M2 demands.So,'those are the three factors that we think differentiate this fromprevious expansion periods.MR. HOSKINS. My point was that there is a rationale; Ianticipated it, and it's a sensible argument. The problem, as we lookback over 30 years of M2, is that all kinds of special factors haveoccurred and yet if we ran M2 at 3 percent forever we seem to get toprice stability. So it troubles me because we're moving away from atrend rate that we worked very hard for four years to bring down to 4percent, and it's causing me some concerns. All I'm saying is thatthere is a lot of slippage in terms of forecasting these things, and Idon't put a lot of confidence in these relationships.MR. PRELL. I think we've emphasized that the kind of moneystock growth that we're anticipating over the next year and a halfcould not be sustained over the subsequent years and [remain7/2-3/91consistent with a] move toward that significantly lower inflationyou're seeking. So, yes, this would have to be a transitoryphenomenon; if you want to move toward price stability, [M2 growth]has to move significantly lower and, obviously, there are alternativesin the Bluebook that describe such a path.MR. HOSKINS. Well, I want to raise one last point and that'syour sacrifice ratios that are involved here. If you ran a forward-looking model with forward-looking expectations, then I think youwould get a different picture.MR. PRELL. I think in essence we've really embodied in thisforecast a bit more favorable sacrifice ratio than some of our modelswould predict. But, indeed, we have not assumed that within this timespan we're going to get an improved tradeoff coming from enhancedcredibility and so on. But if moderate policies are pursued and it'sclear that we are pursuing that objective wholeheartedly, then onemight expect that tradeoff to improve over time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Lee Hoskins has almost asked my question, butnot quite. These scenarios really have been very helpful and thepresentation was helpful, but I suppose it's always natural thatsomebody wants something else. And the one item that I would like tohave had, of course, would have been the one that we control. Thatis, I'd like to have seen an alternative scenario of keeping moneygrowth at 4 percent. What happens over '91, '92, and '93 if, insteadof keeping the fed funds rate constant, we keep M2 constant at 4percent--which would be identical to the rate it has grown over thelast three years and identical to its growth rate from Q4 1990 to thepresent time?MR. PRELL. Governor Angell, the alternative II strategy onpage 9 of the Bluebook is an approximation; it has 4-1/2 percent M2.MR. HOSKINS. That's the disturbing page that has thebaseline for three years at 5-1/2 percent money growth.MR. ANGELL. Okay.MR. PRELL. As you can see, we get into the vicinity of pricestability by 1995, with allowances for measurement questions and soon. We're certainly close, if we're not there.MR. ANGELL. Yes, it really does. Thank you; I'm sorry Imissed that. And the real GNP sacrifice is how much? It's not verymuch in the out years.MR. PRELL. Well, the model says that roughly 1 percentagepoint of extra unemployment for a year gives you a 1/2 percentagepoint reduction in inflation, and we have not built in additionalcredibility effects that could improve that tradeoff as timeprogresses. So, it might well be that one could achieve, with thesame unemployment path or a better unemployment path, as good orbetter price performance by the mid-1990s.7/2-3/91MR. ANGELL. But that path shows unemployment rates actuallyaccelerating through the period. Does that seem surprising to you?MR. KOHN. Well, in the staff's estimation, in order to holddown money growth and nominal GNP, you have to have higher realinterest rates. And in order to get this kind of price performance by'95 you have to hold [real rates] up there and the unemployment ratehas to be high. Clearly, we could have fine-tuned this to some extentto get a little more unemployment now and a little less later. I wasbothered also by this accelerating path of unemployment.MR. ANGELL. Okay.MR. KOHN. But I think the basic point there is that withoutcredibility effects and the sacrifice ratio somewhere in theneighborhood of 2 or a little less, you're going to have to have quitea bit of unemployment to get price stability or something approachingprice stability by 1995.MR. ANGELL. But if you were fine-tuning it, Don, then youwould probably take the 6-1/2 percent 1992 unemployment rate up a bitand maybe take down the 7-1/4 percent.MR. KOHN. Yes.MR. PRELL. Well, there's another option. I think Donconsidered getting into this--and he's discussed it in the past--thatthere is this entry problem as you approach price stability. In asense you're going to overshoot unless you bring that unemploymentrate down fairly rapidly by around 1996. So, what one would dopresumably is accommodate some faster growth out in '94 and '95 andthen you would have a smoother landing as you went toward pricestability. This just goes mechanically throughout without the kind offine-tuning that one could do here.MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. PRELL. So, that maybe overstates the bleakness of theemployment--MR. ANGELL. Well, thank you for doing precisely what Iwanted you to do!MR. BLACK. Except they had it a point too high!MR. HOSKINS. Just one question on the baseline. One way todo a baseline would be to take the past growth rates. You must havesomething else in mind.MR. KOHN. Well, the baseline was the extension of the staffGreenbook forecast. So, we had the 5-1/2 percent we're projecting forthe next 18 months. Then we extended that through '93 with thejudgmental forecast and also through '94 and '95. We didn't set outwith a 5-1/2 percent rule. What we did was to set out what we thoughtwas a policy strategy: that is, to bring the unemployment rate downgradually but to bring the inflation rate down gradually at the sametime. Recognize that if you're going to continue to bring theinflation rate down, you can't have the unemployment rate at or below-10-7/2-3/91the natural rate. And these money growth rates fell out of thatcalculation. We didn't say: "Let's do 5-1/2 percent forever and seewhat happens." It was an accident of the relationship of nominal GNPand interest rates.MR. HOSKINS. Some people will judge policy change as achange in the monetary growth rate.MR. KOHN. Right.MR. HOSKINS. And so for them a baseline would be just aconsistent growth rate; and that's obviously my problem.MR. PRELL. Well, we tried to describe what our baselinemeant because, as Don described, it was an extension of the Greenbookforecast assuming that you are going to leave some small margin ofslack to bring down the unemployment rate gradually.MR. HOSKINS. I understand that.MR. PARRY. My recollection of our discussion of the naturalrate of unemployment in March was that it was about 5 percent.MR. PRELL. We found a range of estimates from about 5-1/2 to6 percent, and we've determined that we would bet on something closerto the 5-1/2 percent.MR. PARRY. But then you said you used the MPS model fortaking this out. And the MPS model has what--6.2 or 6 percent?MR. PRELL. It has been adjusted to be consistent with thejudgmental assessment.MR. PARRY. Oh, I see. So you made a judgmental assessment.Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Mike, you mentioned in passing your estimationof zero inflation as 1-1/4 percent, given the measurement bias?MR. PRELL. I was speaking loosely, but I think one couldmake the case that something in the 1 percent vicinity might beconsistent, when you allow for the possibilities of substitution, lookat quality change measurement problems, and so on. But that's[likely] to be settled when we get closer--MR. MULLINS. Yes, I know it may be premature to talk aboutthat, but when the time comes--MR. PRELL. We have a study already in process.MR. MULLINS. When the time comes, if my term isn't up yet,which is in '96, we might have a little more background work on that,I agree.MR. BLACK. My term will be up; I sure would like to knownow.-11-7/2-3/91SPEAKER(?). We'll send you a postcard!MR. PRELL. In fact, we'd be happy to distribute a paper bysome staff members that was presented at the AEA meetings lastDecember, which addresses this very question as a first cut.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for the gentlemen?If not, who would like to start the Committee discussion?MR. MCTEER. Texas and the Eleventh District continue to lagthe national economy. In the fall that was an advantage that we had;our employment kept growing while the downturn in the national economywas occurring. That came to an end in January and February and we'renow lagging on the wrong end. We had a weak May. I could see thatMay was our first month with expansion nationally. When we went intothe recession in the fall, rising oil prices helped cushion oureconomy in the Southwest and now falling natural gas prices have beena problem of considerable concern. They have been low and decliningfor quite a while. A lot of the factors that have been cited heretoday as being a possible drag on the recovery nationally are factorsalso in the Eleventh District. I don't believe it has been mentionedtoday, but the perceptions have not changed out there; the creditcrunch is still with us and is real. The banks are healing; they arebecoming profitable and their measures are improving. But they arenot lending at the moment, as far as we can tell. The decline in bankcredit continues and they're getting illiquid, but the lending tosmall businesses has not really accelerated. And that's theimpression that most of the people I talk to have.Fiscal drag is also a reality in the Eleventh Districtstates, particularly in Texas; we hear more and more talk of servicecutbacks and layoffs and/or higher taxes. And Texas is debating thequestion of whether to have an income tax for the first time in a longtime. But it's certain that there's going to be some sort of fiscalconstraint for some time to come. There's a good bit of concern aboutdefense expenditures--defense cutbacks and base closings. We had fivebases on the chopping block the last couple of days and three of themwere axed. That, of course, is going to occur over time but it doesaffect current behavior as people anticipate the loss of about 7,000jobs in the Fort Worth area and a bit less in--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The loss of Lyndon Johnson!MR. ANGELL. And Jim Wright!MR. KELLEY. And Sam Rayburn!MR. MCTEER. That's all I wanted to say.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I hate to say this because it maybe a source of worry and concern for the staff, but our projection for'91 is almost exactly what you all have. So, you may want to go backand check yours! As I read the Greenbook, adjusting for the swings inthe overseas earnings of oil companies, it's pretty clear that the[recession] must have hit bottom in the second quarter. That's areasonable conclusion based on what we know about the April and May-12-7/2-3/91figures and the little we know about the June figures. Whatever thefinal record does show, I don't think the bottom will come any laterthan July in view of this evidence we have of increased consumerspending and strength in residential construction. In any case, Ithink that the staff's 1991 projections are very plausible and thatthe risks of error are about equal on both sides for both real GNP andinflation.When we get to '92, however, we differ right much. We aremuch more optimistic on both the growth side and on the inflationside. We're projecting about 1/2 percentage point more growth in realGNP and we're forecasting only a 3 percent rise in the CPI, which isabout 3/4 of a point lower than the Greenbook and well below mostother forecasts that we've seen. Now, I need to emphasize somethingthat we have already alluded to earlier, and that is that our staff's1992 projections are based, in accordance with our instructions, onwhat we would regard as an appropriate monetary policy in the next sixquarters. So, what we've done is to assume that M2 will come inslightly above the midpoint of its current range this year and thatthe FOMC will lower the range for 1992 to 2 to 6 percent and will holdthe actual growth of money within that range. This assumption of alower target range for 1992 has a direct bearing on our projectionsince we believe, given the background of very favorable behavior inthe money supply over the last few years, that reducing the rangefurther would increase significantly the credibility of our anti-inflationary strategy and, consequently, would result in a morefavorable division of nominal GNP between real growth and inflation--because of [how we factor in] forward-looking expectations, Lee. Andwithout that strategy [unintelligible]. If we achieve what we thinkare these highly plausible results, then we think the prospects of thesubsequent years after 1992 will be very bright indeed. I think wehave a real opportunity here to make significant progress--the bestwe've had since I've been around.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The coffee is here and I neglected totake the break; I notice everyone is running for coffee, so why don'twe take a short break and come back in 5 minutes?[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Begin, s'il vous plait!MR. PARRY. After a relatively strong performance during muchof the national recession, more recently the Twelfth District'seconomy has actually weakened. Total District employment fell on amonth-to-month basis in February, March, April, and May. The Februaryand March declines were due to weaknesses only in California; butemployment losses elsewhere in the District account for the April andMay declines. However, I should point out that total Districtemployment still remains 0.4 of a percent above the May 1990 level,with California the only District state to lose employment over theyear. District residential property sales picked up this spring; inMay, we saw the fourth consecutive month of increased sales activityand increased median home prices in California. However, it appears-13-7/2-3/91as though construction activity has not rebounded yet. Boeingrecently announced a major expansion of its Puget Sound areafacilities. Facilities will be built or expanded at about 25 sites inthe area and the construction cost is estimated at almost $3 billionover the next two years. Most of the facilities will supportproduction of Boeing's commercial aircraft, including the 737, the767, and the new 777.Turning to the national outlook, our view is not really muchdifferent from that presented in the Greenbook. In the near term, weexpect the main sources of recovery to be increases in personalconsumption spending and also a short-lived inventory swing. Nextyear consumption will continue to support GNP in our forecast andthere should be something of a turnaround in business equipmentspending. Like the Greenbook, we expect a decline in inflation overthe next year and a half. Indeed, it seems to us that there is a fairchance that CPI inflation could be brought down in 1992 to as low asthe 3 percent that Bob Black mentioned. Much of this improvementclearly reflects the existence of considerable slack in the economy.However, a good part also stems from the recent appreciation of thedollar and, therefore, may not be of a permanent nature. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. While the economicdata that we've been receiving in the Sixth District tend to confirmthat the recovery is at a turning point, if it hasn't already turned,clearly we still have some soft spots to contend with. Our contactsare reporting that there is lots of traffic in the stores and in theshopping malls but that spending has been fairly restrained to date.Where we are getting sales, they are concentrated primarily in appareland home furnishings. Our recovery in home sales that has been goingon for a while continues, and permits are up in most states of theDistrict. We continue to have the problem that is associated withother places around the country: namely, the empty office buildingsand retail spaces as well as excess capacity in manufacturing. Andall of these things are tending to diminish business fixed investment.Orders and sales of apparel, household products, textiles, andpackaging are increasing, which is good news. On the other hand,orders for autos, auto parts, and other consumer durables are eitherdeclining or flat. Our exports are about as they were at the time ofthe last FOMC meeting; that is, we're not doing as well in exports asthe rest of the country, although one producer of telecommunicationsequipment recently reported strong gains in exports, particularly toJapan, which I thought was interesting. On the state problem thatwe've all been talking about, the three most populous states in theSixth District--Florida, Georgia, and Tennessee--have now increasedtheir estimates of budget shortfalls and they're attempting to dealwith these in a variety of ways. Florida has a freeze on stateemployment; Tennessee tried to push through a state income tax butfailed; and in Georgia there are just tightening budget constraints.The credit crunch seems to be abating somewhat, although the demandfor loans is still very, very soft. One banker told me that his loandemand has picked up considerably but unfortunately none of theapplicants was creditworthy! [Laughter] I don't know whether we wantto count that or not. The agricultural situation has been dampened--no pun intended--by very heavy rains, which are beginning to[moderate] a bit so the farmers are now getting out into the fields.-14-7/2-3/91That's the picture in the Sixth District; it's a little better thanthe last time we reported, although there are some soft spots, as I'veindicated.With respect to the national economy, we have somedifferences from the Greenbook forecast with respect both to growthand inflation. And the differences are magnified by the fourth-quarter-over-fourth-quarter comparison; they're not quite as extremeif you look at the annual averages. We have less growth in the earlystages of the recovery as well as higher inflation. Both of thosetend to even out and come a little closer to the Greenbook as we getfurther out into the forecast. Without going through all of thesectors, it seems to me that the basic difference from the Greenbookis that we're showing a slower pace of growth in the labor force thandoes the Board staff over the forecast horizon. This gives us lessgrowth and amounts to a more pessimistic view on our part. What itcomes down to, it seems to me, is that we're simply getting lessimprovement on the wage front. On that score I also don't see in ourforecast very much improvement in the services sector, and that'ssomething that perhaps we ought to be looking at a little morecarefully as time goes on. What I'm more concerned about than any ofthat, though, is the continued fragility in the financial system. Ithink that's a shock that could come and kick us one of these days.It's not only the actual condition of some of the banks around thecountry and in my District as well but the continued publicity andpessimistic reports that are coming from the various agencies inWashington. That is having a very, very negative effect on people'sattitudes toward banking and their basic confidence in the economicsystem. I think that's unfortunate and I hope it doesn't deteriorateto the point where it has an effect on the recovery itself.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The District'seconomic growth continues to improve, with agriculture being thedominant source of that strength, but manufacturing and constructioncontinue to show some additional improvement. In the agriculturalsector, the harvest of wheat--a major agricultural product in theDistrict--has been virtually completed. They've gone throughOklahoma, Kansas, and are now in eastern Nebraska. That wheat crop isestimated to be something like 25 percent less than last year--lastyear being a bumper crop. But the more important aspect is that wheatprices are at very low levels. As a matter of fact, I think they'renow at the level that Wayne Angell experienced when he got out of highschool 10 years ago! [Laughter] The fact of the matter is that therewill be a cash flow but it's just not an outstanding crop. Part ofthe diminishment in the actual grain production of about 25 percentcomes from less planting acreage, but also there are fairly spottyareas across the District in terms of either wet or dry [conditions]or some infestation. Beyond that in the agricultural sector, cattleprices have declined from their record levels but still remain aprincipal source of cash flow for the farmers.In manufacturing, the District automobile plants, with theexception of the one in Kansas City, have been operating on a fulltwo-shift production schedule. And that plant in Kansas City, whichis a new GM plant, will be putting its second shift back on inSeptember, suggesting that those production schedules are gearing up-15-7/2-3/91to meet what they hope to be sales. Construction activity in theDistrict also continues to improve. The building contract awards inthe District in April, for example, were nearly 25 percent above year-ago levels and that was principally a result of public works projects,or infrastructure kinds of projects. However, the residential and thenonresidential contracts have shown improvement over year-ago levels,so there is some hope that those will continue and we will not haveanother downturn in that area. The energy sector has been a deadissue in the sense that prices are such that it just does notencourage any new exploration; indeed, they've shut down some of thesmall producing, stripper-type wells as a result of the current oilprices and projections of prices in the future. On the other side,natural gas prices, which the Tenth District probably is better knownfor--it has a greater supply of natural gas certainly than ofpetroleum--continue to deteriorate and as a result there's not greateuphoria in that area.On the national level, we're not greatly different from theGreenbook forecast but, like Mr. Forrestal, we have a little differentpattern. For example, we do not show in the last half of 1991 as muchvigor in the economy as the staff does. As best as I can determine,looking at the relative figures, the staff has a fairly sharp comebackin inventories which we do not have. On the other hand, in 1992 we'rea bit stronger than they are and the averages for the next sixquarters together are right on the button at about 3-3/4 percentgrowth through that period and in 1993.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As far as the FirstDistrict goes, I'd say that there has not been much change. It'spretty clear at this point that the District has been through its mostwrenching adjustment since World War II. A lot of that, obviously, isbecause of the bubble that we were coming out of. Much has to do withspecific problems that are not sensitive to the U.S. economy. Inmanufacturing, we have almost weekly announcements of layoffs; a lotof them have to do with some specific problems in our high-techindustry. In the defense sector, we have announcements of shutdownsof plants; but that has to do with Tip O'Neill not being Speaker [ofthe House]; they're not sensitive to macro policy. Outside of thehigh-tech area, the encouraging sign that we get in talking tomanufacturers is that the general trend seems to be that things aren'tgetting any worse and about half of them seem to see things gettingsomewhat better. They do have a very, very cautious approach tocapital spending. Generally, we don't see any problems withinventories and I'm seeing a favorable price performance from theirsuppliers. As far as retail sales go, consistent with what hashappened in other Districts, ex-autos we have seen some significantpickup in our District. But we've had very, very warm weather andthat probably is part of it. In the real estate sector, as has beenmentioned in several other cases, we have serious problems remaining.Probably the best estimates are that we have about 54 million squarefeet of vacant space. Even if we were to get a recovery fairly soon,optimistically we would be looking at an absorption rate of 4 or 5million, tops, of that space. So, it just looks as if we have a waysto go there. That, of course, has had very, very serious effects andwe're a long way from being out of the woods. In terms of ourfinancial sector, there is a lot of discussion on talk radio about-16-7/2-3/91that. I suppose the favorable aspect of it is that it doesn't seem toaffect--except in a broader consumer confidence sense--people'sbehavior. People are not running from one bank to another; they feelquite secure with there being federal insurance. And some people aresaying they've been through three institutions and they expect they'llgo through a couple more before they get to another situation. We dohave some feeling that a credit crunch is still going on but, againconsistent with what Bob Forrestal said, loan demand for projects orenterprises one would want to finance is quite weak. In theresidential sector we are seeing some pickup in housing; that hascontinued. That is not reflected in production yet, though, becauseof the overhang that we still have.As far as the national economy goes, I have very little toadd to the Greenbook forecast. I am comfortable with the forecastboth in terms of its likelihood and also in thinking that it's not abad situation to have evolve. One can't help but be struck, as waspointed out by Mike in his presentation, by the unusual nature of thisrecovery--the importance of inventory swings and of exports in termsof what we're looking forward to. And I think all of this means thatwe almost certainly have reached the bottom; but there are significantuncertainties about the upswing. Although hopefully not gratuitously,I find myself comfortable with the staff's assumption of what thebaseline is because on a somewhat [capriciously] velocity-adjusted M2basis I consider that to be about what we had built into the baseline.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, with regard tothe national economy, our forecast is very similar to the staff'sforecast. The differences are really very much at the margin. Maybemy memory is faulty, but it's interesting that the range of themembers' forecasts this time, particularly for real GNP, seems a bitnarrower than I ever remember in the past. Our outlook is a littlemore modest than the staff forecast for both this year and next. Ithink, like Roger Guffey, that the main difference is in the inventoryarea. Although the staff forecast would suggest a somewhat smallerinventory swing this time than in the past, nonetheless, our numbersare even a bit more modest than that. I think the other differencesreally are very modest and our numbers line up reasonably well.With regard to the District, there are increasing signs thatwe have reached stabilization and I think the prospect for renewedgrowth has improved quite a good deal since the last meeting.District employment was essentially unchanged in May after decliningsignificantly in April and, as we [survey] the hiring plans for thethird quarter, the employment situation looks to be getting better.As always, the auto sector is absolutely key to the District and, ofcourse, we are in the model changeover period and there is an awfullot of uncertainty out there. But I think on balance--maybe it'sbecause people are looking to a new model--that the attitudes are alittle more positive. And we would anticipate that productionschedules in the third quarter would add a full percentage point tothe GNP. Even though auto inventories at retail are in good balance,nonetheless, I think the production risks continue to be on the weakside. Given the results of the 1991 model year, any way you look atit there is an awful lot of nervousness about the 1992 models, and wearen't going to know the market reaction to all this until later this-17-7/2-3/91month and really into August. But the dealer attitudes are better;fewer are operating in loss positions now than was the case before andin general, as I say, the auto industry attitude is a little morepositive. This is working down into the supplier sector. The steelbusiness is a bit better than was the case at the time of the lastmeeting. The forecast of shipments for the year has been moved up abit to 77-78 million tons. And the initial outlook for next year--atthis point it has to be very [preliminary]--is that shipments willcome in at about 80 million tons. But still, it's important toremember that these numbers are significantly lower than the 85million tons that were shipped in 1990. In the capital goods area, anawful lot of weakness continues. Construction orders still are wellbelow last year; the machine tool business is soft. Heavy truck salesthis year are about 15 percent lower than was the case last year,which was not a very good year.In the agricultural sector, we have a couple of interestingdichotomies. First, starting with the weather: Parts of Iowa arevery wet--much too wet in fact to get into the fields; but some partsof Indiana haven't had enough rain. Nonetheless, on balance, with anyreasonable luck on growing conditions it should be a good productionyear. The planting is about completed in the District. For some,though, I would say it was the latest planting that they'veexperienced in a great many years. And the latest AgricultureDepartment survey on planting would suggest that District corn andsoybean acreage is up just a bit this year, which brings the otherdichotomy forward: namely, food prices. Because of the increasedacreage and significantly lower export opportunities, the carryoverstocks this year are likely to be heavy, and prices are undersignificant [downward] pressure. Corn and soybean prices particularlyare under a lot of pressure. Therefore, farm income is going to bedown, and I am beginning to hear some bad news out of some parts ofthe agricultural sector that are a little more highly leveraged thanothers. We could have some more problems there.On the inflation front, the news continues to be good and theoutlook is even better. Materials prices are under a lot of[downward] pressure and competitive conditions continue to be veryheavy. For some of the large manufacturers whom I talk to, theincreases in their purchase prices this year are lower than last year.One very large manufacturer that I talk to from time to time says thatin fact they have a lot of leverage; they have been able to achieve adecrease in the overall cost of their raw materials and otherpurchased products this year. So, they've accomplished a good deal.Labor contracts continue to be favorable, with fairly long contractsand good terms. But I would caution that there are at least two majorcontracts in the District coming up this fall that could make adifference. But, net, District conditions seem to have stabilized,albeit at a fairly low level, and people's outlooks seem to be muchmore positive than at the time of the last meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Thank you. If you go through the Districteconomy sector by sector, I think you conclude that conditions aremixed. That is, you can find some sectors that are doing reasonablywell and others that are not. On the other hand, if you cut itdifferently and ask how the second quarter looks compared to the-18-7/2-3/91first, almost universally I think people would report that the secondquarter looks a good deal better than the first. Some of that isundoubtedly seasonal but, even discounting for that, it is prettyobvious from the reports we get from our directors and advisorycouncil members and so forth that the economy in the District clearlydid better in the second quarter.With regard to the national outlook, I find myself quitecomfortable with the Greenbook forecast, primarily for one importantreason that I think some people were getting at earlier. Presumably,the path of the economy isn't independent of the policies pursued.Following the '81-'82 recession we had a massive tax cut andexpansionary monetary policy for at least some time. If memory servesme correctly, we had some of the same kind of policy mix coming out of'73-'75, and it wasn't surprising that we had a very strong expansion.I think we will get a modest expansion this time, basically because Idon't think we're going to see fiscal stimulus and I'm assuming wewill not see much in the way of monetary stimulus. So those things gohand-in-hand, and I think they give us the kind of path for theeconomy that the Greenbook suggests.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, my story has largely been told. I thinkthe Philadelphia District is much in line with what is going on inmost of the country. We're in the process of bottoming out butthere's no lift-off yet. I would say attitudes in the business andbanking community are hopeful but still cautious. Business peopledon't read as much into a tenth or two increase from month-to-month asdo analysts. I think they tend to look more at their absolute levelof output in business and they still see that business is low eventhough it's stabilizing. One gets the sense that a little good newswould go a long way toward substantially improving confidence. Ithink the other side is true, too: Bad news would have a magnifiedeffect in the pessimistic direction. But I think things havestabilized and attitudes are lagging some and will probably catch up.I can ditto pretty much what Bob Forrestal said about creditconditions and banks. I'm getting more calls than I would like frombankers who basically are saying "I told my board that at the end ofthe year I was taking a big write-off and I ought to have most of itbehind us; now I'm coming back and going to have to put in for somemore." I think the worst is over but there's still bad news comingout. And that does feed into this vulnerability issue concerning thefinancial sector. People are just being bombarded with it; to me it'sthe largest vulnerability that we have. I think you would find thatcredit demand is still weak. Business people will say there is acredit crunch while the bankers will say there is no credit crunch butthey just need to make good loans. I think that is still there.As far as the forecast goes, I think the staff is broadlycorrect in forecasting a modest upturn for all the reasons that havebeen given. I would see perhaps less growth in the second half ofthis year and more next year, simply because there are these cautiousattitudes out there. Lots of business people are largely writing off'90 and '91 and looking more toward '92. But that's certainly asubtle difference, and I think the broad contours are correct.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.-19-7/2-3/91MR. ANGELL. My forecast for nominal GNP is a little lowerthan the staff's for the four quarters ending in the fourth quarter of'91. Frankly, I think I would be more comfortable if I were adisinterested party looking at the Board staff's forecast than I wouldwith my own because mine seems somewhat extreme to me in some ways.Yet I think I'm looking at the very same things that Mike Prell haslooked at in terms of modifying his forecast to a less-than-exuberantrecovery. But Don is certainly correct when he suggests that Reg Q isnot [a factor] this time, and I think that does mean some verydifferent things for money growth. [Several] of you have mentionedthe tax and fiscal policies, and I think that has to be noted as adifference this time around. That is, quite often we get either somemore liberal or faster depreciation of capital rules or investment taxcredit or a reduction of capital gains tax; there's always some dealout there, and this time there is no deal out there. We have toremember that this time we're also not getting any action in the longbond as we ordinarily do. If you take either the 12 months before therecession started or take a point halfway into the recession, whichwould be all of 1990, long bond rates in 1991 don't move [in a waythat suggests] they're going to be any different than 1990 long bondrates. So, that's quite an adverse factor for the residential realestate sector that needs recovery. Ordinarily, we find that householdexpenditures do seem to relate to what happens to home starts--notjust appliances but crazy things like automobiles seem also to berelated. I think we have a consumer out there who is also moredamaged in regard to his exuberance for the future than we've seen inall of the post-World War II recoveries. I just don't think there's alot of enthusiasm for borrowing and spending. Finally, therealization by many consumers that there is no tax deductibility ontheir interest charges is a factor there. So, this seems to be aconsumer who is behaving differently. I know, Mike, that you have itin your numbers, too; I'm just taking it down a step more than youdid, which is probably too extreme to be worth much. But that tendsalso to get me a little better picture in regard to the imports; thatis, I think the consumer is being a little less exuberant so I do notexpect the rebound in imports that the staff has in its projection.What really worries me is that we have not had the kind ofprice effect that it seems to me we should have had. That is, giventhe money growth rates, given the slack that's in the economy, andgiven this recession effect, it doesn't seem to be there. Why havecommodity prices failed to decline as much as they ordinarily wouldduring recession periods? Now, it also looks as if commodity pricesare not spiking upward in a recovery like they ordinarily would. So,we have a different picture in commodity prices than I've seen in arecession and, frankly, I'm very puzzled by it. At the same time thatcommodity prices do not show the extent of the recovery, I think it'ssomewhat strange that gold prices failed to move down. Given centralbanks' reduced willingness to own gold, or given what I see as areluctance in the foreign central banks and others to hold as largegold stocks, given countries in southeast Asia who have changed theirattitudes [toward gold], and given the Soviet Union [sales], I don'tunderstand why gold prices do not come down. It suggests to me thatthere may be some what we call "crazies" out there who believe thatgold is a good [inflation hedge]. And I guess I think that [inflationconcern] is in the long bond.-20-7/2-3/91On money growth, I do not expect 5-1/2 percent money growthwith interest rates staying where they are. With interest ratesstaying at current levels, I expect lower money growth--more like whatwe've seen. So, I do not see that it takes a dramatic run-up inshort-term interest rates in order to keep money growth at 4 percent.Well, that's a contrary and rather rambling indication of my beingperplexed by what is going on. So, I don't have much confidence in myforecast, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I think the direction of theeconomy, as indicated by the recent news, is obviously up. And I havea good deal of confidence that indeed we are in a recovery mode andthat the staff projection is a reasonable one. My concern is that therecovery doesn't abort along the way. Without being able to identifypossible external shocks that might stall out the recovery, I continueto think the downside risk is significant. And I believe that it iscentered in the financial system. Although the stock market continuesto surprise me by its strength, I'm concerned that continued weaknessin corporate profits and another spate of bad news about the bankscould cause the market to retreat and the confidence of both consumersand bankers to evaporate. Without more vigorous lending by banks andthe concurrent demand from both consumers and businesses, the recoverycould run out of gas. I don't see the banks exhibiting rosier cheeksmuch before the first quarter of next year, which makes the next sixmonths critical. And in that kind of an environment, we need toremain flexible and tactically nimble in these months ahead. Givenall that, I would favor keeping the range for M2 growth just where itis. It might be a serious mistake to signal our intent to slow thegrowth in the aggregates before we have confirmation of the strengthof the recovery.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The economic forecast that myassociates in New York have put together is not now materially orsystematically different from Mike's forecast; there are somedifferences around the edges. In listening to the talk around thetable, Mr. Chairman, I'm inclined to the view that Mr. Prell and hiscolleagues perhaps should qualify for a gold star either forforecasting or for courage in standing pat against the skepticism ofmany of us around the table for the past six months.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. With an oak leaf cluster!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. With an oak leaf cluster! You'renot there yet, Mike, but you look a heck of a lot better than wethought. I do think it's a great tribute to Mike and his colleaguesthat they were willing to stand pat, essentially, with their forecastwhen a lot of people, including myself, weren't buying it. Now, it'snot in the barn as Roger Guffey would say--or the bin, I guess. Inever get those two things straight, bins and barns, but--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Barn is for hogs; bin is for corn.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Okay. [I had] good training; I wasout in the Ninth District, too!-21-7/2-3/91MR. BLACK. You left too soon!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I left too soon. In terms of theanecdotal [evidence], I can say that even among the industrial sectortypes that I talk to, if nothing else, the decibel count is down abit. And if you try really hard, you can even find one or two hereand there that acknowledge that something looks a little better. Ifthat's not confirmation, Mike, I don't know what is! Having saidthat, there still is, of course, a not-so-silent minority who remainconcerned about a double-dip. And something that surprised me alittle is that we actually hear a little more these days about thecredit crunch than maybe we did even six months ago. That may just besome people smelling the coffee for the first time; nevertheless,certainly that was the impression I had with the fall meeting of ourSmall Business Advisory Council as opposed to the last two meetingswhen they were in. I do agree with John LaWare, Bob Forrestal, EdBoehne, and perhaps others, who have made the point that in terms ofthe near-term risks, the financial fragility factor probably looms asthe largest. [The financial system] is still tender. I think John'scomments about some of the events at the end of last week illustratethat point. On the other hand, and for what it's worth, we've justgotten through examinations of a couple of the big banks that weexamine directly and I see some evidence, at least on the basis ofthat small sample, that the rise in problem loans is stabilizing at ahigh but, in these cases, not alarming level. I'm also hearingreports from my own examiners in connection with the shared-bankcredit review, Mr. Chairman, in cases where they are working jointlywith the Comptroller and the FDIC--for the first time certainly thatthey're willing to talk to me about it and I don't know whether othersare picking this up as well--about rather sharp collisions betweenexaminers working on the same credits. The suggestion is that theother two agencies are differing sharply in some cases with my peopleover classifications of the very same loans.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Which direction?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. [Down.] I don't know what to makeof that, except that I do have a fairly high degree of confidence inmy own examiners. I don't know if others have picked this up or not.MR. HOSKINS. Only one.MR. KEEHN. Did you say that the difference is that they'rerating down versus your ratings?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.MR. HOSKINS. And they want a whole write-off.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Much lower.MR. KEEHN. That's what I'm hearing.MR. SYRON. That has definitely been our experience with ourlarge institutions.MR. KELLEY. Yes, it surely is.-22-7/2-3/91VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The worst case I know of involved afairly large credit, though not huge, where they even had differencesin algebraic signs. My guys were saying that they thought it shouldhave been upgraded a notch and the dispute was to downgrade it anotch. That's a big difference.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a huge difference.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As I said, I don't know whetherother people have picked this up or not but I have been told this bymy own guys.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm picking up the first part, but Ihave not yet picked up different signs.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, that was one case; I don'twant to make a big deal out of this isolated case. I mentioned thatjust to be dramatic.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You have been!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But the point is that this isunusual; this is not something that happens with great frequency. Itdoesn't happen often that there are material differences in judgmentamong teams of examiners working on the same credit at the same time.I cannot verify how widespread it is, but it's widespread enough thatit has been called to my attention in a couple of individual cases bymy own examiners. That's an aside; the main point is that thefinancial tenderness, if I could put it that way, is still very muchin evidence.Having said that, let me just add one other general point.If what I hear to be the consensus around the table is correct in thatthe recession is over and that at least a moderate recovery seems tobe taking hold, I think it's probably fair to say that in one sense wereally may have very successfully dodged the bullet because not onlyare we looking at what historically would be a very modest recessionin all respects but a recession combined with other factors that Ithink have produced some of the foundations that could really help usout over the intermediate term. Now, Ted mentioned earlier theimprovement in the external sector. The numbers Ted is looking at nowcompared to what we were looking at not too long ago really are a gooddeal better. There has been a lot of talk about the prospectiveimprovement on the inflation front; not only is that improvementabsolute but it's also relative. If you look at the chart on page 12of Ted's handout, you find a very pronounced convergence in theinflation rate in the United States versus those of Germany and Japan.They're not the same but the gap has narrowed very appreciably.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We could cross Germany next year.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We could.MR. ANGELL. Well, I think we will.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's really significant in terms notjust of the absolute improvement but the relative improvement. Thecost containment going on throughout the economy, including in the-23-7/2-3/91banking sector, I think bodes very well for the future. Andnotwithstanding what Governor Angell said a moment ago, I think thebalance-sheet rebuilding that we're seeing in the corporate sector andthe household sector, while badly needed, is not an inconsequentialfactor looking out over the intermediate term as well. That isanother way of saying that if we don't screw it up, the outlook overthe next few years is a good deal better than we might have thought.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. We're at the low end of the central tendency forthe inflation outlook in '92, so we're very constructive on thatscore. I might add that that assumes a tighter monetary policy than Ithink the baseline does. I'm not sure about all these velocities andso forth.MR. HOSKINS. They wash out over time.MR. MELZER. Picking up on Jerry's last point and a little onwhat Bob Black said earlier about the uniqueness of this opportunitywe have: It took four years of good policy to get here and I hope wedon't screw it up, because I do think it's a very unique opportunity.As far as current District activity goes, we have the samepattern that I've described in recent months. We're getting slightemployment growth and basic weakness in manufacturing--not as muchweakness as nationally--being offset by growth in nonmanufacturing.And the particular weakness in manufacturing is in transportation--McDonnell Douglas and Chrysler, with the layoffs they've had in theSt. Louis area. And in nonmanufacturing, we're seeing strength inservices. Somebody said earlier that they are not seeing that yet;we're seeing that and we're also seeing a pickup in constructionemployment. In fact, both residential and nonresidential contractsare up in the most recent period, and residential is up very sharply.That's now beginning to spill through to some other sectors of theeconomy. GE in Louisville has called back 1,000 employees because ofwhat they see going on in homebuilding.As far as banking conditions go, if you compare the numbersin the first quarter to the first quarter a year ago, it's really hardto detect that there has been any change. There's a very slightdeterioration in return on equity and in nonperforming loans, but it'salmost indistinguishable. So, banking conditions in the District arestill very good. Despite that, and even though the banks are in aposition to lend, we're seeing very moderate credit growth, which Ithink probably reflects a weakness in demand.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Mr. Chairman, I wanted to come here today alsoand congratulate Mike by confirming that the recovery started in thequarter in which he called it. However, I was not able to get hold ofMr. Smuckers to get my apple butter index and come down here andreport. And that's unfortunate; that index is really reliable.MR. TRUMAN. Mike had two quarters!-24-7/2-3/91 -25-MR. HOSKINS. The District isn't showing anything muchdifferent from what anybody else's District seems to be showing, atleast from what I've heard here. In the state of Ohio employment inMay is up one percent over what it was a year ago; in Pennsylvania itis down a percent and a half or so. All the anecdotal informationsuggests that we've touched bottom and will be beginning to head upsoon. The employment numbers in Ohio would tend to indicate that.The capital goods people are all nervous. The order books aren'tdropping or anything like that, but they don't see any sign of apickup in the third quarter, with the exception of large trucks; therehas been a pretty good surge in that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry. There's what?MR. HOSKINS. A surge in the last couple of months in theorder books for large trucks. The one thing I hear uniformly fromtalking to people is their comfort with the inventory levels. Therewas not one person we talked to who thought they didn't have theirhands right around inventory; inventories were very low and rightwhere they wanted them. That's the only consistent [comment] I gotacross the District in talking to manufacturing people.In terms of the outlook for the national economy, again,we're not too much different from the Greenbook. We just havedifferent monetary assumptions than they do. I guess I'm a littletroubled by our concerns over all the risks that are out there. Wehave to be cognizant of risk but I think everything we know about theempiricism of macroeconomics, as well as macroeconomic theory in thelast 20 years or so, tells us that we probably can't control most ofthose things very well. And trying to offset them with monetarypolicy is not going to help us a lot, whether it's unemployment causedby defense changes or troubles in the real estate industry. So, itseems to me that we ought to keep our eye on what we can control overtime. If we want to get long rates down and get some credibility,then we ought to take a tack that focuses on inflation. Now, if 4percent money growth isn't going to get us there, then I think weought to go lower. Governor Angell is concerned that we haven'tgotten far enough; maybe that's because the relationship is disturbed.The objective is not money growth; the objective is price stability.So, I think that's where our focus ought to be.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I'm a good deal more comfortablethan I was when we last met here in May. At that time we hoped thatwe had a recovery at hand and now it's virtually certain it is at handand probably in hand. I find myself with a forecast for the remainderof '91 that's on the high end of the [members'] range. It's stronginventory that does that. But that having been said, I'm in the campfor '92 of still having some considerable concerns. My forecastproduces what I consider to be a good [result]; it's a bit under thoseof some people, but I'm concerned that the economy could well betender for a good while for several reasons. The first is thefragility in the banking system; that has been brought up by severalpeople and I think everybody here is fully aware that it exists. Ithink that's going to be here and it presents continuing risks, asJohn LaWare points out consistently.7/2-3/91The second thing that concerns me is the heavy load of debtthat has been built up over the '80s at all levels of the economy. Ithink that's going to be a drag for some time. In my view, we'vecrossed the watershed between the basic orientation to create debt andare changing over now to an era where it seems to me the orientationis more to service debt and try to bring it down. That's going totake an extended period of time to accomplish and that's going to be acertain underlying drag all the time that it's at work.The third concern would be in the area of this inventorycycle. As I understand it, it seems to be a substantially heaviercomponent of the overall recovery that we're looking for this timearound. And after a little while--a couple of quarters or maybe three--that's going to run its course. Then there are going to have to besome other sectors to pick up that slack when that ceases to be anexpansionary factor. And it's a little hard for me to see where thatslack is going to get picked up. Net exports don't look as if they'regoing to be any help; real estate generally and commercialconstruction in particular are going to be very weak for an ongoingperiod; government certainly doesn't look as if it's going to provideany stimulation--and I certainly hope it doesn't. There may well besome help from consumers, but I have some question in my mind aboutthat. Some of these other things may turn out to be just a littlebetter. I'm well aware of Lee Hoskins' remark earlier today thatthings always seem to be a little better than we estimate, and I hopethat that turns out to be the case here again. But I think we're infor a tender period, at least through the next year. So, that leavesme thinking that our policy challenges are, on the one hand, to dowhat we can do to sustain the economy--not hype it up but sustain it--and to try to see that it has a chance to broaden as it goes along.Clearly, at the same time, we have to get in hand and then maintainand hold this much improved inflation outlook that I think we all see.But for the time being this is a time to wait a while and see whatsorts of things begin to unfold over the next quarter or two.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Finally, Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Most of my stuff has been stolen by now byother people! Some of my views are pretty consistent with MikeKelley's. It's very difficult to predict the turning point, and thereare plenty of moderating influences out there, which we have talkedabout many times. Some are starting to come to a resolution. In thestate and local governments and pretty soon in most of these venues wewill see the shape of the resolution. The dollar continues to bestrong. The Greenbook now projects only a modest retreat and manypeople have referred to Joan Lovett's list of the new recent flare-upson the financial fragility front. I would just mention, in referenceto Jerry Corrigan's comment that some of these recent episodes in theexaminations may raise again the specter of the credit crunch, thatthere was an article today on the screen, and it may have been in TheWall Street Journal, on the difficulty homebuilders are having gettingcredit. The National Association of Homebuilders was saying that it'sgoing to be a terrible year. I might point out that their estimatefor housing starts is only a little higher than the Greenbookestimate. So, actually, we're not being too optimistic, I think it'sfair to say. The Greenbook story has slimmed down and now it's mostlyinventories driving the process. I think the cessation of inventoryliquidation should give us a healthy boost for a couple of quarters.-26-7/2-3/91It's less clear to me how much accumulation we can project--whetherbusinesses will really want to replace the $80 billion theyliquidated. Inventories have been a bit illusive, although it's goodto hear that people think they have them under control; we should getsome help there. After that, like Mike Kelley, I don't see a lot topropel the economy. The Greenbook simply falls back to moderategrowth in consumer expenditures and acceleration in business-fixedinvestment in '92, and I wouldn't have a great argument with that.That should be enough to sustain the recovery. I do think there issome risk that after the inventory effects wear off in the nextquarter or two we could return to the slow growth we had in '89 andthe first part of '90, leaving us vulnerable to shocks and recession.There is the question of the adequacy of money growth tosustain the recovery. For the last four years we have undershot themidpoint of the target range. And I feel confident we're on thattrack this year as well. It's not clear to me in which direction thenext appropriate move will be. I think the dollar has already gottena head start on the tightening, as Ted Truman alluded to--althoughperhaps not quite in that way. I do agree that we stand on thethreshold, potentially, of very substantial progress in reducing thecore inflation rate and it's a position that has taken this Committeequite a few years to achieve. The potential progress seems to belarge by historical standards, so I think it is important that we dowhat is necessary to try to put that in the bank.I think we're in pretty good shape overall. It is true thatthe long bond may not be convinced; again, to say it relects concernsabout inflation raises questions of why the dollar has responded[differently]. I need more lessons in chart reading because the CRBindex looks like it did fall off some, although gold is another issue.And there may well have been an increase in the real rate due to thedemands in eastern Europe. But my view is that it will take more thanjust a couple of months of this to convince those taking a 30-yearrisk. And if the inflation numbers behave as we've projected them asthe recovery progresses, I think they will want to see what happensafter it starts. And I think the long bond will come around.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, everybody. I think we've runpretty much to the end today. We will adjourn until 9:00 a.m.tomorrow morning. Are we going to lock up here?MR. BERNARD. We usually do, yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anyone who wants to leave his materialshere may feel free to do so.[Meeting recessed]-27-7/2-3/91July 3, 1991--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Kohn.MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don?MR. HOSKINS. I sort of asked you all these questionsyesterday, Don, so let me try it differently this time. The Bluebookand the alternatives that you present for the Committee give us theimpression that we can shape the contours of output in the short runwithout giving up disinflationary efforts. What I want to know is:What is your comfort level with these kinds of projections based onthe models that you use? They're not forward-looking particularly,and our experience with them leaves me uncomfortable.MR. KOHN. Obviously, there's a wide band of error around anyof these projections. Mike would be the first to admit that.MR. PRELL. Or second! [Laughter]MR. KOHN. We're obviously giving you our best guess basedon experience, model results, etc. We are coming at this from thetrough of a recession in which we do have some slack in resourceutilization, which gives us some encouragement that we can both reducethat slack, keeping the unemployment rate above the natural rate ofunemployment, and get some progress on inflation. It is a middleroad. It's a new version of a soft landing in some sense and perhapsthe ideal outcome. Obviously, there's a lot of room for slippage oneither side. And the issue for you, I guess, is whether you want toaim at that or aim at something else. The other piece of slippage, ofcourse, is between money and the objectives. Not only is thereuncertainty about the underlying forces in the economy but there is alot of uncertainty about what money growth paths one would choose inorder to hit some agreed on set of objectives. So, that compounds it.MR. PRELL. President Hoskins, if Don hadn't just made thatremark, I think I would have myself. My sense is that we have as muchconfidence in predicting what inflation will be over the next coupleof years looking at the real GNP and unemployment picture as we wouldlooking at money and guessing at velocity and the links through allthese channels to prices. So, there is a significant uncertainty hereabout what you should be focusing on to have the greatest confidence--MR. HOSKINS. Let me just follow up. Would you make thatsame statement if we were talking about money growth over a 5- or 10-year period?MR. PRELL. I might.MR. HOSKINS. But you wouldn't be comfortable?MR. PRELL. Obviously, this unemployment/inflation link is ashort-run relationship, so it may not be relevant over the longerspan. But with financial innovation, I'm not sure what the meaning ofM2 will be five years from now. So, in today's world I'd be reluctant-28-7/2-3/91to set out in advance a particular course and say "I want to stick tothat and I can be highly confident what the price trend would be."MR. KOHN. If I may take the liberty of retranslating yourquestion: Our forecasts are based on a path for nominal interestrates and they relate that to spending and through that to output,employment, and inflation; and another way of putting your question iswhether over 5 or 10 years I would have as much or a little more faithin a money/nominal GNP relation than I would in a nominal interestrate/GNP relation. I think as we practice policy we end up looking atboth of those and at a number of collateral pieces of information totry to interpret the interest and exchange rates--with money being animportant piece of collateral information. But we'd be hard pressedto put entire reliance on one or another set of these things.MR. HOSKINS. I just had one other question, not on thatsubject. At one point we widened the bands on M2 and the [other]aggregates because we thought there was significant volatility. As Ilook at the numbers over the last four years, we've been within a 1/2point or so of the midpoint of the range on a fourth-quarter-over-fourth-quarter basis. So, it seems to me that maybe we don't have thesame degree of uncertainty about where we're going to come out. Iguess I'm asking you: Would you be comfortable with a narrower range,given our experience of the past?MR. KOHN. No, I guess I wouldn't. I think the widening ofthe ranges reflected two things. One is the increased interestelasticity of M2. So, working as we do with interest rates andnominal GNP, and feeding that back through M2, a mistake on theinterest rate/nominal GNP spending side means that the Committee wouldtend to push interest rates higher or lower and, because M2 is moreinterest sensitive now than it used to be over short periods of time,we can get quite a substantial response in M2 to get the same nominalGNP with the same inflation outcome in the short run, cyclically. Theother point would be that, if anything, I'm a little more uncertainabout the relationship of M2 to nominal GNP now than I was two orthree years ago when I thought we had a very good handle on it--atleast it looked like--over four [to] six quarters. Now I'm less sure.So, the fact that we came out near the midpoint of the ranges the lastfew years is almost a coincidence, involving offsetting surprises tosome extent. I know, for example, that last year, 1990, we expectedmoney growth--and I think the Committee didn't disagree with this--near the upper part of the range by the end of the year. And it fellway off. So, I think there's at least as much uncertainty about thoserelationships now as there was when the Committee widened its ranges.MR. PARRY. Don, a very key assumption in the alternatives iswhat happens to the shift in the demand for money. Clearly, we had asubstantial shift in 1990 and we're making some assumptions aboutfurther shifts. If one were to see a return to more normalrelationships, then clearly we'd have a much different outcome withregard to what the target ranges should be. Is there some additionalinformation you could give us about the degree of confidenceassociated with those particular assumptions?MR. KOHN. I think I just expressed my uncertainty toPresident Hoskins. I'm not sure I could emphasize it any more. Wesee that miss being related in part to the unusual developments in the-29-7/2-3/91depository sector over the last year: the shrinkage of the thriftindustry and the simultaneous problems of the banks and the effectsthey are having on both depositors and depositories. Since we'reprojecting an expansion in the economy and a slow abatement of thecredit crunch--and that these pressures on the depositories and thethrift adjustment, while continuing, won't be accelerating anyhow--we're projecting that in growth rate terms M2 and GNP will come backcloser into their historical alignment over time. But it is purely aprojection that comes out of this notion of the abatement of some ofthese severe pressures with the economic expansion. But there is justa huge amount of uncertainty about that. It is the case that relativeto the models the errors in the first half of this year were a littleless than they were last year, and that by either extraordinary skillor pure dumb luck we actually projected the model error at thebeginning of this year. The model error we got for the first half ofthe year is pretty close to what we expected.MR. PARRY. I guess I'd make a comment. Those alternativestrategies to me seem very useful, but in going to the alternativesthat you then show it's useful also to think that one could justifyperhaps following one strategy in the next year or so, given theuncertainty associated with that period, and still go to perhaps aneven more aggressive strategy in subsequent years to achieve--MR. KOHN. We tried to hint at that in strategy IV, in whichwe were sort of having fun fine-tuning this. We said: "Well, supposethe Committee put a little more money in now. How fast would theyhave to take it out so that at least they didn't get off the track ofstrategy I?" But, obviously, there are lots of permutations andcombinations.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. My question is really along the same line. I'mtrying to understand the process in these alternative strategies alittle better than I do. Where does this 5-1/2 percent money growthin the baseline, especially in the out years, come from?MR. KOHN. We start with the presumption of a strategy forpolicy involving slow deceleration of inflation, holding theunemployment rate around 6 percent. We ask what nominal GNP andinterest rates would be consistent with that and the M2 fell out ofthat. We did not set out to design a rule for money growth. Youcouldn't hold--MR. STERN. You specify the economic characteristics and thenyou back into the money path?MR. KOHN. Exactly. And we recognize in the P* simulations--they are sort of footnotes here--the notion that you couldn't hold to5-1/2 percent forever and get decelerating inflation. It's too fast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Don, not to put too fine a point on it--and Ithink you probably already answered the question--but on this keyissue of the relationship between the Ms and nominal GNP: In footnote5, where you say you assume further downward shifts, would it be fair-30-7/2-3/91to say that that's a separate assumption and that you could just aseasily have less downward shift as more downward shift? That has someimplication for how much room we'd need if the downward shifts werenot [abating].MR. KOHN. It's our best guess and I agree with you that wecould have some more. If you thought that the shrinkage of thedepository institutions system was just beginning, by asking for morecapital, closing all these thrifts, we would really be reroutingcredit away from these institutions. The new banking bill will putdepositors, at least uninsured depositors, at risk if it passes and Ithink accelerate that process. If anything, one could easily make acase for asking what they are going to do with all those M2 [funds].They won't need them; they won't have any loans to make and we willhave greater downward shifts in the out years. I think one could alsomake a case, which is sort of embodied in the P* model, that we've hada constant velocity since World War II on average. Actually one cango back earlier, I guess--is that right, Mr. Chairman?--to World War Iand we've had constant M2 velocities since then. And what the staffis assuming here is that V* is changing; that is in effect what we'redoing here. We have permanent velocity shifts, which is fighting anawful lot of history. So, I can make arguments, as I just did, onboth sides of that.MR. PARRY. Well, one nice thing is that, given thepreliminary nature of these deliberations, we will have six monthsmore to observe what is happening to velocity relative to what onewould expect before [we set the final ranges in] February.MR. KOHN. Well, in fact, the 5 percent growth for the year1991--5-1/2 percent over the two quarters of the second half of theyear on average--really has very little further downward shiftrelative to our standard demand model. So, it will be interesting tosee whether that happens.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Don, on page 9 [in the Bluebook] on the baselineyou have real M2 growing from 1 percent in 1991 to 2, 2-1/4, 2-1/2,and 2-3/4 percent [in the subsequent years through 1995]. Why doesreal M2 grow--now, maybe real M2 is not something you think works--andyet under alternative II, the tighter [scenario], you have real M2growing on a much slower course, from 1 percent to 1-1/4, 1-3/4, 2-1/2and then to 3-1/4 percent? Why does real M2 behave so differentlyunder those two scenarios?MR. KOHN. Okay, I'm not sure I see the 3-1/4 percent; I see2-1/2 percent.MR. ANGELL. Well, in 1995 you have the price level at 1-1/4percent.MR. KOHN. Oh, I see. I'm sorry; you're right. I think thepoint is that you tighten up a lot earlier in strategy II and then inorder to keep the unemployment rate from rising, at some point youhave to ease off a bit and push in a little real M2 or you're going tohave even faster increases in the unemployment rate out there. Theother point is that with the slower growth--this probably accounts for-31-7/2-3/91 -32-even more of it--and the lower inflation of strategy II, the tighterstrategy, nominal interest rates are moving down pretty substantiallyby the end of the period, almost a percentage point below thebaseline. Baseline nominal interest rates also begin to move down in'94 and '95 as inflation abates, to keep the real rates from risingtoo much. They move down even faster in the slower money growthstrategy because inflation is coming off even more. As those nominalrates move down, you get increased demands for money in the usualvelocity sense of lower velocity. And if you didn't push in more M2,you wouldn't get the decline in nominal rates; things would explode ina tightening way. So, you need more M2 in the out years in order tosatisfy demands for money compelled by lower interest rates.MR. ANGELL. Under both scenarios?MR. KOHN. Right, but even more under the tight scenario inthe late years because inflation is coming down more and nominalinterest rates come down more. For nominal interest rates, althoughthey go up in the tight scenario right away and stay higher, thedecline is a full 2 percentage points from '92 through '95. In thebaseline scenario, the decline is about 3/4 of a percentage point.MR. ANGELL. But if that's the case--if you have real M2under both alternative I and alternative II at 2-1/2 percent in 1994and then in 1995 you have 3-1/4 percent [under alternative II]--Iwould think the unemployment rate would fall more rapidly in 1995under alternative II than it would under alternative I.MR. KOHN. Well, the answer is in this interest rate effect--that is, the effect of money once you take account of the demands formoney associated with lower interest rates. It isn't that much; thegrowth doesn't accelerate that way under the tighter alternative; youget some additional [growth], but not as much as [under the easierone.]MR. ANGELL. Okay, that's fine. I don't think you'redisagreeing with what I'm saying: that there would tend to be towardthe latter part of this period some possible gains from unemployment,depending upon credibility. That might actually bring theunemployment rate below alternative I.MR. KOHN. Below alternative I? Below 6 percent? That wouldbe a lot of credibility! But it's moving in that direction.MR. ANGELL. With the same inflation rate?MR. KOHN. Anything is possible, Governor Angell.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Don? If not,let me get started. I was looking over the data the last few days andthe more I look at the data--despite all the flowers that we aregetting and all the showering with praise that David Mullins hasgotten recently up on the Hill--policy has really been quitesuccessful, especially on the money supply side. That is, by whatevermeans, we have managed to bring money supply growth down in agradualist, successive, cumulative way to a point where we are nowback to growth rates of the 1950s. And we have done it by bringingdown the targets slowly; actually, one time we left them unchanged,7/2-3/91but otherwise we continued to move them down in small increments. Ithink we especially ought to be quite pleased that we've come througha recession--hopefully, this is the end of it--without engenderingdouble-digit money supply growth. And that is an accomplishment thatI don't think is to be pushed aside very readily. When you look atthe data in the context of the P* model, which is as good a reduced-form means of looking at money and inflation [as any], we still have away to go on the down side with respect to [controlling] inflation--that is, under the existing regime. I don't think we can hold thelast three months' figures, which are under 3 percent; but it may wellbe that we will be surprised at what is actually in the process ofemerging at this stage because it's hard to make the case for anythingabove a 3-1/2 percent inflation rate with these types of data. Infact, assuming constant velocity, at the 4-1/2 percent midpoint orslightly less, actual [M2] growth is consistent--or pretty close--toprice stability, if we believe that there is an upward drift [in theprice measures]. Or I should say that the price [measures] do notfully capture the quality drift and, as a consequence, overestimatethe inflationary pressures.I do think the credibility question that we're looking at hasto be a function of where both money and prices are. I cannot see howanyone could claim that we have been expansionary with money, eventhough we have not yet seen prices fall to the level that [iscommensurate with what the decline in money growth] suggests. It'shard to know how to read the long-term bond rate, as to whether therereally are inflation expectations in there, or the behavior of theexchange rates, which suggests that it's more real than we realize. Idon't think there's any question that the 5-1/2 percent M2 growth ratethat is implicit in the baseline model is too high over the long run.That [rate of growth] is not consistent with the level of pricestability that the vast majority of us are looking at. And there's noquestion that at some point within the next year or two we're going tohave to bring down our targets by a notch, maybe two. But we're notall that close from where we want to be over the long run if webelieve that the long-term velocity [of M2] is stable. As aconsequence of that, I raise the question: If over the long run we'regoing to be required to bring down the target rates, is this July 1991meeting the time to do it for the year 1992? My answer to that atthis particular stage is "no." We have a credit crunch; we havefragility; we have all sorts of problems that have not worked theirway out. And I should think at this particular stage that we could dovery well by staying where we are. I fully recognize, and I agreewith Bob Parry on the point that the credit crunch may disappear. Bynext February, the outlook may be significantly different; thefragility may be behind us; and we'll have another shot at [the rangesfor] '92 in February. In fact, I had Don put together for me a listof the times we've changed the July provisional targets in February,and one way or another we've done that more than half the time.So, I would argue at this particular stage, with fiscalpolicy clearly shackled and likely to remain shackled for a while,that the spotlight is on us in a way that I don't think we've seen fora while. And I see, frankly, very little benefit to moving now onlowering the targets, although I think it's essential that we not stophere. I think we have made extraordinary progress in bringinginflationary pressures down. We have gone through the recessionwithout blowing it. And with the current targets I think we have the-33-7/2-3/91capability of continuing to cement a continued disinflationaryprocess. I'm not sure there's anything to be gained in the short runin signaling a tightening for '92 this far in advance. I don't thinkwe need it. All that will do is to galvanize some anti-Fed actionswhich, since the banking bill is still open and under negotiation, cancreate an inadvertent problem for us because amendments on the floorof the House and the Senate can be particularly ill-informed and stillpass. I should think at this particular stage that we probably wouldbe well advised to sit tight with '91 and '92, but plan to look at itagain in our next review of the '92 targets. If things have improvedmeasurably and we have a shot at it, we probably should think stronglyabout reducing the ranges a notch at that [time]. But if we wait ayear or if we wait a year and a half, I don't think that does us anydamage so long as money growth doesn't start to move outside thetarget ranges and we are perceived to be willing to accept a lot morein the way of monetary and credit growth than we have demonstratedthese last several years. Bob.MR. PARRY. Well, Mr. Chairman, according to our projectionsas well as those in the Bluebook, it is likely that M2 and M3 will endup well within the range this year unless the outcome for economicactivity and inflation [differs markedly from our expectations].Thus, maybe we should retain the ranges that we currently have forthis year. For 1992, I can see compelling reasons in support ofeither retaining this year's ranges or lowering at least M2's range by1/2 percentage point. In support of lowering the ranges, pricestability over time does require further reductions in the range ofM2, as you noted. Also, a reduction could send a clearer message tofinancial markets concerning our goal for reducing the ranges and itcould have salutary effects on inflation expectations. On the otherhand, a reasonable outcome for the economy next year, includingfurther progress against inflation, seems to require an M2 growthabove the midpoint of this year's range. Moreover, there isconsiderable uncertainty, as we've talked about this morning, aboutthe trend of velocity over the next 18 months. It could return toslower growth rates more quickly than is being assumed in ourforecast. Finally, staying with the same range for M2 for two yearswas agreed to in 1989 and also in 1990, without I believe sacrificingthe pursuit of price [stability]. I believe in view of thepreliminary nature of our July deliberations for 1992 I would favoralternative II, which basically repeats the same ranges for next yearas we have for the current year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. As you know, Mr. Chairman, we've had a fewreporters around in recent months asking questions. One of the mostinteresting questions I was asked--my answer was not reported as faras I know--was: What have you learned in five years? And to thatthere was a clear-cut, easy answer. I've learned that gettinginflation down is a lot harder than I thought it was five and a halfyears ago. It just is pretty hard to get it down. There have beentimes that I've argued with the staff, with Mike, in regard toinflation. I thought we were going to be more successful than wewere. It's very clear to me now that it's not easy to get the rate ofinflation down.-34-7/2-3/91The second point I would make, Mr. Chairman, is that youpointed out to me a year and a half ago, when I was complaining aboutinflation not coming down, that inflation would come down in a bunchsometime, and I think you were right. If you look at the history ofdisinflation, it does tend to come in bunches. I had the view at onetime that maybe inflation can come down during expansions, but oursuccess in getting inflation down during the latter part of anexpansion phase has proved not to be an event. So, we have anopportunity; and when you have opportunities, you act to make gains.The third point I would make is that inflation never comesdown too rapidly. Now, deflation could be too rapid. But inflationdoesn't come down too rapidly because when inflation comes downrapidly the bond markets know it and you get some benefit from fallinginterest rates. So, gradualism sounds nice in theory, but it's justtoo easy if gradualism never begets progress. So, at some point intime we have to stake out an opportunity, and I believe this is anunusual opportunity to make tremendous gains. Now, Don, I know why itis that you have the 5-1/2 percent [assumption for M2 growth in 1992].But it seems to me that by most measures we can look at the 4 percentgrowth rate from Q4 to June and the 4 percent average over three years--and it was very stable during the three years--and say that itreally is quite adequate. It would have been very adequate if therate of inflation had not bulged to 5 percent. We would have foundthe 4 percent to be just fine if that rate of inflation hadn't bulged.If M2 growing at 4 percent is sufficient to provide a recovery thatall of us are agreed is in place, then I see no reason why 4 percentmoney growth won't work in the future.I think you asked the question, Mr. Chairman: Why do it nowrather than in February? And I think the answer to that is that wehave a Chairman who is very, very good at persuading when he makes theHumphrey-Hawkins report. And if the Chairman explains why it is thatwe're [adopting] a lower target range, that can give us thecredibility kick that all of us think would be very, very helpful.And in doing that I think we have a chance to have this recovery bebetter rather than weaker. That credibility could cause the long bondinterest rate to fall from its [current] level, which is higher thanit was last year, and that would be very, very good for the recovery.So, the reason that I would like to do it now is because we need thebond market improvement now. That would give us a credibility that wecould not get in any other way. And, Mr. Chairman, even though youwould prefer not to explain that now, I think you'd be very good atexplaining it now. And I think that would make a considerabledifference. If I'm wrong and the money relationship changes, I don'tsee any reason why we couldn't back off in February. The tentativestep should be the step that we want to make and then if the moneyrelationship turns out to be quite different, you'd be able to explainthat next February.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Explain] raising the targets inFebruary? I appreciate your over-estimation [of my abilities]!President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I've never disagreed with youbefore, much to my pleasure, and I certainly agree with your commentsthat the baseline growth rate for M2 is much too high and thatstrategy II is near what we ought to be aiming for. I even went so-35-7/2-3/91far as to say one time to a reporter, facetiously, that much to mydismay I was tempted to just give you my proxy and go play golf. Andyou, on another occasion, said you were going to hold me to that! Iwill try to cover my tracks by saying that I suppose at some pointinevitably we're all going to differ.So, I'm with you on the first two-thirds but [not] when weget down to the discussion of the ranges. I recognize that long-runalternative II, which means extending the '91 ranges to '92, couldencompass strategy II--an idea that we both endorse. But as theBluebook points out on the bottom of page 19, long-run alternativeIII, which lowers all the ranges 1/2 percentage point is "moreconsistent with the spirit and intent" of our anti-inflationarystrategy. And that would provide fresh evidence of our commitment tothe very things that Governor Angell has just described very well. Ithink that is a very important point, as he emphasized. As I saidyesterday and as he said much better today, we are at a very crucialpoint; we've had remarkable success up to this point and manyforecasters are now beginning to lower their projections of inflationin part because they think the economy is not really going to spurt asmuch as it has in past recoveries. But I think a large part of thatis due to the growing credibility that we have gained because we havehad this remarkable record over the last several years. I thinkleaving these ranges unchanged in '92 would raise some doubts andpossibly slow, if not break, the momentum that we've gained thus far.But lowering them would reinforce our credibility and I think wouldreduce the transitional costs of achieving price stability.Consequently, I very strongly favor alternative III. I recognize thatM2 growth may well be in the upper part of that range next year if weadopt that alternative, but that strikes me as a pretty manageableproblem that we could afford to take on in view of the benefits that Ithink we would get from the credibility standpoint by lowering ourranges. And if, as Governor Angell postulated, we had to raise them,I share his confidence that you could explain that very well. Wereally have a golden opportunity here that we haven't had until now,and I think we have to seize it. Although there are many reasons whyI could argue that we ought to temporize, I'm afraid that I just haveto come out for alternative III.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. Our goal is price stability. I agree with youthat we've made progress in terms of bringing money growth down. Whatwe know about money--or at least what we think we know--tells us thatwe ought to get some progress. To date we haven't gotten theprogress. I'm not wedded to a particular money growth; I'm wedded toprice stability. And it seems to me that what we think we know aboutit is that we're about a percentage point away from a noninflationaryeconomy in terms of money growth. And to look to raising the growthrate in money--. Even though I know it's a residual that falls out ofyour output, price, and interest rate model, I view it as a policyinstrument. And I just can't see how we would want to tolerate a5-1/2 percent rate of growth in money for any significant period oftime when we've worked so hard to get where we are. If the 4 percentgrowth rate [over the past] four years doesn't get us anything, then Ithink we ought to move on down to 2 percent or whatever it takes toget us there in a reasonable time-frame. I just think that weshouldn't be considering anything in the upper end of this target-36-7/2-3/91range. I would argue that we ought to lower the midpoint of thistarget range and center it on 3 percent because that's where we wantto be. And if that doesn't work, then we should center it lower. ButI don't think we ought to abandon our efforts to bring money growthdown when we seem so close. We can stay with the current targets forthe rest of this year but, for the reasons that both Bob Black andWayne Angell have already given, I think we would do ourselves a greatservice by clarifying our commitment to price stability by loweringthe target ranges. I'm not even comfortable with a 2 to 6 percentrange; I'd like one centered on 3 percent or at least I'd collapse thetop end of the range.MR. ANGELL. Be patient, Lee; be patient.MR. BLACK. Show the kind of restraint that Governor Angelland I showed!MR. HOSKINS. Well, I'll compromise and opt for a lowertarget range of 2 to 6 percent. That's my recommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, as I look back over ourexperience of the past 12 to 18 months, I think that policy has beenabout as good as we could have expected and certainly better than Ihad anticipated. And for all of the reasons that you gave, I wouldvery strongly favor staying where we are. In saying that, I'd like tomake it clear that I in no sense am abandoning the idea of pricestability, but I think we have to bear two things in mind. We'retrying to achieve price stability over time, not all of a sudden at acost to the economy. We have other responsibilities besides pricestability. Price stability may be the primary objective of a centralbank, but I don't think it's the only one. Our credibility, it seemsto me, is measured not only in terms of how we deal with inflation butalso how we deal with the real economy. We have a recovery in trainat the moment; I think that's pretty evident. But I do think therisks are still on the down side. You pointed to a number of otherrisks, none of which is trivial, I would say. So, I think it'simportant that we hold where we are at the moment. I think the risksto us as an institution as well as to the economy are really quitesignificant if we make a move at this time. So, I would stronglysupport your recommendation that we hold [the M2 range for] both '91and '92 at 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent at this time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, the position that you havepresented to the Committee today and the conditions you described arealmost identical with the one's I espoused yesterday, so I'm veryhappy to support alternative II as the strategy. It seems to me thatthere's room in that range to accommodate whatever we wish to do interms of continuing to put pressure on inflation. And I am veryconcerned that at this point, when we don't have assurance of thestrength of the recovery that we think is underway, the announcementeffect of saying that we are going to slow down the growth in themoney supply could run the risk of aborting the recovery. So, I verystrongly support staying where we are, believing that we have enoughroom within that range to do whatever we wish.7/2-3/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think, as others havesaid, that policy has been quite effective, largely by drift offortune as well as by skill. And I think there is general agreementthat most of us often think about our objectives in terms of inflationand [view achieving price stability] as a vehicle for promoting realgrowth in the economy. A lot of the somewhat technical debate rightnow comes down to the issue of how much we want to take intoconsideration uncertainties associated with the relationship betweenmoney and output. And it seems to me that, not unusually, we're in atime of significant uncertainty. First of all, we're not absolutelysure where we are in terms of the real economy itself. Beyond that,there are all of these factors going on in the financial system towhich some people have alluded. And coming back to the question Iasked Don earlier, it's far from clear that we have a great deal ofcertainty about velocity's behavior in either direction. In terms ofcredibility, a concern I have--I think we'd be surprised by it--isthat if we were to lower the ranges and then have to break through thetop of the range, that could be as damaging to credibility as someother specs could be in the other direction. Additionally, I have agreat deal of sympathy for your view, Mr. Chairman; I'm not quite surewhat we get for changing [the ranges] now in July, halfway through theyear. We'll have more information both on the real economy and onwhat is happening in the financial system as the year goes on. So, Ithink the opportunity for gaining credibility is greater, if we findit necessary to make a change, to do so after some of these thingsbecome less [uncertain]. So, for that reason, I support yoursuggestion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I would prefer alternative II at this time aswell. I think, as Governor LaWare says, it's unnecessary to changethe ranges. The current [M2] range provides ample flexibility torespond to inflation risks. If we need 4 percent growth we have theability to achieve it within this range. Indeed, we've experienced 4percent growth over the last year and a half within the range. On thecredibility question, there is some merit to the credibility argument.On the long bond, I'm not so convinced that there's much inflationbuilt in. When I see our long bond rate at roughly the same rate asthe German long bond, I wonder how much inflation premium is builtinto our bond. Moreover, it seems to me that our credibility is notthreatened now. It has not been brought into question. And we mightbe better off saving this and using it when it's needed more, althoughI do think one could make an argument there. I have some concernabout the appropriateness of the 2 to 6 percent range and the 4percent midpoint, and I think that's something we should think about.It may be right, but I'm not convinced that setting the midpoint at arate that is below realized core inflation for virtually every yearfor the past 20 years is something we should do right now. If wereally think inflation is going to be 3 percent in '92, and if we'regoing to have 4 percent growth in money, and velocity stays constant,are we willing to say to the world--or to the people who will read itthis way--that we're willing to accept 1 percent real growth andrising unemployment? If we are willing to accept that, perhaps now isnot the time to announce it when the unemployment rate is stillrising, the recession is not yet cold in its grave and inflation is-38-7/2-3/91already receding, and the banking bill has opened up our statutes tomeddling. This process of reviewing it has been quite successful andhas been characterized by patience and persistence; and it's animpressive achievement. We are approaching a stage when we ought tothink about where we're headed--toward a stable range and a morestable target and what price stability really means, given that wehave the bias in estimation, as the Chairman mentioned and as wediscussed a bit yesterday. I think there's a question about the rangeas well. It's not clear to me why Germany has a 4 to 8 percent rangeand many of these other countries are able to operate withinrelatively tight ranges. My view is that we're approaching a time inwhich we ought to confront those issues. But I would prefer topostpone that and talk about them perhaps with some background work bythe staff and in an environment with the recession behind us and therecovery safely underway and when we know more about the shape andform of the recovery and the nature of the progress that we're makingon reducing inflation. At that time the credibility of lowering therange might be worth much more. So, I would agree with your proposal,Mr. Chairman, the current ranges for '91 and tentatively for '92.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me you phrased it very,very well, and I absolutely agree with both the strategy and thescenario as you outlined it. It seems to me at this point that themessage effect of what we decide today is awfully important, perhaps abit more important than the practical operating effect. As I thinkabout it, I'm not sure I'd like the message effect of changing theranges either way at this point. To reduce the ranges has someunfortunate consequences, which you talked about; it's the wrong timeto send that particular message. And, obviously, raising the rangewould be inappropriate. I think the baseline alternative strategy asDon has outlined it is reasonably consistent with the economicforecast that we talked about yesterday. And I must say that as Ithink about that forecast for this year and next year, it's a prettyconstructive outlook and, therefore, it seems to me that we ought tocontinue to leave the ranges as we have them. I very strongly favorthe ranges of alternative II.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I strongly support alternative IIand I think that case has been made pretty thoroughly by others. ButI would like to go ahead and offer my summary of where my thinkinglies. There are two concerns that have been mentioned. Number one isthe actual operation of policy, which is of course the most importantthing. But signals are also important. As far as the actualoperation of policy goes, we always have a challenge on both sides.The primary challenge, of course, is to maintain the downward trend ofinflation that we're all dedicated to, and that will be particularlyimportant if this recovery flourishes. But alternatively, we have tobe able to provide for a sustainable and broadening recovery if ittends to falter after a bit. Under alternative II, we would provideourselves room to expand a bit if that turned out to be required and Ithink the probability of that is non-trivial. And we would still haveplenty of room to apply more constraint if that were required. If, onthe other hand, we tighten the ranges now, we'd be pretty muchconstraining our ability to respond if the economy did turn out to-39-7/2-3/91 -40-falter after a time. As far as the signal effect goes, we clearlyhave tightened slowly for as much as a decade now and within theframework of today's economy I think it's fair to say that we continueto do that. And I believe that we're perceived as doing that. Ithink the market perceives us as dedicated to lowering inflation, butit also sees us as trying to be realistic about the state and theneeds of the real economy. It also sees us as a bit frustrated as faras our inability so far to make visible progress on inflation. So, inthose contexts, I really question the need for an aggressive signal atthis point. I would even suggest that an aggressive signal mightfrighten the market in a way that would be counterproductive, if theycome to see the Federal Reserve as tending to over-react to itsfrustration of not getting faster inflation progress. So, signal-wisea perception of an increased level of aggressiveness at this point maybe (a) unnecessary, and (b) possibly a little counterproductive. Asfar as the actual conduct of policy goes, I think the present rangesgive us plenty of room to provide more constraint if that's what timeshows to be necessary and still provide us some head-room if troublearises and we need to have some head-room.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Mr. Chairman, I favor alternative III essentiallyfor two reasons. One has been discussed at some length and has to dowith credibility. I'm not sure that a 1/2 point move in the rangegets us a lot of additional credibility. In fact, in this environmentand given our stated objectives, it might be kind of expected. On theother hand, anything we can do to enhance credibility is importantbecause there are costs involved in bringing inflation down; and tothe extent that we can get credibility working for us and containthose costs, I think that's an advantage. My judgment is that areduction in the range at this point would help us at least a bit onthat score. The second reason I'm in favor of lowering the ranges atthis point is continuity. This has been commented on as well. Thefact is that M2 over the past 4+ years has grown at 4 to 4-1/2 percentor so. It just seems to me that we shouldn't compromise that kind ofperformance. I think continuity is important here, and we ought toact in that fashion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, long-range target setting is a mix ofsubstance and symbolism. Given where we are as the only game in townand hopefully at the bottom of the business cycle with inflationcoming down, I think the symbolism part is more important than thesubstance. It is important that we have credibility on the inflationside in terms of reducing it, but I think it's also important to havecredibility in the sense that the central bank ought to be viewed aspro recovery and pro healing of the financial system. And I thinkkeeping the ranges the same in this context is the right balance. Ithink it gives us the overall kind of credibility that we need inorder to be an effective policymaker. On the more substantive side,the technical side, all of the options that we're talking about haveus in the top end of the existing range. I think we need thatmaneuverability and the operating room, given the uncertainties aboutwhat kind of recovery we're going to have. We've talked a lot aboutvelocity. It may turn out to be the way the staff says; it may notturn out to be the way the staff says. So, when I look both at7/2-3/91symbolism and substance, I come out fairly clearly on the side ofkeeping the ranges the same.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. I think perhaps everything has been said andthere's nothing more new, particularly with respect to my view thatyour proposal is the correct one. That is, we've come to mid-Julywhen you will testify and there are still such uncertainties aboutthis recovery that to suggest that we can say the recovery is wellunderway and we can look forward 18 months ahead and say we're goingto bring money growth down seems to me to be the wrong signal to begiving at this time. That does not say, however, that if I were herein February that I would not be going to the 2 to 6 percent range,because I think it is over the long run the appropriate way to go--providing we do have the recovery that has been projected by the staffin the Greenbook.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. For 1991, I think everyone is in agreement thatwe ought to stay with the same ranges. For 1992, it's a fairly closedecision, but the emphasis is that the ranges are tentative for 1992and will be reviewed in seven months. I agree with Governor Angellthat one can make the case, based on what we expect to happen betweennow and then and based on conditions that we expect to prevail in1992, that our tentative judgment right now is that it will beappropriate to reduce those ranges by 1/2 of 1 percent, centering on 4percent. I would recommend that we do that and explain it in a waythat emphasizes that should developments not occur as we expect, itcould always be reversed.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would reaffirm the '91 ranges andput in alternative II for '92. But I do take quite seriously thispoint you made, Mr. Chairman, about the need to take a hard look atthose '92 ranges in February. I say that because, assuming there areno big surprises in the economy or financial system that would make metake away Mike Prell's gold star that I gave him yesterday, we are atthe point in the cycle where we have to think about, or begin to thinkabout, the need to tighten policy. Certainly, I'm not saying that'sneeded right now, but we should start thinking in those terms. And itseems to me that on this whole question of credibility, which probablygets a little overblown, the real test of our credibility is going tobe whether, if it's needed, we will tighten soon enough andsufficiently enough to prevent the serious mistakes in policy thatwere made in the mid-1970s. If you look at the forecast and take itmore or less at face value, it seems to me that that question couldeasily be on the table in spades six months from now or so. Since Isee that as a possibility, and since I think our credibility reallydoes come down to what we do and not what we say, I'd rather keep theranges where they are just in case things do work that way. And thena cut in the ranges in February will be more than symbolic and thetiming might be precisely what we need. So, I'm quite comfortablewith reaffirming the ranges in alternative II but, as I said, I dotake seriously your point about the need to look at that closely inFebruary. Indeed, things could turn out such that both substantively-41-7/2-3/91and symbolically a cut in the ranges then could be just what thedoctor ordered when we need it most.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. In terms of the strategies laid out, I'd favorstrategy II, the tighter one, and flowing from that alternative III interms of the ranges. We're talking about a long-term approach tostrategy here, and that underlines our commitment to price stability,which I think is the one thing we really can influence in the longrun. The credibility point is the major argument in favor of it. Itseems to me that we could get the most positive impact by making amove now. I agree with Jerry: Our actions are more important thanthe symbolism of this. But I think if we change it in February, it'sgoing to be because we're perceived to be on the run; and I don't knowwhether we buy a lot at that point in time. Some of the argumentsthat I've heard I'm not particularly persuaded by--for example,gradualism. We've been at this for four years and I think we ought tokeep down that path. I agree with what you said, Mr. Chairman, andwith what Lee said: There's some distance to go here. And I thinkthis is the time to try to consolidate some of the gains. In terms ofthis issue about a top end of 6 percent somehow constraining ourability to act if the economy is weaker than we expected--and thispicks up on Jerry's point--we're already "acting" quite a bit now; wehave projections in the Bluebook of M2 growth moving up to a 6 percentrate, which is 50 percent higher than what we've averaged over thelast four years. So, we're doing our part in trying to assure arecovery. In fact, I would agree with Jerry that what we have to bethinking about is: When do we take some of that rope back in? On thefinal point that I've heard some arguments that I don't necessarilyagree with, I'd add the financial fragility point. I don't think theconduct of monetary policy, so long as we're providing adequateliquidity to the economy, is really the appropriate tool. I think wecan look ourselves in the mirror and say that we've been doing ourpart on that score. I don't disagree that there are problems outthere, but I think there are other policy approaches that need toaddress those. If you step back and look at them, the problems thatwe're having with the financial system are really the products of amonetary policy that sowed the seeds for inflation, and a lot of theproblems are inherent now as inflation is coming down.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. We have to take two votes at thisstage. One is on 1991. I inferred from the comments that there was aconsensus for maintaining the 1991 ranges currently in place.MR. ANGELL. I move that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MR. BLACK. I'll second that, Mr. Chairman.MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, could I interrupt just a second? Inthe Bluebook we raised the issue of whether the Committee wished todelete the words "a resumption of sustainable growth" in the firstsentence. We put that in when the economy was in recession.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it's appropriate to delete that.-42-7/2-3/91MR. ANGELL. I would agree.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anyone object to the deletion ofthat phrase?MR. PARRY. Are we talking about the language of the[directive] now?MR. KOHN. Yes, the long-run part of the directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Page 26.MR. PARRY. I was wondering what contribution this phrase"contribute to an improved pattern of international transactions"made. That seems to me a bit of fluff maybe. I think we took some ofthat out of the shorter-term language in the operational paragraph.It seems to me that we could excise that as well. The recommendationthat Don made was to take out "a resumption of" and I suggest that wetake out what follows--that is, "and contribute to an improved patternof international transactions"--because I don't know what it means.It seems to me that it would be better if we said "will foster pricestability and promote sustainable growth in output."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know what it means but you can'tprovide it! [Laughter]MR. TRUMAN. This phrase, if my memory is correct, has beenin the directive since about the middle of the 1970s. And it was--MR. PARRY. That's even more reason!MR. TRUMAN. Well, I'm not so sure about that. There havebeen several rounds in which we tried either to define it or to refineit to a greater degree. My memory of listening to the Committee onthis point is that they always ended up saying it's a way ofsuggesting that international dimensions of policy are not completelyirrelevant to the Committee's deliberations. If you want to look forsubstance, that's what it is.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob, would you rephrase your revision?MR. PARRY. Yes. "The Federal Open Market Committee seeksmonetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability andpromote sustainable growth in output."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It strikes me as eminently sensible atthis particular time because I had the same problem when I reread it.Does anybody have any objections?MR. ANGELL. I agree.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, let's assume that the bracketedphrase "a resumption of" gets deleted and that the sentence ends witha period after the word "output." Would the Secretary call the roll?MR. BERNARD. This is for reaffirming the '91 ranges with thenew wording in the leadoff paragraph:7/2-3/91Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Mullins YesPresident Parry YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. For 1992, as I recorded the consensus,it comes out as alternative II. I infer that that referred not onlyto M2 but in general to M3 and the debt aggregate. Would somebodylike to move that?SPEAKER(?). I'll move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.MR. BERNARD. It would read: "For 1992 the Committee agreedon tentative ranges for monetary growth, measured from the fourthquarter of 1991 to the fourth quarter of 1992, of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2percent for M2 and 1 to 5 percent for M3. The Committee provisionallyset the associated monitoring range for growth of total domesticnonfinancial debt at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent. With regard to M3, theCommittee anticipated that the ongoing restructuring of thriftdepository institutions would continue to depress the growth of thisaggregate relative to spending and total credit. The behavior of themonetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light ofprogress toward price level stability, movements in their velocities,and developments in the economy and financial markets."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell NoPresident Black NoPresident Forrestal YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Mullins YesPresident Parry YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. We now move to current monetarypolicy and I'll call on Don Kohn.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be much brieferthis time. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don?-44-7/2-3/91MR. ANGELL. Don, if we look to the period ahead and, as ViceChairman Corrigan indicated, we find it necessary to engage in atightening, are there any explorations underway that will enable us toadminister the open market window in such a way that we would not haveevery 1/4 point seen as an announcement arrangement? It just seems tome that it has always been very helpful when we had some reservetargeting arrangement that did not give an announcement effect to thefed funds rate. What can you tell me in regard to explorations ofways to administer the window which would enable restraint to takeplace and would cause interest rates to be seen as rising by marketpressures rather than as an announcement of the Fed?MR. KOHN. As you know, Governor Angell, we explored suchpossibilities a little while ago, partly at your urging. I thinkthere is nothing actively underway now. If the Committee wished,obviously, we could do something. I think the key question theCommittee would need to ask is whether you're going to have reservetargeting and have it tied in some way to M2; this would be a stretch,given the pattern of reserves, as Harvey Rosenblum pointed out [to me]yesterday, but you could do it. We played in the past with "shadow"reserve targets but not tied to M2. The premise there would be thatmovements in M2 would provoke some reaction. The Committee would haveto have enough confidence in its reading of M2 that it would wantmoney markets to be moved around by deviations of M2 of some size--theCommittee could decide [what those should be]--from its projection.The underlying confidence needed is in the relationship of money tothe outcome.MR. ANGELL. Well, would having the discount rate above thefed funds rate and having some other supporting overnight arrangementbelow that tend to give an atmosphere in which you could do thiswithout having the fed funds rate run too far?MR. KOHN. Well, I think your plan would limit the movementsin the funds rate, depending on where the penalty discount rate was interms of a ceiling and where something else was in terms of the floor.But if you wanted a substantial band in there, then you would have totolerate increased federal funds volatility within that band; thatwould go along with this. So, it would help in some sense. I don'tthink it would negate the need to make the fundamental decision aboutwhether you wanted to tie federal funds rate movements even within aband to relatively short-run movements in M2. Now, if the Committeeso desires, we can certainly work to see how we could do somethingalong the lines of tying reserves to the funds rate and M2. But Ithink there are some decisions that need to be made by the Committeeif we're going to go ahead with it.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, the reason I ask this question isthat this will be the first time that we might be in a tighteningarrangement in which the market will misread every 25 basis points inthe fed funds rate as having an announcement effect. And I thinkthat's a frightening disadvantage for us.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I agree with that. If we can find a wayto avoid that in time, I think it would help policy.MR. BLACK. I would strongly support that suggestion. I'vebeen urging my colleagues in Richmond to do just that, but they have-45-7/2-3/91been resisting because they don't really think it can be done. And itis difficult, unless we're saying that the reserveable part of M2 isgoing to grow at the same rate as the nonreserveable part. If we paidinterest on reserve balances, it would make that more likely. Buthaving to reach up in the air and pick some federal funds rate that'sgoing to give some predictable rate of growth in the money supply isjust a crap shoot at best. I'd really like to move toward some kindof reserve targeting if it can be done. But it might necessitate acomplete change in the reserve requirement regime to do itsuccessfully.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't you give it some thought, Don?Well, we've been thinking about this continuously now for quite awhile. The question is: Are we at a point where there's any payoffin committing Committee resources to start to be somewhat moredetailed? It's more a question and not so much an issue of whether weshould do it because, obviously, if it looks as though it's going towork, it's something very valuable for us to have. The question ismore an operational issue as to whether or not enough is out there tosuggest that the commitment of research resources will come up withsomething other than "on the one hand and on the other hand."[Laughter]MR. KOHN. We will commit to bringing a memo to the FOMC byAugust, at least outlining the issues and the sorts of decisions thatwe think will need to be made. I would invite the research directorsaround the edge of the room to supply me or my colleagues with any ofthe work that you have already done on this, please.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Don, what would be your interpretation of themeaning of M2 if it continued into July-August at the subdued rate ofgrowth that we've seen in the last months?MR. KOHN. I don't know; it would worry me. And I would haveto be honest with the Committee and say that the numbers handed to methis morning suggested weaker M2 than we built into the Bluebook forthe latter part of June in terms of preliminary data. This wouldn'tnecessarily affect the July growth rate, but we'd probably be markingJune M2 down by close to a percentage point relative to the Bluebook,based on the data for the last two weeks. As I tried to say in thebriefing, one way of approaching it is to say: Well, everything isgoing fine; the economy is recovering; all the incoming data on thebusiness cycle etc., seem very consistent, and we assume they willcontinue that way over the next few months, consistent with theoutlook of the staff or of the Committee for a recovering second halfof the year. I might also say that something odd is going on withpeoples' portfolios, so just ignore it; it's a demand shift[unintelligible] missing money [unintelligible]. I guess I would havetrouble if it persisted, particularly through August, and growth wasedging down toward the lower part of the range. I would have troublemaking a judgment to dismiss it out of hand. If people are moving outof M2, they're finding other assets more attractive. In the past whenthe Committee has eased or tightened, for example, the first effect onM2 is just a portfolio shift. You raise or lower the rates on otherkinds of instruments; people shift their M2 portfolios and laterchange their spending. If we're seeing a situation in which interest-46-7/2-3/91rates in bond markets, for example, are so high that they'reattracting a flood of savings, it may be that those interest rates areso high that they're not going to support the kind of expansion [weenvision]. If we're seeing a situation in which depositories simplydon't want the retail deposits or depositors are still so scared anduncertain about what is happening at depositories that they don't wantto give [funds] to them, the re-channeling of that credit may not beentirely effortless. So, I would hesitate to say that if it continuedweak like this, I would definitely ease policy. But it wouldcertainly make me think hard about where we were going three, sixmonths from now and whether we really did have a satisfactory policyin place. It would be an extraordinary miss in the predictive powerof M2, which isn't very great. There's a wide band around ourexpectations but it seems to me that when you get to one or anotheredge of the band you're probably getting a signal that you shouldn'tignore it unless it is overwhelmed by other signals. It would weighon that side in my mind.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions for Don?MR. MELZER. Where is that weakness in M2? Is it across theboard or in the non-M1 components?MR. KOHN. It's in the non-M1 components. I started talkingabout the revisions that I just got handed me this morning.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is that more than yesterday?MR. KOHN. Slightly, I think. I can't remember exactly whatit looked like yesterday. But it's widespread. Small time deposits,which had been consistently weakening, have continued to weaken; thereare big minuses there. But the interesting thing in this is that theMMDAs have weakened as well.MR. MELZER. Is M1 still growing?MR. KOHN. Yes, in fact Ml, if anything, was revised slightlyupward.MR. MELZER. Wouldn't that give you some comfort inconnection with your response that--MR. KOHN. Yes, particularly since the strength is in othercheckable deposits. We will be publishing a drop in M1 on Friday, butthe preliminary data for the latest week suggest that that comes back,with a $2 billion increase on July 1.MR. BLACK. Don, is there anything that suggests--other thanwhat your material contains--that the small time and savings depositsmight be moving into bond and stock funds?MR. KOHN. We have actual data on the bond and stock fundsthrough May, which show very large increases. We've talked to themanagers of those funds and they say that it's not less for the stockbut more for the bond funds and that those inflows have persisted inJune. So, I think there is some of that there.-47-7/2-3/91 -48-MR. BLACK. Would I be justified in being less concernedabout the weakness in June because of where this money has gone?MR. KOHN. Well, I don't know. I think that's an analyticalissue. Whenever M2 is weak, it can be weak for one of two reasons:Income is weak or people are reallocating their portfolio. I do thinkit's not giving us a signal that the economy was somehow collapsing inJune. Of that I'm quite confident. But as to whether the portfolioreallocations can be entirely ignored, I'm less confident.MR. BLACK. I come out, I think, about where you do. Itgives me some comfort knowing where they've gone; otherwise I'd beconcerned that M2 has been too weak.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Don? Why don'tI start, then, on the discussion. It's really interesting in a sensethat we are getting so many positive signs that the economy isstrengthening. We're picking it up pretty much across the board. Infact, with the exception of a somewhat disappointing new-home salesfigure that came out this morning, I don't recall a figure that wasunder expectations in the last three or four weeks, which is really anextraordinary run on specific data. Very specifically, I think theprogress that we had been discussing at the last meeting relative tohow we foresaw inventory liquidation moving into increased orders andeventually increased production is pretty much on schedule and, ifanything, is ahead of schedule. The order patterns are weak inincreasingly fewer areas. There is still evidence that in June, eventhough it looks as though industrial production is clearly up forJune, inventory liquidation was still going on. And when you look atall of the other elements of final demand, there's not much to see;it's not terrific, but it's clearly not caving. The crucial issuethat concerned me--namely, the problem of capital goods weakness--seems to be fading. The order patterns are somewhat better. Thereseems to be at least now a mixed pattern in nonresidential buildingcontract awards and permits, whereas before it was a free fall.So, all of the data are coming together, with the exceptionof the financial balance sheet structure. The weekly data that we'returning out on bank loans look awful. They suggest that inventoryliquidation is being financed out of declining bank loans. Bankcredit, as Don has said, is pretty sluggish; we are getting a modestincrease in residential real estate loans and a presumed continueddecline in commercial mortgages. Since the individuals who areputting the orders in and obtaining the production materials are thesame or at least in proxy form are those who are making the financialdecisions, it's obvious that purchases of materials are gettingfinanced. So, the question we have to ask ourselves is: Why is itthat the flow-of-funds or the balance sheet structure don't seem toreflect the financing in physical volume? There are a number ofpotential answers to this. The first is that it's clear that this isnot a forecast. This is actually what happened; it is merely lookingat the recent past. Orders are moving up, production is moving up,and sales are moving up, and the balance sheets show nothing. So,whatever is happening, ex post it is being financed. I've beenmeaning to look at one thing and haven't had a chance to look at itclosely; I have a suspicion that part of the answer is that anincreasing part of the nominal GNP reflects non-asset accumulationcategories. Electric power purchases, for example, in the GNP have no7/2-3/91balance-sheet effect. Purchases of residential structures do;inventories do and involve varying degrees as you go up and down thedetail of the GNP, even though you can get a very big chunk ofservices with no balance sheet effect. And that clearly has an impacton how the system is financed. I suspect that is the case. I alsosuspect that the grossing effect in the flow-of-funds has probablycome down, meaning the type of big grossing that we used to see in thestate and local government sector, which borrowed to reinvest, or thevery big element of borrowing on existing homes.One of the interesting charts that Mike had yesterday was theone that showed net equities as a percent of GNP and net borrowings asa percent of GNP. In the last several quarters they were tending toconverge, implying, if you just put them together, that the total-funds-raised ratio to GNP wasn't all that much out of line. But thereis no question at this stage that we are getting a credit deflation.That is, not only are the monetary aggregates growing more slowly butall of the intermediary expansion is softening. And part of this isclearly offset by significant increases in direct borrowing in thebond markets and increased equity issuance. So, that curve that weused to look at about the proportion of financial intermediation onthe one hand and commercial bank intermediation on the other as apercent of the GNP has been going down for quite a long time and stillseems to be doing that. And it may well be that what we've got hereis sort of a secular shift out of intermediating institutions; part ofthat may be that people are just scared of banks and thrifts and aretrying to keep their money out. It doesn't require very much changeto affect the net change figures and to give us peculiarities, whichmay well explain the money supply problem that Don is raising. Idon't know what to make of it. I would say that the bottom linesuggests to me that it's not a policy question at the moment.Things seem to be pretty much on track and I don't thinkthere's any real alternative to alternative B. There are [areas ofuncertainty] that are more likely to affect Federal Reserve actionlater rather than [sooner]. And I think we have problems in bothdirections. Jerry raises the concern, which I think may well be themore appropriate concern, that problems are going to be coming at usin the direction that will require us to tighten, not ease. But thereis the possibility that we may be looking at a financial system thatis disintermediating and we're going to have to make a decision as towhether or not that has any significance for the economic output orthe economy. But at the moment it doesn't strike me as an immediateissue that confronts us; I suspect it's one that may emerge sometimelater in the year. So, for now I would recommend no change,alternative B. Bob Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. I would agree completely, Mr. Chairman,alternative B. I assume you're talking about a symmetric directive?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I didn't say but obviously I--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's really symmetric when youdon't even have to say it!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.-49-7/2-3/91MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I would agree with yourrecommendation of alternative B--that we stay with existing policy.However, based on the performance of the economy in the early stagesof past recoveries, I really wouldn't be very surprised to see newinformation coming in that will indicate that perhaps the recovery isa bit more robust than we're currently anticipating. If that were thecase, then I think promptly reacting to such information probablywould have beneficial effects on long-term financial markets and,moreover, probably could avoid the need for a more vigorous policyaction in the future. Therefore, I would prefer an asymmetricalpolicy directive to reflect the possible need to tighten over theintermeeting period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I support the proposal of "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I support "B" symmetric, although I understandwhat President Parry is concerned about. And I would emphasize that Ithink it's very, very important that we not be seen at all to begetting behind the curve. That is, if the market believes we'refalling behind the curve in that kind of circumstance, it would bevery, very unfortunate; I think the long-term bond rates would showthat and when we tighten I think long-term interest rates would go inthe wrong direction. But there isn't anything right now that suggeststhat that needs to be done. It seems to me that the money growthought to be discounted; that is, we ought not to be thinking we're astight as maybe we think we are looking at money growth. But lookingat commodity prices and other things, I don't think there's any needto tighten at this point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.Mr. MELZER. I favor "B" symmetric. I'm just reflecting onsomething you said, Alan, and on Don's comments before. I'm wonderingwhether we ought to be worried about weak M2 growth in the otherdirection. In other words, it may actually give us a false sense ofcomfort that we have a restrictive policy in place. I had our peoplelook at what reserves are doing every two weeks when they're released.And if you just look back over the last year, total reserves--thisisn't the St. Louis number this is the Board number--have grown 5.2percent over the last year; since the end of the year they've grown7.1 percent; since the end of the first quarter they've grown 8-1/2percent. But over the last two months, it's 16.4 percent. So, if youlook at that, it's hard to argue that monetary policy is not providingadequate liquidity to the economy. We've talked about it before interms of the problem with the operating regime, but if market ratesstart to move up with a strengthening economy and we peg the fundsrate too low, this is the result. I guess I'm a little worried, justlistening to the comments that we have portfolio shifts in M2 but thatthe Ml component of M2 is growing very healthily, that we may bemisled by a weak M2 number. I would not advocate any tightening now;I wouldn't even advocate an asymmetrical directive. But I think wehave to be very attentive to this.-50-7/2-3/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's an important point. I thinkthat's the reason why Wayne's view about trying to get off the fundsrate is really an important issue. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I support what you suggest, "B"symmetric. I do think that the point that has been made--that it maybe necessary for us to be willing to react quickly, if things do comeback strongly on the real side--needs to be emphasized again. Also, Ithink what Governor Angell said is very, very true. But it's lessclear to me how we resolve that in the short run. So, all of thisargues in my mind for just staying where we are right now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. I agree with "B" symmetric, Mr. Chairman. Iwould like to suggest that we consider moving the "monetaryaggregates" phrase up to either first or second place, though. I'm alittle concerned by the weakness we've had, but I think there's a goodexplanation for it. So, I think Governor Angell is right; we have notbeen too tight. But at some point the aggregates may give us a littlemore accurate information and I'd like to pay more attention to them.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I suggest something? Actually, ifwe had more time, Governor Kelley was going to make the presentationon this whole question. If you wouldn't mind, I'd just as soon waituntil the next meeting when we can discuss this in considerably moredetail. I think you ought to be prepared at that time to re-raise theissue because--MR. BLACK. That's fine.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That whole section [of the operationalparagraph] does require us to take a look at it and I think it wouldbe useful then to make some decisions. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. For the interim period it seems to me that thecurrent policy is appropriate. There is a fairly short intervalbetween now and the next meeting and, therefore, I'd be verysupportive of alternative "B" with symmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. "B" symmetric, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I support "B" symmetricCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I, too, support "B" symmetric. I don't see anycase here for changing anything. I do have a little concern thatthings have worked out exceptionally neatly this time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You don't trust it!MR. STERN. I don't trust it. But unless we get some majordata revision or something, I guess we ought to just---51-7/2-3/91SPEAKER(?). Enjoy it.MR. STERN. Enjoy it, right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "B" symmetric. Let me just comeback to this point that Ed Boehne raised first and others havecommented on. In the period immediately ahead, partly for the reasonsTommy Melzer noted, I would worry more about slower real money supplygrowth than I would about fast money supply growth. Part of what thisdilemma about the money supply is telling me at least right now isthat the money supply really isn't worth a damn either in terms of apolicy indicator in the short run. Wayne wants to get off the fundsrate and so do I; but if you're going to get off that, you have to geton something else. And it isn't clear to me what else we can get on.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's what Don Kohn keeps telling us.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But this point you're raising, thisintermediation phenomenon, really could make the policy process in theperiod ahead very, very tricky no matter what horse we're riding. Itis a worry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it's so dramatic that a lot ofour old guidelines have to be rethought. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. "B" symmetric, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoskins.MR. HOSKINS. With our hard peg on the funds rate, aseverybody has said, money is the residual; and we don't much know whatthat residual is telling us. If you want a suggestion for what weought to be targeting, it's probably the CPI. And if it moves up, weought to raise rates.MR. ANGELL. Commodity prices?MR. HOSKINS. "B" symmetric! [Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guffey.MR. GUFFEY. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I guess that leaves President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have a consensus for "B" symmetricand I would like to have the language read with the appropriate[wording].MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. Depending upon progress towardprice stability, trends in economic activity, the behavior of themonetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and domestic-52-7/2-3/91financial markets, somewhat greater reserve restraint or somewhatlesser reserve restraint might be acceptable in the intermeetingperiod. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to beconsistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from June throughSeptember at annual rates of about 5-1/2 and 3 percent, respectively."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move that?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Mullins YesPresident Parry YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The FOMC meeting will adjourn after Iindicate that the next meeting is Tuesday, August the 20th.END OF MEETING