Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeOctober 1, 1991A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 1, 1991, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice ChairmanMr. AngellMr. BlackMr. ForrestalMr. KeehnMr. KelleyMr. LaWareMr. MullinsMr. ParryMessrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents ofthe Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and EconomistMr. Bernard, Deputy SecretaryMr. Coyne, Assistant SecretaryMr. Gillum, Assistant SecretaryMr. Mattingly, General CounselMr. Prell, EconomistMr. Truman, EconomistMessrs. Beebe, Broaddus, R. Davis, Lindsey,Promisel, Scheld, Simpson, Slifman,and Ms. Tschinkel, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account-2-Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Johnson, Assistant Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Division of Monetary Affairs, Board ofGovernorsMr. Hendricks, First Vice President, FederalReserve Bank of ClevelandMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Lang,Ms. Munnell, Messrs. Rolnick, andRosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis,Cleveland, Kansas City, Philadelphia,Boston, Minneapolis, and Dallas,respectivelyTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofOctober 1, 1991CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. We have TomHoenig with us--officially this time--and I gather, Tom, that this isyour first day as president.MR. HOENIG. As a matter of fact it is and that's a warningto all of you.MR. BOEHNE. It's all up hill from now on!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move the minutesof the August 20th meeting?MR. KELLEY. So move.MR. SYRON. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Sam Cross, you havea number of issues on the table.MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]Mr. Chairman, I also might take a moment to mention that wecirculated a memorandum to the Committee on questions related to theinvestment of our German marks. As the memorandum points out, almostall of our marks are in a three-month double-forward facility with theBundesbank. This causes a problem for the Bundesbank in terms of somemismatch between that facility and the two-month repo position thatthe Bundesbank uses these funds for. They are concerned and have beenseeking to get some change in that facility, and we're looking intothe possibility of some modification. We need to work this out, ofcourse, with the Bundesbank and the Treasury and there are manytechnical questions that we have to look into.The memorandum also suggests that we might look at somepossible change in our approach more broadly. I mentioned thepossibility of a three-point approach for dealing with these DM andyen balances. The first element would be that we would work out anarrangement whereby either regularly or from time to time as seemsappropriate we would put the earnings we receive on these variousreserve holdings back into the market or sell them in other ways. Thesecond element would be that we would continue to look for furtheropportunities for off-market exchanges such as those that we carriedout and are still in the process of carrying out with both the Bank ofJapan and the Bundesbank and thereby reduce some of our reserveholdings in that manner if it seemed appropriate. Then, thirdly, Isuggested that we might also consider some modest diversification ofour facilities so that they might be less heavily focused on thesevery short-term, three-month facilities which are available on a two-day notice--less heavily focused in this Bundesbank facility and othersimilar facilities. We might think about putting a somewhat greaterportion, for example, in the BIS or in some other arrangement of thatsort. We'd try to work out this matter with the Bundesbank; it iscausing them concern because it does put them in a position wherebythey have to explain to their GAO and auditors why they have afacility with us that can cause them to make losses out of profits.10/1/91And as part of this general examination we could also consider somediversification so that we might move a small portion of the balancesinto somewhat longer German government paper beyond the 12-month limitthat we've been held to up to this point. There's very little of thisvery short-term paper available in Germany, and for reasons ofdiversification it might be appropriate to consider a somewhat moreflexible approach. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Mr. Cross?MR. BOEHNE. One question, Sam: What are the real prospectsfor off-market sales of marks?MR. CROSS. Well, we're about halfway through the processthat we worked out with the Bundesbank to cover the months from Julythrough December. After that, I do not think the Bundesbank would beunwilling to consider some further possible exchanges next year. Imentioned as a part of the approach that we would continue to look forsuch opportunities. I assume there is a possibility that both we andthe Bundesbank might find it in our mutual interest and thereforeadvisable.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions? Peter Sternlight,the Domestic Desk.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Corrigan, do you want to addanything?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, let me just say a couple offurther words on the Salomon situation. As Peter has indicated, andas I think is widely known, the status of Salomon as a primary dealeris under active review. Just so the Committee understands the waythat all came about, Gutfruend called me on Friday the 9th of Augustand first revealed the initial violations. We sent them a letter thefollowing Monday, which they got on Tuesday, in which we basicallysaid that in view of what they had disclosed they had 10 days to maketheir case on why they should be retained as a primary dealer. Thatletter, I think, prompted the second round of disclosures, whichdidn't come easily I might add. And when the full scope of the secondround of disclosures became apparent, I told them--and this was all inconsultation with the Treasury and the Chairman, so I was not actingin a vacuum--that signals were off for the 10 days and that theyshould not conclude that the Tuesday letter meant that we might nottake immediate action. And I think it's fairly clear that thatmessage was what, in turn, prompted the decision of Strauss andGutfruend to resign and Buffet to come on board. There was no horsetrading about this. But we did decide here on Friday morning in theChairman's office that in those circumstances we would give them alittle more breathing room to make their case. So, in effect, we didgive them an extension, which has now run its course. They havesubmitted to us a rather voluminous set of documents laying out allthe changes they've made and all the changes they plan and so forth,and that is under evaluation. Nevertheless, we are rapidlyapproaching the point where the decision time will be at hand.Indeed, I would be very surprised if whatever decision we make is not10/1/91made sometime around the middle to the end of this month. I can't seeit going beyond the end of this month.At this point, I don't want to try to prejudge that decision.And above all we recognize that the Board of Governors and theCommittee have a natural and appropriate interest in both the decisionand the decisionmaking process, if for no other reason--and there areothers as well--that there are possible decisions in the spectrum ofall that might be considered that could have very major implicationsnot just for the firm but for markets as well. As that gets closer wewill, of course, make sure that appropriate means and mechanisms arefollowed to satisfy those natural interests. Obviously, we will haveto consult with the Treasury and the SEC as well.Even though I don't think it has to bear on the decision,whatever it is, I can't underscore enough how large and how complexthis firm is. If you look at it relative to Drexel, for example,Drexel literally looks like a fly on an elephant's behind in terms ofboth size and complexity. The balance sheet, as Peter said, is downto something a little over $100 billion now. But again, unlikeDrexel, not insignificant parts of this balance sheet are booked inforeign offices in a multiple-currency type environment now, withsignificant balance sheet assets denominated in various foreigncurrencies. Their global operations are several orders of magnitudedifferent from anything we've seen to date. But I think the biggestelement of potential complexity is the off-balance sheet. The off-balance sheet in total notational terms is about $650 billion, isn'tit Joan? [Secretary's note: Ms. Lovett replied in the affirmative.]Again, that's bigger than a bread basket. One of the things, ofcourse, that you see when you confront this kind of situation is thatalthough everybody says you can net positions down and all that, itdoesn't work that easily in practice. The most complex element of theoff-balance sheet by far is the swap book. The swap book aggregatesto $320 billion; the rest of it is foreign exchange, futures, andforward mortgage-backed securities. They're complicated in their ownright but one could at least visualize how those things can be takencare of. The swap book is a horse of an entirely different color. Itinvolves multiple categories of counterparties all over the world.And the swap book was, among other things, the instrumentality throughwhich these incredibly complex hedging positions were developed.So, it's not as if you can take the swap book and carve itout without the carving out itself having very important implicationsfor all the other instruments both on and off the balance sheet. Andmaturities in the swap book can run out as much as 10 years; they'renot just interest rate swaps. Some of them are highly complex swapsthat involve both interest rates and exchange rates. Some have threeor four or five interest rate/swap-type transactions that are tied upwith currency swaps that might involve six or seven differentcurrencies, and that's basically one transaction. But the difficultywith the swap book other than its complexity is that writers of swapsessentially have either an implicit or offer a very explicitresponsibility to buy them back and/or to make a market. Now, theproblem that creates is that if the thing starts to slip, what willhappen just as sure as any of us are sitting here is thecounterparties that are net plus in individual swaps will put themback and the ones that are net minus will take to the hills. And thatcan create some rather unusual difficulties. But I say that just so10/1/91people recognize that this is an extremely big and very, very complexfirm. Again, it's not that that by itself bears on what one does ordoes not do; but it does say that, as a part of the process of comingto whatever conclusions have to be reached, we have to consider, andwe are doing so seriously, possible contingencies that could arise.Mr. Chairman, I think that's all I want to say at this point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for either Jerry or Peter?MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think the understatement in yourcomments is that this Committee and others in the System have someinterest in all of this. This is probably not the forum, but I havesome strong interests, and perhaps other people do too, not only inthe implications for the financial markets--and I think you've givenus a hint by talking about swaps just what some of the implicationsand some of the contingencies are--but also, closer to home, just howvulnerable we are as an institution in all of this. Again, this isprobably not the place to talk about it, but I think it is importantto talk about it in some forum.MR. LAWARE. Jerry, would the removal of the primary dealerstatus bring the firm down?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, that's obviously a toughquestion. The prevailing view among people in the markets here andabroad, including some very prominent foreign officials--theprevailing view among those who choose to express a view about that tome--is, yes. Now, that doesn't mean that view is right. We ourselvescertainly think that is a possibility. It's one of these things thatis so hard to judge.MR. LAWARE. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. A second question, of course, isthat even if you thought it would, how do you judge the follow-onsystemically? And a propos Ed Boehne's questions, from aninstitutional point of view, there are risks on both sides even ofthat. Now, there are certainly people who say that our institutionalreputation is damaged if we don't do something like that. But if wedid it and it produced that kind of problem, our institutionalreputation could be damaged in the opposite direction. So, it's avery, very difficult question.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What we need is a Solomon!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We surely do.MR. MELZER. Jerry, as this begins to sort itself out--Idon't know what the potential is but obviously we're dealing withconfidence here--it seems to me that an important part of this, if itwere at all possible, is not having whatever decision is reachedjumped on by key politicians right and left. I don't know what that--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think that's the thrust of Ed'scomment. But there's not a win-win there that I can see.MR. MELZER. Right.10/1/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Jerry, I think there are two kinds of responsesthat we can be involved in. One is the response to a firm that hasviolated the ethical principles in regard to falsifying reports, whichis an issue in itself. But the other problem that seems to me is veryimportant to the Federal Reserve is that we address the entirequestion of whether or not a small group, in a sense, ought to havethat privileged access. And in that vein I'm wondering how far downthe road it would be for us to be able to have an electronic abilityat various firms to make their bids. I presume that takes quite a bitof software as well as hardware.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, let me say two things aboutthat, Wayne. First, as you know, as part of this interagency reviewprocess we are looking very hard at what steps can be taken toaccelerate the programs that are already on the drawing board. Idon't have a firm answer as to how much can be done to accelerate thatprocess. It is unambiguously clear that some kind of electronicbidding system would help [alleviate] some of these problems. But itis not by any means a panacea. I think, for example, that whatSalomon did was three things: One is that they violated the auctionrules; two is that they systematically lied about it; and three isthat they used the set of customer relationships that are all withinexisting rules to piece together these very complicated financingarrangements for themselves and their customers that produced the"squeeze." Squeezes can be good; squeezes can be bad. That's aproblem in its own right. In any event, that produces thesedistortions either in terms of the price of the underlying security orthe pricing of the RP in the marketplace. Now, those latter things,whether one thinks they're good or bad, could have been done entirelywithin the existing rules. That may say that the rules are wrong; butthey could have been done entirely within the existing rules. Andthat issue in my mind is in some ways more fundamental than the factthat they broke the rules. It has nothing to do with the question ofpenalties, of punishments fitting the crimes, and all that. In termsof the way the market works, an electronic bidding system isn't goingto do a darn thing to deal with those issues.The other thing that is important to keep in mind is that onecan at least speculate--and that's all it is--that even the mostsophisticated electronic bidding system and trading system might stillresult in a situation, and indeed I suspect would result in asituation, in which there still would be a relatively small number oflarge institutional players that are going to be a very, veryprominent if not dominant part of this market. In addition, even themost sophisticated electronic bidding and trading system in and ofitself does not provide the answer to the question of who ourcounterparties are. And that's where the nub of the so-called moralhazard problem arises. Because as long as we have to deal withsomebody, there has to be some kind of objective standard. In thisday and age of "Government in the Sunshine" and all the rest of it, wewouldn't last 5 minutes saying: "Well, that's our business and nobodyelse's business." So, while the electronics can and will help a lot,and frankly in retrospect we probably--not probably, we should havebeen putting more emphasis on that--as you know very well, it wasperceived as a question of priorities. We've put huge amounts ofresources into the upgrading of the book entry system itself; we've10/1/91put huge amounts of resources into Treasury direct; we've put hugeamounts of resources in the savings bond thing; and the perception wasthat the auction system was working well. It didn't seem, certainlyto me--and I was wrong--to be at the front end of the priority list interms of intensive application of new technology.MR. ANGELL. I don't want to debate all these questions atthis point, but I do think it's very important that the marketplaceand the public perceive that we're very sensitive to an open accessbidding system and that we really ought to give a lot of priority tomaking certain that that option is available so that as the discussiontakes place we are not seen as holding up that process.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I agree completely with that. And,really--Dave has been working with us on this--we will be putting afull court press on that. But I don't want to leave the impressionwith anybody that once we fix that, we've fixed all these otherproblems because that just doesn't follow.MR. ANGELL. I understand and I'll be very happy at someother time to talk about some of those other problems.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions?MR. MELZER. I just want to make one follow-up comment.Thinking about what John [LaWare] was saying--and again not prejudgingwhere this ought to come out--it seems to me that one can draw adistinction between violations in the auction process, which theTreasury oversees, and our decision with respect to primary dealers,which is whom we choose to deal with to execute our transactions. Itjust seems to me, getting back to John's point, that in effect as apunishment--and maybe it's perceived by some as an appropriatepunishment--that implicitly the statement the Fed is making is thatwe're not comfortable dealing with these people. I can just imaginewhat the reaction will be. It will be "The Fed must know somethingabout this that we don't know," if they say they're not comfortabledealing [with that firm]. That's a pretty serious statement, it seemsto me. And if somehow a distinction could be made between those twoissues--the Treasury bidding process and our role in executingtransactions--which is a distinction you've made before, I think it'san important one.MR. SYRON. The one problem with this and the reason for theextensive discussion is that it is perceived--and I think Ed's commentis very appropriate--correctly or incorrectly by many people out therethat the appropriate sanction applier, if I can use that term, is theFederal Reserve. Now, if that is not how it's done--and I'm notjudging that one way or another--then there has to be a way, givenwhat happened, that that issue is somehow defused and it's clear whatthe sanctions are and why the Federal Reserve is not the appropriateone [to apply sanctions] and what it is that whoever is appropriate isdoing.MR. MELZER. Yes, we can suspend them from the auctionprocess without pulling their primary dealership; that's what I'msaying.10/1/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The trouble, unfortunately, is that whatwe can't do is suspend them temporarily as a primary dealer.MR. MELZER. Sure.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's like executing somebody technicallyand then resuscitating them. If there are no further questions onthis issue or to Peter, may I have a motion to ratify the actions ofthe Desk?MR. SYRON. So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We now move on tothe economic discussion. Mike Prell.MESSRS. PRELL and PROMISEL. [Statements--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for either gentleman?MR. BOEHNE. Mike, that was really an excellent openingstatement about the economy and where we are. I think it reallysummarized it quite well. I have a question about the profile of therecovery. The profile in the Greenbook is essentially a real growthrate of about 3 percent, give or take a few tenths in eitherdirection, starting in the third quarter and going out through theforecast period. Yet, I think the typical historical pattern has beenthat in the initial quarters--the first two or three quarters--we tendto get a more rapid growth rate and then it begins to slow. I'mwondering in your analysis of past recoveries if you think that thereis anything in the sort of jump-start dynamics earlier in a recoverythat we have to have a faster growth to get it going and then it tendsto slow and whether, if we only get 3 percent in the initial quarter,that's enough jump-start action to keep the recovery going insubsequent quarters.MR. PRELL. I think that notion has some intuitive appeal.It's not something that one can discern in terms of the behavioralrelationships that are sort of the averages through cycles that areembodied in econometric models. My sense is that where this in factmay be a part of the current process is that some sectors are having amore muted initial response for various reasons. The housing sector,for example, is perhaps not having as big a kick from decliningmortgage rates as we've had in some past cycles, and we are not seeinga big pent-up demand for consumer durables. We didn't get a big surgeinitially, and this may have tended to contribute to this sense thatthings are really not picking up. And with the rather negative tonethat I referred to earlier, in those circumstances the confidence maynot be there on the part of businessmen to proceed to the next phasesof restocking and pickup in investment as might have occurredpreviously. So, in a sense, the initial sluggishness may becontinuing to retard [activity] as people just don't get the sensethat things are falling in place and that they should proceed withconfidence in making investments to meet future demand. So, it may bethat there's some of that dynamic here. I don't see that, though, as10/1/91necessarily suggesting that this [recovery] has to peter out. We havethis continuation of what we think is the beginning now of a moderategrowth path.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mike, this is related to Ed Boehne's question.This forecast incorporates our usual assumption of no change in rates,which you essentially had to make. In going back and looking at ourforecasts historically, we have quite a substantial change in ratesfrom what they have been. I'm wondering in going forward whether youthink the difference between these expectations of rate changes andwhat the economy has done has been caused primarily by externaldifferences and what is going on in the real economy. That's onefactor. And how much--and you addressed this somewhat already--is ita change in the responsiveness of the economy to a fall in rates?It's impossible to give a precise weighting on that, but I'd beinterested in your speculation about that, particularly going forward.MR. PRELL. Ted Truman presented an interesting econometricresult--I think it was in the chart show--which indicated in essencethat to a first approximation the decline in interest rates that hadoccurred since the beginning of this year had effectively offset thesurprise we have seen in the dollar, which we had not anticipated toappreciate as it did. Thus, if you looked at where output would besometime out in 1992, these were compensating forces. Now, whatcaused the dollar to do that--whether it was exogenous events andpolitical factors and so on or part of the internal endogenousdynamics in the economic system--is hard to say. But some politicalfactors clearly were involved in that development.MR. SYRON. So you might say this was different in the pastand you wouldn't necessarily forecast that that would continue?MR. PRELL. Well, I would not discount entirely the notionthat some of the responses to the financial developments that we haveseen in the economy may have differed from what we have observed inthe past. There's a complex of factors in terms of term structure andfinancial flows and the credit crunch aspects of this and so on thatyou'd have a hard time matching up against previous history. My senseis that the key interest-sensitive sector, housing, has responded tothe easing in rates; that did happen. And we expect the recent easingto continue that process. Inventory investment has been very cautiousand we've been a bit surprised. On the other hand, there haven't beenother things occurring that should have driven firms to restockaggressively. So, maybe things are not out of kilter there; the basicelements of the cyclical dynamics are there. And it's really hard todiscern how much they've departed in degree from the past.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I have two questions. One is on nonresidentialconstruction of structures. There has been a very protracted and alsosharp fall-off for 13 quarters. Is that almost unique in terms ofcyclical history?MR. PRELL. This is an extraordinary slump.10/1/91MR. PARRY. The duration clearly is; is it the biggest drop?MR. PRELL. Right, it's very long; it started a while backand it is very protracted by historical standards. In terms ofgauging how far it might go, we think it's reasonably aligned withwhat we can see already in the construction contracts and permitsdata, which have some lead time in them. We think that there is still[in train] a significant decline in office and hotel construction andprobably in other commercial construction to some degree and thatwe're likely to see only modest improvements over the next year or sobeginning in industrial construction and maybe in some utilitiesconstruction. This just looks like a very weak sector. The vacancyrates have remained high to date despite the fall-off in constructionof office buildings. We just don't see a basis at this point for animprovement there. And the financing situation is obviously not aplus. But, given the fundamentals, that's just a side story. Nobodyin their right mind would finance the construction of a new buildingin many of the major cities.MR. PARRY. I would assume that after that process iscompleted some of the major excesses that occurred prior to that wouldpretty well be offset. Let me ask a question on inventories.Clearly, the pattern for the next couple of quarters is going to bedramatically impacted by what happens in that area. What you had forthe third quarter is the continuation of a very conservative inventorypolicy. We have July numbers; we have production and sales numbersfor August. Are they basically consistent with a nonfarm inventoryliquidation of that magnitude, which is really still very substantial?MR. PRELL. In fact, as we noted in the footnote in thisGreenbook as we had in the prior one, we actually perceive theliquidation as likely to be larger than the number we wrote down inthe Greenbook, given our expectation that the inventory liquidation inthe second quarter would be lower. We've circulated some revisedtables.MR. PARRY. We have them. They have that in them?MR. PRELL. Under this cover sheet are the revised forecasttables that we distributed. There is a substantial liquidation stillin the third quarter. We think that is consistent with the Julynumbers, anticipating that in the subsequent months there will be alittle less liquidation and that as we move into the fourth quarterwe're going to move toward to some end to that liquidation. But eventhe fourth quarter we perceive at this point to be in negativeterritory on a GNP basis. So, we think it's consistent with theproduction figures and the import figures and the limited inventorydata we have. But we're dealing with a very small amount of data onthe third quarter.MR. PARRY. Sure.MR. PRELL. And there's room for a surprise, certainly.MR. PARRY. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.10/1/91MR. ANGELL. Yes, Larry, I'd like to ask a question aboutJapan. We understand that just-in-time inventory management seems tobe in place in Japan and certainly Japan appears to have rather highshort-term real interest rates. Is there some possibility that theheavier rate of production in the first and second quarters is aninventory surge that still has to be looked at as a threat to thecontinued growth of the Japanese real GNP?MR. PROMISEL. Well, it's hard to rule that out, but Iwouldn't think so. I think inventories have been held in pretty goodshape; in the second quarter, I'm not sure how well they did. TheJapanese are talking quite a bit about the need to get investmentgoing--I'm referring to fixed investment, not inventory investment--atthis time, and they are concerned about increasing their outputcapacity as demand increases. My sense is that they do not have anoverhang of inventories that is going to damp significantly the outputrise over the near term, although we do not expect a very robustgrowth in Japan in the near term. We have growth fairly sluggish inthe second half of this year and picking up only to about the rates ofpotential growth, maybe 3-1/2 to 4 percent, in 1992. So, we're notanticipating very strong growth, but I don't know that an overhang ofinventories would be a major downside risk in that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for the twogentlemen? If not, shall we move ahead with the round table? Whowould like to begin? Bob.MR. BLACK. Well, I think getting a hand on the true state ofthe economy and its near-term prospects is about as difficult thistime as it has been at any time I've ever been involved in it, andI've been doing this longer than I would like to remember. Much ofthe anecdotal information that we've been getting lately has beennegative and discouraging. Of course, there is some positive news--especially in the manufacturing area--and similarly the statistics arepretty mixed. But despite all that conflicting information, I thinkthe staff has made a particularly strong case for the kind of moderategrowth that they're projecting here. And I think it's important tobear in mind that this is just a moderate [recovery] and not in anysense a strong one. Real GNP, for example, is expected to grow atonly slightly above what most people assume to be the long-runeconomic potential. So, if this is all that happens, this recovery isdefinitely going to be on the slow end of those that we've had in thepostwar period. Our guess is that the downside risk on the forecast,while somewhat greater than the upside risk, is not as much greater asmost people appear to think today. We're all aware of the downsiderisk presented by such things as the weakness in M2, apparentlycontinuing restraint on credit supplies to some industries and in somegeographical areas, the fiscal restraint in the federal and the stateand local government [sectors], and the heavy overhang of commercialreal estate throughout the country. But balancing all thesenegatives, at least to some extent, are strong increases in theleading indicators of manufacturing activity, an apparent reduction inthe underlying inflationary pressures--although Mike did explain veryclearly that that's not an unambiguous signal--and the substantialreductions that we in the Federal Reserve have effected on short-termand long-term rates.-10-10/1/91The one aspect of this recovery that does appear to be clearto me, really, is that we have made substantial progress towardreducing inflation or the underlying trend rate of inflation. Thestaff's projection of about a 3-1/2 percent rate by late next year inthe context of continued moderate real growth seems pretty reasonableto us. And if we can get 3-1/2 percent next year and then maybe 2-1/2percent in 1993, then I think we will be closing in on what iseffectively price stability. Now, I'm certainly aware of the riskthat excessive monetary restraint could damage the economy and itsapparently precarious position and that we could make it moredifficult, if not impossible, to achieve sustained price stability.So, we definitely want to exercise a degree of caution. But at thesame time I think it's important that we not be too cautious. Weclearly have some momentum in reducing the inflation rate now; ourcredibility is growing and that will not only increase our chances ofattaining our goal but will also reduce the cost of attaining it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the Twelfth Federal ReserveDistrict economy is producing mixed signals at the present time.Several sectors are reporting continued declines. For example, unlikethe recovery occurring elsewhere in the nation, the District'smanufacturing sector continues to contract. California has beenparticularly hard hit, having lost 38,000 aerospace jobs since Januaryof last year. Banks are reporting loan levels that have fallen fasterthan in the nation as a whole; total loans are down 3.6 percent fromthe level a year ago. Retail sales are reported to be sluggishthroughout most of the District, although in the states of Arizona andIdaho there is the report of strength. Construction and real estateactivity are weak, with continued job losses in July reported in theDistrict; and nonresidential construction activity remains weak,particularly in California. Residential sales, after rebounding inthe spring, have declined for three consecutive months.There are other indicators, however, that are turningpositive. Total employment in the District rose in July for the firsttime in six months. The July increase occurred in all District statesexcept Alaska, and it left the District's employment approximately 0.2percentage points over what it was a year earlier. Trade employmentrose for the first time in six months while service jobs were added ata solid 4.7 percent annualized rate between June and July.If I can turn to the national outlook, we expect to see amodest recovery over the next six quarters, and I'd say it's roughlyat the same pace as that in the Greenbook, assuming that the value ofthe dollar is constant. In the near term we expect that the mainsources of growth will be in household outlays on durables and housingplus a switch from inventory liquidation to inventory accumulation.And then next year we would anticipate a turnaround of businessequipment spending. We are optimistic that a moderate recovery wouldbe consistent with moderate declines in both the inflation rate andthe unemployment rate in the period. We also believe that there is achance that the dollar may drop as much as 10 percent over the nextyear and a half as long-term interest rates fall and also as the U.S.demand for imports grows. If that were to happen, that path of thedollar would add approximately 1/2 point to the growth rate of GNP-11-10/1/91next year but also would add 1/2 point to the inflation rate by early1993. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In terms of theDistrict, New England has changed very little since the last meeting.In fact, a sense of resignation is beginning to accompany thepervasive sense of gloom. Confidence at the consumer level about bothcurrent and expected conditions continues to decline; we're in a rangethat's somewhat worse than the national level. And partly as a resultof this, retailers we talk to are extremely nervous about theChristmas season. They are going in with very light inventories;there has been a lot of inventory liquidation so far and they areplanning on quite light ordering for Christmas. In fact, now they'reseeing some lost sales because of not having goods on the shelf andthat's reflected also in indications that discounting has diminishedin some of these cases; but they're not about to increase theirinventories for a while. Manufacturers by and large see some bottombut no real rebound. Again, they are very nervous, very cautious oncapital spending, and have continued plans for restructuring andreducing employment. There is concern in the aerospace sector, whichin our area involves feeder industries; they are particularlyconcerned about what may happen to the B2 program. Actually, it'sinteresting that in the District as a whole we saw a reduction in thelabor force last year of about 1 percent. Some of that I think ispeople moving out and some of it is the discouraged worker phenomenon.In the financial sectors there is obviously a lot ofcontinued restructuring going on. Much of this, if not all, is verynecessary; but it obviously will have a transitional impact on thelabor market and the commercial space market. It is an interestingphenomenon. In the space market alone there is an enormous amount ofjockeying going on as developers who have buildings just completed orabout to come on line try to compete to steal tenants away fromcompetitors by knocking down lease prices quite a lot. From thestandpoint of the economy as a whole, while this restructuringcertainly has been an important and necessary long-run phenomenon thatwe don't want to stop, it does constitute a drag on the economy,particularly as it affects many people who usually haven't beenimpacted by recessions; and it affects their confidence. Residentialreal estate in the District has softened but one would expect with themortgage market improvement that there will be some turnaround.Unfortunately, in what I think has to be on balance a negative reportwith regard to District business activity, on the inflation side wedid have one interesting labor contract, the NYNEX contract, that willaffect to some extent at least the management of the New Englanddivision of NYNEX. It's a fairly rich contract--about 13.2 percentover three years. It actually had to reverse the previous deals intrying to [introduce] cost sharing for medical insurance where[unintelligible] program as long as the company would pay for itfully. This was traded off [for other concessions] and we'll see ifthe productivity returns come in. Management expects that they havegotten some significant work rule improvements, but we don't know.And they're continuing to cut management employment. But I think itwas really buying labor peace at what I thought was an unusual time inthe cycle.-12-10/1/91As far as the national scene goes, I think it's very, veryhard to find a central tendency in the forecast that would be muchdifferent--or one that I would have much more confidence in--than whatthe staff has produced. I find myself very much in sympathy withMike's views of the risks as far as the outcome goes. I would thinkthat they're slightly on the down side but not greatly.From my perspective what this comes down to, since it's all agame of risks, is: Which side is the worst if we are wrong? My ownview is that I would prefer to be wrong on the side of having a littlestronger growth than somewhat weaker growth, at least in the shortrun, because I am concerned about the financial sector. We havetalked about many of the [financial sector concerns]. We would bequite a ways away from potential if the economy were to come in--instead of, say, at 3.3 percent growth, which is the central tendency--at something like 1.8 percent rather than 4.8 percent growth. Thatimplies further stresses on the system--[more than if] we were to have4.8 percent for a short period of time. As long as we're willing toreverse course, I think that the latter could be dealt with moreeasily than coming in with a very slowly growing economy.Depending upon the state of confidence, I think we could seea quite slow Christmas season. I admit that there are strongoffsetting risks that imply a rather evenly balanced outcome in termsof what may happen to the economy. Again, my views are driven bywhich side I would rather be wrong on, in terms of the effect of beingwrong.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, in the Chicago District at least weseem to be in something of a steady state. Really not much haschanged in total context since the last meeting. In a comparativesense our numbers seem a little better than the national averages. Onemployment, for example, our numbers have shown a little less erosionthan the national numbers; excluding Michigan, which of course has itsown very obvious problems, some of the employment numbers are lookingat least flat to up a bit. Manufacturing activity is showing somesign of modest improvement. The steel business, for example, isoperating at a higher rate, and at least one manufacturer wouldanticipate that their operating rate would go up pretty close to 100percent by the end of October.As has been the case all year, so much is very, verydependent on the auto industry. And I must say at this point that Ifind it awfully hard to get a grasp on what the underlying retaildemand for cars is. The early September sales numbers are a little onthe disappointing side, but it is expected that fleet sales during thelast 10 days will boost sales for the month as whole. The industryobviously is hoping for a better fourth quarter and the forecasts forsales of cars and light trucks seem to be coming in at about 13.6million at an annual rate. But they do admit that that could be alittle on the optimistic side. Based on that sales expectation, theirproduction schedules for the fourth quarter have been set at levelsquite a bit higher than the fourth quarter of last year and higherthan the third quarter of this year. But, again, the caveat or theproduction risk is on the down side. Looking back at the thirdquarter, of course, they had production schedules that were forecast-13-10/1/91at quite a bit higher level than actually took place. If the salesfail to live up to expectations and production is cut back, that ofcourse would work back onto the suppliers. A lot of the orderincreases that steel manufacturers have are based on auto production,but these are orders that are cancelable. We're just going to have towait and see how all this works out in coming weeks.In the agricultural sector, despite the drought in parts ofthe District--it's particularly tough in central Indiana--and now theearly frost, production is going to come in at a reasonable level.Corn is down just a bit from last year; soybean production is probablydown a little more. The impact in the District in terms of farmincome is nothing like what we experienced in '85 or '86 when we wentthrough a big correction, barring even the drought of '88. And the agbanks do not anticipate a significant deterioration in the permanentaspects of agricultural loans.On the price inflation side, I must say the situationcontinues to look positive. Competitive conditions are just too tightand too tough to provide much latitude for price increases. The steelindustry, for example, has announced a price increase for sheet steel.They think it will stick, but major users of steel say it will notstick and that they will be able to beat it back down. On the wageside, there is not much change other than, I would point out, thatCaterpillar is really in a very tough negotiating stance--really anon-negotiating stance. They anticipate a strike and final settlementcoming out of that at a very low rate--at about the settlements ofsome of the other UAW contracts.In a national context, our numbers, certainly for the thirdand fourth quarters of this year, are quite similar to the Boardstaff's. But I will say that our forecast for next year is a littlelower than the staff forecast. The main area of difference is inpersonal consumption for durable items and in turn for disposableincome; our numbers are lower there as well. So, I would argue thatthe staff forecast is a little on the positive side as we get intonext year. And, net, while the recovery seems to be developing alongthe lines that we've been anticipating, the main question is the onethat Ed Boehne raised: whether this recovery is going to be strongenough to get enough of the boats off of the bottom to sustain it fora continued period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, when we were together in AugustI reported that economic activity in the Sixth District was very slowand uneven and, unfortunately, that hasn't changed at all. In fact,the people that we've been talking to over the past several weekswould describe the local economy, and to some extent the nationaleconomy, as one that really is struggling to maintain any forwardmomentum. Retailers are experiencing flat sales; they've been verydisappointed by the back-to-school season. They're also seeing, ofcourse, weakness in durables as is the trend around the country. Theyare very concerned about sales in the upcoming Christmas holidayseason and are not really expecting very much from that. I would saythat confidence continues to be low. The sentiment in the District isreflected in the general comment we get from business people: Ifwe're really in a recovery, why doesn't it feel better?-14-10/1/91On the other hand, industries that are in any way related tothe export side are doing a little better; and that includes, forexample, industries like chemicals and poultry processing.Manufacturing inventories continue to be quite lean. Another positivenote is that single-family housing inventories seem to be declining,though declining at a fairly slow [pace]. And building activity andsales seem to be improving a little. However, in two of our majormarkets, Florida and Atlanta, the momentum in housing seems to bedeclining and there's some evidence that it might actually be stallingout. Adding to the gloom generally in the area, state and localgovernments have experienced revenue shortfalls and are cuttingexpenditures quite stringently, with the exception of Louisiana, whichhas benefited somewhat from the oil situation. There are no priceincreases to be reported at all.On the famous credit crunch side, that problem still seems tobe with us in the Sixth District. Bankers say they are willing tomake loans to creditworthy borrowers but it's pretty clear to me thatthe standards for gauging credit quality are pretty stringent andhaven't changed very much over the last several weeks. So, insummary, it seems to me that the Southeast--the Sixth District--isexperiencing activity very much like the nation as a whole, with thesame mix of strengths and weaknesses.On the national side, we're fairly close to the Greenbookforecast, but we do show somewhat slower growth, particularly nextyear, and somewhat higher inflation. We agree that the recovery isgoing to be slow; it's probably going to be pushed by manufacturing.I'm somewhat concerned that our forecast--not only ours but forecastsgenerally--have been a bit more optimistic than the reality and I hopethat upcoming forecasts will prove to be a little more realistic. Butas I look at the overall characteristics of the economy nationallywhat I see is: modest growth in consumption expenditures withhouseholds and businesses constrained by high debt levels and limitedincome growth; a housing sector that's still adjusting to slower ratesof family formations--the demographic situation we've talked about; anonresidential market that has a three-year supply of office space;and negative fiscal impulses at both the state and the federal levels.When I add that up and add to it the balance sheet position ofindividuals and businesses, which is retarding growth, it seems to methat the risk is somewhat on the down side. And I would ask the samequestion that Dick Syron asked: If we're going to make a mistake inpolicy, would it be better to err on the side of stimulating growth alittle more? I would tend to come out on that side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. At the national level, as has been the case forsome time, I find myself quite comfortable with the Greenbookforecast. The latest readings on the economy and its prospectssuggest that a modest recovery is underway and I think it's likely tocontinue. I would add that I'm also more confident than I have beenfor some time that we are finally going to see some progress inbringing down the core rate of inflation over the next year or two.So, from that perspective, the outlook to me looks reasonablysatisfactory.-15-10/1/91In the District, recent meetings that I've held have had asurprisingly positive tone. But I think that's because they've beenvery District-specific. By that I mean that they focused mainly onagriculture, which for the most part is having a good year; ontourism, which has had a good year; on residential construction, whichin parts of the District at least is doing surprisingly well; and onretail sales, which have been boosted substantially by Canadianshoppers apparently flooding across the border and stimulatingactivity all across the northern tier. So, from those perspectives,things really look quite positive. On the other hand, if I talk tobusiness people whose businesses are more diverse geographically andwho do business nationally and internationally, attitudes really areterrible. I've been trying to understand why, without a lot ofsuccess, because I don't think the aggregate data that we look at areas bad as the attitudes would suggest. Part of the explanation may bethat business people simply expect, and indeed want, stronger and morerapid improvement in activity than they are experiencing. Part of itmay be the pricing situation; my general impression is that it wouldbe very difficult these days really to get any kind of price increasesat all. And that may be affecting them, of course, both directly andthrough the profit side of the business.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ed Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Except for manufacturing, there are few signs ofgrowth in the middle Atlantic states. There's continued weakness inthe labor markets and joblessness--the number of people who are out ofwork--is still rising. The word from the retailers in the District,and the statistics do back it up, is that retail sales are fairlyflat, with not much expectation of a Christmas season that they willfeel comfortable about. The banks and the financial sector generallyare still quite sluggish and the overhang of commercial real estate isstill there and will be there for some time. On the whole I sensethat the District is somewhat weaker than the nation and attitudes areat best cautious.As far as the national economy goes, I hope the Greenbook isright. I always feel better when I hear Mike. The trouble is thatwhen I get back home, it doesn't last long; it's a quick fix and Ineed more of it to overcome what I keep running into. But I think therisks are on the down side both for growth and for inflation. Andthen I ask myself the question that Dick raised earlier: If wemiscalculate, nine months or a year from now which miscalculationwould we rather have? If this incipient recovery should slip awayfrom us--though I don't happen to think it will--I think it would bevery difficult for us to rev it up again. I would prefer to try toslow down a faster recovery than to try to speed up one that isn'tmoving along. So, I think the risks are on the down side and thecosts of the downside risks are higher than coming out on the up side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I think it's time to remember that we are 28months into this period of declining short-term interest rates. Thefed funds rate is 465 basis points lower than it was 28 months ago.This was accompanied, of course, eventually by a shift from a flatyield curve to a very positive yield curve. That very positive yieldcurve has been in place for quite a few months. We're looking, then,-16-10/1/91at a shift in behavior in the commercial banking system as well as thenonbank public in regard to their positioning of assets. Thecommercial banking system is shifting heavily into U.S. governmentsecurities. This is quite typical at this stage of the interest ratecycle that we're in. Undoubtedly, when commercial banks begin at themargin to add to their holdings of government securities and to offsetthat by some shrinkage or no growth in loans that, of course, meansthat the opportunity costs of making a new loan are moving in thedirection of alleviating the credit crunch. So, it seems to me thatwe have fully in place the atmosphere that does provide for the kindof forecast that Mike has described. To me the one factor that wasmost noticeable in Mike's statement was that the Blue Chip forecastershave a slightly lower rate of economic growth but a slightly higherrate of inflation. And I guess, Mike, that maybe we have insideinformation. But the critical question before us puts me somewhat indisagreement with those who talk about where the risks are. Thecritical risk that we run at this stage is that we do not make thegradual progress in the core rate of inflation as Mike has outlined.And if we go past this window and find ourselves with the same basiccore rate of inflation we've had since 1984, you can better believethat we will pay for that yield structure and the term structure ofinterest rates in the future, and that certainly will be a verysignificant factor with regard to the size of the U.S. government debtand the interest payments that will be there.So, I feel that where we are is just about right. I don'tsee how it could be much better. It seems to me that it would bebetter for us to have 2-1/2 percent real growth rather than 3-1/2percent real growth and make the progress in [reducing] the core rateof inflation. The environment that we're in, if we maintain it, cameafter a period of patience, which may mean that the rate of inflation,and the rate of [unintelligible] may come down more in the next 12months. Yet we're looking immediately at financial markets that [haveyet] to adjust to news in regard to what we think the third-quarterGNP numbers are going to be. It's entirely possible that given thosenumbers--[growth in] real GNP in the third quarter at the 3 percentlevel--that we could see the long bond yields rising above this nice7.79 percent where they now appear to be. So, we have in front of usa very delicate matter. And it seems to me that the best prospectsfor growth will rest with further progress in [lowering] the core rateof inflation. So, I'm very pleased, but I would be happy to have Mikebe 1/2 point too high on this real GNP number.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. The economy in the Dallas District, Mr.Chairman, has improved somewhat since the last FOMC meeting. Over thesummer we experienced some employment gains, after about five monthsof no gains. District manufacturing activity has gone along with thenation in being stronger than the services areas. The strongest partof manufacturing has been in chemicals, petroleum refining, plastics,and also some construction-related manufacturing. Construction haspicked up slightly in residential areas but not in nonresidentialareas. The energy sector remains weak primarily because of theprolonged decline in natural gas prices. Rig counts in the Districtare down about 5 percent in the last month and down 21 percent overthe past year. Retail sales have languished in recent weeks andremain well below year-ago levels. Our directors and other people we-17-10/1/91talk to and get anecdotal information from have the feeling that we'restuck in the mud--that forward progress is not necessarily beingsustained. They're still very concerned with what is going on withbank lending and they're concerned about the sectors of the economy--the small business and medium size business sectors--that are stillrelying heavily on the banking industry as opposed to someone else fortheir financing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. First Vice President Hendricks.MR. HENDRICKS. Well, I'm pleased to be here with you again.Several of you commented that you'd rather see Lee at this chair thanme and I agree with that; I certainly would. Nevertheless, in ourDistrict we are cautiously optimistic about prospects for furthergains in output as inventory cutbacks near an end. Our Districtcontacts tell us that they're reasonably satisfied that retail stocksare at about the desired levels. Manufacturers, especially of motorvehicles, steel, and major appliances, have for the most part clearedtheir inventories. We also see scattered signs of a comeback incapital goods out there. Several industry sources believe that theirbusiness is either near a trough or in the early stages of recovery.This is especially the case with producers of industrial equipment,industrial controls, heavy duty trucks, small electric motors,electrical equipment, and ball bearings. But I would hasten to addthat the recovery in our District is not yet broad-based or verystrong. Our directors do not yet see much of a recovery but theirattitudes may be based more on year-to-year comparisons or on theirmemories of pre-recession operating rates, when they expected to be at85 percent or more [of capacity]. Still, we feel that the latestpurchasing agents reports confirm that manufacturing has been in anexpanding phase in recent months; and that should continue, albeitless rapidly than many would want. That concludes my remarks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, recent public attention has beenfocused on the banking sector being the skunk at the garden party,which is restraining more vigorous growth in the economy. I have asomewhat different view. I believe that the credit crunch isn't [theissue]. I believe it's not so much that banks are not lending as itis that borrowers are not borrowing. It is true that bankers'confidence has been badly shaken by savage examination experience, aslack economy, and stiffer capital requirements; but they can hardlyabandon their basic business, which is lending money. I think theanecdotal evidence favors the conclusion that it is weak demand ratherthan lender reluctance that accounts for the credit contraction.Consumer confidence and business sector confidence are weak and arenot likely to be stimulated by further interest rate changes. Somesolid good news about the economy is far more likely to stimulatedemand than a 25 or 50 basis point cut in the fed funds rate. I hopewe don't lose patience with the pace of recovery if we have confidencein the staff analysis, and I do. In the past, we have had a tendencyto ease too much and too long; and I hope this time that we can keepour eye on the target of price stability and not over-stimulate theeconomy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, John, I'm glad you liked thewaffle! Vice Chairman.-18-10/1/91VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. This is going to sound as if it wasorchestrated, but it was not. Amid all these anecdotal reports,Gary's people must be sending the people in Minneapolis to talk to mebecause I hear all this terrible stuff too. But staff at the Bankyesterday were walking me through some [analysis] on the householdsector, which actually made me feel a little better. Some of it Mikealready referred to and indirectly John referred to it. We all havethis impression that the saving rate is very low, that income growthis rather sluggish, and that spending is rather sluggish. But if youlook at it in the context of these NBER charts, you find severalthings. One is that the saving rate never falls in the beginning of arecovery. What that means, of course, is that it is income thatpushes up spending, not the saving rate falling. And when you look atthe income side in this recovery, it's sluggish but certainly notdisastrously so. I think that was part of what Mike was sayingbefore. And neither for that matter is overall consumption spendingor even so-called discretionary consumption spending all that wildlyout of line with what one might expect. On the other hand,nonagricultural employment is a bit weaker, but interestingly enoughthat is not in manufacturing; it's not even in construction. It'sbasically all in services, with particular emphasis on finance,insurance, and real estate, and in state and local governments. And,of course, those problems are as much secular as they are cyclical.What that basically says is that if you look at the dynamics of theconsumer sector in the context of income, employment, and savings,despite the fact that nobody feels very good, it's not all thatunusual looking.There's another side to it, which gets to John LaWare's pointthat I found even more interesting. And that is what has beenhappening to the household balance sheet. When you look at thathousehold balance sheet in flow-of-funds terms, what you find is thatthe contraction in the growth of household debt doesn't look all thatunusual either. The only thing that's unusual is that it started alittle earlier than it normally does and that the fall in the growthrate of non-mortgage debt started distinctly earlier and has been muchsteeper. But that probably reflects the 1986 Tax Act as much asanything else. But as the rate of growth of debt falls, if youbelieve in a balance sheet, something else must happen. And of coursewhen you look at the last four or five years as a whole, the savingrate on balance hasn't really changed at all. Therefore, what wefind, which isn't surprising, is that over that period the growth inthe acquisition of financial assets and the acquisition or increase inliabilities are very, very similar. And that, of course, makes theoverall situation look even more typical. But it turns out--and thisis the thing I didn't really have a clue on--that there is one verybig difference in terms of the financial assets side of the householdbalance sheet over this four-to-five year period, and that is a verylarge atypical shift in the composition of household financial assetsout of bank deposits into various securities-type instruments,including government securities funds and so on.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The financial funds.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, even the mutual funds are apart of it, but it's also the government funds. Now, that bigrelative drop in bank deposits, of course, we see in the context ofthe rate of growth in the money supply. But if you think of it in-19-10/1/91this broader context, it seems to me that the pattern as a whole isquite consistent with the hypothesis that it's being drivenimportantly by the desire to shed debt, which is quite consistent withJohn's point about the demand side of the equation being moreimportant than the supply side. Indeed, it's also quite consistentwith the hypothesis that the portfolio shift phenomenon, which in partis being facilitated by technology, may have an important role here aswell. Now, the reason why that makes me feel a little better in thecontext of the earlier comments about income, consumption, the savingrate and so on is that, to the extent it is significantly driven bypurposeful decisions to manage the balance sheet better and shed debt,it also makes me at least less nervous--I'm still nervous--about themoney supply and about the credit crunch. That's not to say that Ithink I understand the money supply and it's not to say that there arenot elements of the credit crunch there; it's simply to say that itmakes me feel a little better about them and therefore a little morecomfortable with the kind of forecast that Mike has on the table.I'd quickly add, Mr. Chairman, on the anecdotal side, thatthe attitudes one hears about, especially from big businesses, arestill lousy. The only other thing--I don't remember if I mentionedthis at the last meeting or not--is that I do get the sense that thecommercial real estate market in price terms may be bottoming out, atleast in the greater New York metropolitan area. There's still goingto be a long workout, but one does begin to get the feel that theprecipitous--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Commercial and not residential?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're talking now about the rentalprices flattening?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Sale prices.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sale prices are flattening, which meansthat the rental prices are flattening?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes. Now, that's still in thestraw-in-the-wind category, but I now have had enough people say thatto me that I can't dismiss it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. New York was the leader in goingdownhill in certain respects.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, it's not just the City. I getthis now from northern Jersey too, anyway. Ed, I don't know whatthey're saying in southern Jersey, but certainly in northern Jersey--MR. BOEHNE. Northern Jersey has more excess than southJersey. But Jerry's point is that probably in relative terms there'smore excess space in the suburban areas than in the central cities.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob, what is your judgment of commercialreal estate price trends in the last month?MR. PARRY. That they're weak and probably have come down.-20-10/1/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anyone else sense this?MR. BOEHNE. I sense that rental prices are still coming downbut that sale prices in the Philadelphia area are in the process offlattening out.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Commercial?MR. BOEHNE. Commercial buildings.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The relevant rental prices are the newlease rental prices because the average is going to come down for along period.MR. BOEHNE. The new lease prices are still very weak.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Have you seen anything, Dick?MR. SYRON. I think the new lease prices have weakened butare stabilizing. We have levels that are substantially below whatthey were before but I think that they are reaching--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob, is there anything in Texas?MR. MCTEER. I don't think there's a lot of activity there.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anybody else have any sense ofdevelopments?MR. FORRESTAL. Rental prices are still weak in the Atlantaarea.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They have to start somewhere.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Look, don't misunderstand me. Theyare weak in New York. But what I'm saying is that they appear to be--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The rate of decline is [abating]?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, that's clear. The rate ofdecline has abated, but my impression is that it is beginning to soundas though people think it may be bottoming out.MR. SYRON. It's different in suburban areas and the centralcity. In Boston, where obviously it occurred earlier than in someother places, the class A space seems now to be going for $21-$22 andthat hasn't changed much, I would say, over the summer.MR. LAWARE. It's half of where it was four years ago.MR. SYRON. That's right.MR. PARRY. I think the weakness in prices and itscontinuation are broadly consistent with the forecast. If you hadthese prices bottoming out now and presumably moving up in the nextquarter or so, maybe you would have your [projected] decline innonresidential construction and maybe within that the commercial[sector] coming to an end. But to the extent that that forecast is-21-10/1/91correct, I would anticipate considerable weakness in prices in themonths and quarters ahead.MR. SYRON. Well, a lot of leases are rolling over and theaverage is obviously coming down because people are very aggressivelygoing out and seeking to steal tenants. There are a lot of placeswhere that is going on.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Tom Melzer, do you want to comment onthis and make your report?MR. MELZER. I don't have any comments on that particularsubject. In terms of the District in general, I would say thenumbers, which are necessarily somewhat stale at this point, wouldindicate that maybe we're at the beginning of a turnaround. I havebeen reporting overall employment declines. We have had prettyhealthy growth in manufacturing employment in the most recent three-month period and a seeming cessation in the decline innonmanufacturing employment, and both residential and nonresidentialconstruction contracts are growing at pretty healthy rates.Anecdotally, I picked up a somewhat different tone. What I've beenhearing, particularly from our board of directors, over a long periodof time is that things are just moving along at a slow pace withoutany significant declines.We were in a couple of different parts of the District lastweek, and particularly in Evansville I picked up some very positivecomments. They all seem to go back to roughly midyear; they talkedabout a very lousy first half of the year. One fellow who suppliesautomobile parts is running [his production facilities] seven days aweek and has record shipments. Another in electronic components hasincreasing orders. There is some talk of capital expenditures in theindustrial area there. A lot of people are looking all of a sudden torelocate. It's not new construction; it will be relocatedmanufacturing facilities. But the observation was that people don'teven look if they're not somewhat constructive, and there's a lotgoing on there. In general, I would say this is mostly manufacturing-driven, just given the people we had in the room from that generalarea.In another area where the economy isn't performing so well,Mt. Vernon, Illinois, there was a lot of talk about creditavailability. But in general I think there was a recognition that arebuilding of balance sheets needed to take place. One thing thatsurprised me is that no one really attacked [the Federal Reserve] interms of interest rates. In other words, no one said: "You've got todo something about interest rates." Now, I think if you're in areassuch as Boston and the West Coast, where maybe there's a lot of realestate hung up, that interest rate pressure is still there. But inthese areas there's just a general feeling that rates are not theissue. And I would say, picking up on John LaWare's point about thecredit crunch, that our aggregate banking data for the Districtcontinue through midyear to show no increase in nonperforming loans;we're at roughly the same level we were at the end of last year, withless than 2 percent in nonperforming loans and yet no loan growth.So, this should be a group of bankers that isn't as shell-shocked assome others; and loans aren't growing.-22-10/1/91On the national situation, I'm comfortable with the Boardstaff's forecast. I would make at least four observations. First ofall, I personally don't think monetary policy is inconsistent withrecovery and expansion; I think it has been consistent with that forsome time. Secondly, I'm very skeptical about our ability to fine-tune the real side. So, the concept that we can somehow buy moreinsurance bothers me. I just don't think we'd be good enough to cashin that insurance, or however you want to describe it, when we needto. And in that connection, I think there's a good deal of monetarystimulus in train, as Wayne pointed out--whether you look at what hashappened to interest rates and in particular short-term real interestrates or whether you look, as we would be more inclined to do, at thebehavior of narrow money or reserves over a period of time. There's agood deal of stimulus in the pipeline and I don't think it has allshown through. In fact, and this would be my final point, our view isthat if we were to continue this rate of narrow money growth for asustained period of time, we're probably already risking a somewhathigher inflation rate than the 3 to 4 percent that we're talking aboutachieving in the forecast period down the road.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that what we've allbeen talking about this morning and what is at the front of all ourminds is a very straightforward question with a very ambiguous answer.Is this economy faltering or is it going to falter? If we knew theanswer to that question, we'd have a pretty good idea of what to doabout policy. The staff forecast is that it's not faltering and isnot going to. But I think the staff and everyone else would agreethat the question is very much outstanding. I would certainly concurwith those who say--and I've said here before--that the consequencesof a falter are very severe. And we have to keep that very much inmind and be very concerned about it. But it seems to me as we ponderpolicy right now that we have to keep in mind the fact that we have agood deal more stimulus coming from what has already been done. Staffstudies have indicated that the stimulus that we're going to get fromeasing actions to date is going to peak in late '91 and the first halfof '92. The major part of it is still ahead of us. We all know howmuch rates have come down. Wayne Angell mentioned 450 plus basispoints in the last 28 months. The aggregates may be beginning tomove; it is very tentative yet. But I think one can make the caseperhaps for this sticker shock and that the portfolio shifts arebeginning to abate and may be in the course of beginning to move alittle, which will help the aggregates. We just had a drop in theprime rate. Mortgages just went under 9 percent for the first time ina long time. Yields on long-term Treasury securities just went under8 percent. There's some help still on the way. It seems to me thatpolicy help right now, to the extent that it can be provided and isneeded for the economy, may be to reinforce the downward trend in longrates. We have an incipient view now that inflation is going toimprove, and we need to encourage that. It seems to me that the bestway to do that would be to try to see if we can't hold short rates forthe moment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I don't have much to add on the real economy.We expected a moderate recovery and we're getting no better than that.-23-10/1/91There still is some sense that it hasn't really taken root, althoughthe evidence is pretty clear that we're getting a manufacturingrebound. I had some sense from the anecdotal evidence that thisrecovery may have lost some of its steam in late summer. Thatcertainly happened in the housing area, but--as both Mikes mentioned--the recent retreat of mortgage rates might rekindle that faint flame.Consumer spending appears to be holding up, again growing withmoderate growth in income. From the real side what concerns me isthat after this manufacturing recovery and the inventory side of it,it remains difficult to identify the sources of final demand that aregoing to move the economy forward. The government sector remainsbleak. Perhaps we can expect an uptick in business spending nextyear; attitudes are not too encouraging, but they never are. And onthe consumer side, consumers can only spend at the modest rate ofincome growth. So, I think the final demand side late this year andearly next year is a concern.On the financial side, I still see some weakness. It's truethat the public capital markets, the investment grade sector, lookfine. As the long bond rate has come down, bond issuance has pickedup smartly. The stock market has been marking time for six monthsnow; still, we're getting a fairly healthy volume of new stock issues.For below investment grade businesses--small and medium-size firms,which are the growth sector of the economy--I still think conditionsare [poor]. Demand is certainly weak; at some stage demand should bepicking up. I wonder why we hear so much about credit constraints ifthey're not out there. In the beginning, I thought it was commercialreal estate developers; I would assume by now most of them are brokeand not able to complain! The jury is still out on the capacity ofthe system to satisfy loan demand should it ever arrive because Ithink banks are focusing on increasing capital, working out problemloans, and rationalizing operations with mergers. One way I would[phrase] the question confronting us on the financial side of theeconomy is: Are monetary conditions tight or easy? You can pick yourindicators here. M2 conditions look tight, with unprecedentedly slowgrowth in M2. We've discussed some of the issues there. What wouldconcern me most is the credit side and less so the portfolio side. Mlgrowth continues to look healthy; maybe it has tailed off a bit, butit continues to look healthy. We have little confidence that M1 isrelated reliably to economic activity. Some would suggest even thatthe reliability of the M2 relationship could be called into question.Look at credit growth. Conditions also look tight; but, again, thatcould be demand. If you look at interest rates, we've brought short-term rates down substantially, as has been mentioned, and that lookslike ease. Of course, it's real rates that matter and with CPIinflation of 5-1/2 percent in 1990 and looking at perhaps 3-1/2percent in 1992, real rates have fallen less over this last year thannominal rates. So, there has been less ease than would be apparentjust looking at the rates. Real Treasury bill rates are higher thanthey have averaged over the long sweep of history. Over 60 years thereal T-bill rate has been zero. Currently, it's probably 1-1/2 or 2percent, although it is probably marginally lower now than the ratethat prevailed over much of the '80s. It's roughly in the same orderof magnitude as the '80s; of course, the '80s was a differentenvironment, characterized by growth in credit demand.If you're interested in stimulus to final demand, you mightlook at real rates paid by final borrowers; perhaps they matter. If-24-10/1/91you think of real rates faced by bank borrowers, they would still seemto be pretty high. As Chairman Riegle pointed out the other day, thelast time the discount rate was 5 percent, the prime rate was 6percent, not 8 percent as it is now. It is true that over the lastyear the federal funds rate has fallen 300 basis points; the primerate has fallen only 200 basis points in nominal terms; and the realprime rate has fallen even less. With respect to real consumer bankrates, I would suspect that we've had little, if any, easing in thoserates; maybe they've come off in nominal terms a bit, but I doubt ifwe've seen much easing in those rates in real terms. And it's notclear why we should expect much stimulus from that source. So, itdoes seem to me that the financial system is inherently tightcurrently and is not transmitting our easing actions fully through tofinal borrowers. I think one sees this if one looks at money growth,credit growth, or real rates, which for many borrowers still appearhigh.We are concerned about flagging final demand out there in acouple of quarters. It could be that in this environment we may needto offset some of this inherent tightness; and lower rates may benecessary for the ease to show through to final borrowers and producethe stimulus we would normally expect from our actions thus far. Irealize this argument applies most forcefully only to a segment of thefinancial system: the banking system, and perhaps insurance companiesin an institutional system. However, those without access to thecapital markets do constitute a significant sector of the economy interms of size and I think in importance in terms of stimulated growth.And even in the capital markets, we must recognize that real rateshave fallen less than nominal rates. I would also mentionparenthetically here the point that Mike Prell made based upon TedTruman's work: that the rise in the dollar this year has also offsetmuch of the apparent ease. So, the bottom line is: I wonder just howstimulative policy has been. I fear that it might be tighter than wehave intended. I also feel that at the current stage we continue toreceive data consistent with weak recovery. We've made a couple ofmoves in the last six weeks and these have been well received by thelong bond market and precipitated the reduction in the prime rate.So, it may be wise to continue to assess developing responses to theseactions before moving again. I hesitate in part because I wouldn'tlike to miss that opportunity that Governor Angell mentioned. I dothink, though, that if the economy sinks into recession early nextyear, that would not be helpful to pursuing our ultimate goals. So, Ido see risks in waiting too long for the financial system to ease onits own. We may need to do more to offset what I see as an inherenttightness, if we're concerned about this issue of the level of finaldemand later this year and early next year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anything further? Does anybody elsewant to make any comment?MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, do you want to hear from ourDistrict?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I did, but I didn't want to pushyou, Tom.MR. HOENIG. I appreciate that.-25-10/1/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I thought you might just like to sithere and listen for the first time.MR. HOENIG. I might just make a couple of comments thatmight be of some value.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Please do.MR. HOENIG. Our District economy has been growing fairlymodestly, and I think it's particularly important that this hashappened in the manufacturing area as well. Our automobilemanufacturers are operating at capacity. And while our aircraftindustry, which is important in parts of our District, had a downturnin the first half, it is anticipating some recovery, which is goodnews for us. I might mention that residential construction activityin our area has been picking up, but nonresidential has continued tolanguish, although not as seriously as in other parts of the country.I might even mention that in Denver, although there's not a lot ofactivity, there is an appearance that lease rates are firming up andthat is important to us.In agriculture, the situation is very similar to what you'veheard here. There is some strengthening in crop prices but cattleprices have been falling fairly importantly and we anticipate about a10 percent decline in agricultural income in our part of the country.Energy also is weak, particularly in the natural gas area. It hasbeen very harmful to our Oklahoma area where prices have been down andtherefore rig activity has been falling as well.On the national economy, I would like to mention that ouranalysis is, like others, very similar to what is in the Greenbook.We are a little more pessimistic in the consumption area and netexports but a little more optimistic on the investment side. We thinkit might be even stronger if long-term rates were to continue to comedown. We are also in agreement with the projections on inflationbeing less than 4 percent. We think that's a very important focus aswe go forward because that will help long-term rates to come down andthat will have a much more important stimulus on the national economy.So with that, Mr. Chairman, I'll make my remarks short. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thanks, Tom. Why don't we break forcoffee?[Coffee break]MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don?MR. PARRY. The forecast of M2 is adjusted; how are theerrors treated?MR. KOHN. Well, judgmentally.MR. PARRY. In other words, using the model, we would havegotten numbers significantly higher than in the Bluebook?MR. KOHN. From here on out you mean?-26-10/1/91MR. PARRY. Yes.MR. KOHN. Yes, about 3 percentage points higher.MR. PARRY. Okay, so in effect you're saying--MR, KOHN. The growth rates we'd be seeing would be more like6 percent than 3 percent.MR. PARRY. Do the errors deteriorate or are you basically--?MR. KOHN. Yes, we have smaller errors in the fourth quarterthan we had in the third, but the errors are still substantial--on theorder of 3 percentage points. In the third quarter we had an error inour model of 6-1/2 percentage points.MR. PARRY. Okay.MR. KOHN. Our projection is that whatever mysterious forceswere causing that will abate, in part because people with MMDAs,savings deposits, or other deposits have had a chance to reallocatetheir portfolios.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Don? If not, whydon't I get started. We have a very unusual set of problems, but theleast difficult strikes me as in the area of policy. The reason I saythat is that at this stage we seem to be treading what in retrospectis very likely to turn out to have been the right path. If we go backhistorically, as Jerry and a number of others have in this discussion,what is clearly happening is a long-term phenomenon where in the firsthalf of the 1980s, in part as the result of the 1981 Tax Act, wecreated an extraordinary expansion of credit. The grossing up in theflow-of-funds sense of both the funds raised per dollar of nominal GNPand the degree of intermediation were all fairly extensive. There wasa really major financial expansion. It finally petered out somewhatin the middle part of the 1980s and then got really dragooned with the1986 Tax Act, which took away all of the real estate incentives thathad been the major spark that had engendered the credit expansion.Since that period we have had the grossing coming downdramatically; by the grossing I mean the types of activities in whichstate and local governments borrowed at the [tax exempt interest]rate, invested at the Treasury rate, and picked up a guaranteed rateof return. There was a lot of that going on. I'm talking about thevery large amount of borrowing against realized capital gains and thesale of existing loans, which built up the balance sheet. The wholething was really quite explosive, and all of that is now in theprocess of turning around and, in fact, has been turning around forthe last four years. It is not something that disturbed usparticularly until it began to fall into the money supply area.This may be premature, and I suspect it is a littlepremature, but I think what is occurring is that we're beginning tofind that if past relationships on M2 were in place--or as Don likesto say "in train"--we probably would have a much weaker economy rightnow than is currently the case. Now, that's a very tentativestatement because we really don't have enough evidence. But if onewere to look back from, say, February 1992 and ask "How does this all-27-10/1/91look?" I have the impression that the hypothesis that Don raised mayhave some validity: namely, that the S&L evaporation has more to dowith the money weakness than I think we realize. In principle, wehave always argued that M2 was determined essentially by the choicesof the holders, which means in effect that from where the supply comesis irrelevant. And our general view about the liquidation that wasoccurring with respect to the resolutions from the RTC was essentiallythat all that money was going into other intermediary places and to adegree in commercial banks and was leaving M2 fundamentally unchanged.I think the proposition that M2 is mainly demand determined andperhaps Ml even more so really is questionable; it is by no meansclear that the proposition that M2 is all [demand] determined makesany sense. And indeed with the size of the contraction of the S&Ls,it probably shouldn't be a surprise for us that we're getting as muchof a contraction as we are. What is surprising is why now? Why notearlier? And that raises the question as to how quickly peopleadjust. As I was mentioning to Don a while back, I remember how longit took a decade ago for the 5 percent passbook accounts to disappear.People just sat there with 5 percent when they could have gotten twicethat and more; it took a long while to unravel. But it's fairlyapparent that when you shake somebody and say "Look!" they change.And when you have an S&L resolution, people [reset] their views as towhere they should be relative to the types of holdings they have. Ithink that's what is probably going to turn out to be the case. Thisagain raises as a hypothesis that when we look back in six months orthereabouts I suspect we will be looking at what really was afundamental change going on in the structure of finance.I think that the real economy, if one could measure it interms of whether it is good or bad, is really not bad. Productivityhas increased significantly in the manufacturing area over the years.I would suspect, although the evidence is difficult to come by, thatprofitability at any given rate of operation tends to be higher; thatthere is a great deal more competitive capability in the Americanbusiness system than there was a while back; and that what we arerunning into is a deficiency--basically in this case the intermediarysystem. It surely is not in the area of bond issuance.[unintelligible], as a number of you told me the other day, indicatedthat the view at is that the total investment bankingindustry was operating at capacity and that if there is any moreissuance coming out in stocks or bonds their "due diligence" wouldbegin to break down. We're seeing an extraordinary [volume of]financing going on in the larger companies, but we are seeing a reallyextraordinary pulling back in the depository institutions. I'msomewhat less inclined to take the view that John LaWare has taken. Ithink there is a supply side effect from the capital side. I'm notsure how it's going to be resolved but it's probably the 1980s thatwere off, not the 1990s.All in all, I think what we have here is that the grossingthat went on throughout the '80s has come back to normal. The generalnet funds raised is far closer to normal, but we have a really hobbledintermediary system, which is not only the S&Ls and commercial banksbut clearly the insurance companies as well. Were it not for the factof a weakened intermediary system's effects on primary borrowings, onecould argue that we'll finance the economy outside the intermediarysystem. But it doesn't work that way. And what I think we areseeing, as I put it to my friends at the White House the other day, is-28-10/1/91that it's very much as though an economy which is picking up steam isrunning against a 50 mile an hour head wind. My impression is thatwe'll make it through, but it will be a struggle.Having said all of this, I think we're getting some evidencethat the commercial banking problems are not getting worse. We'regetting some indications that we have passed the worst in the S&Lsituation; we still have insurance problems but they're not gettingworse. So, the question at this stage is: Can we get through thenext several months? My suspicion is--and I would buy the staff'sforecast on this--that we probably will. And if that is the case,what we are testing right now is a major hypothesis as to whether themoney supply contraction that we are seeing really matters or whetherwe are seeing an economy hobbling along with insufficient finance thatnonetheless will be able to make it. If that is in fact the case, wewill look in retrospect and say, rightly or wrongly, that we probablyhave the optimum policy that one could conceive of, granted the typesof problems that exist.Now, having said all that, we're not in February looking backat something which looks as though it has been cured; we're not thereyet. And I would be inclined at this stage to tread very cautiously,as I think we've done. I'd rush nowhere quickly. And that would leadme to conclude that policy should be somewhere between symmetric andasymmetric toward ease, but I'd be less inclined to move unless webegin to see further deterioration. If the staff forecast is right,and if this hypothesis about money that Don has raised is right--and Ithink it is becoming increasingly more reasonable--then we shouldbegin to see some strengthening in the data within the next six weeks.If it fails and fails in an obvious way, it is telling us that thishypothesis is not correct and would lead one more toward the type ofhypothesis that Governor Mullins raises. I would recommend adirective--although I personally would feel comfortable either withsymmetric or asymmetric toward ease--that is more toward the latterbecause it's hard for me at this stage to envisage that we mighttighten within the next six weeks.Finally, let me say that irrespective of what is going on, Ithink we are going to have some tough public relations difficulties onthe Hill, not only with the issue of Salomon but with this wholeproblem of a sluggish economy. An economist's view is that arecession is over when the economy stops receding; and that bydefinition is the low point of a cycle, the worst point of a cycle.Politicians believe the recession is over when the economy hasrecovered fully. And we're going to be in this dilemma, as far as I'mconcerned, for a goodly number of months. But if the staff is righton the forecast--. So far things are falling into place even if theanecdotal evidence doesn't work, and I think we may well come out inthat area. In any event, I spoke longer than I intended to but I'dlike to put on the table as a general suggestion "mildly asymmetrictoward ease," if one can characterize a directive in those terms.MR, BLACK. Is that "B" mildly asymmetrical toward ease or"A" mildly asymmetrical?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. "B."MR. BLACK. It's "B."-29-10/1/91CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I frankly would not expect us to easeright here. We could well ease; and if that happens, we might findthat the economy turns around a lot faster than we now expect.President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, as you indicated, the economy doesappear to be recovering from the recession; at the current level ofthe funds rate, the forecast for moderate growth along with some gainsagainst inflation certainly seems reasonable. I also think that thedownside risk in the outlook has been addressed by the recent declinein interest rates. Consequently, I would certainly support the ideathat we leave policy unchanged at this time, and I must admit a slightpreference myself for a symmetric policy here.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, while I said earlier and Istill continue to believe that the risk is on the down side, Icertainly hope your forecast for our looking back from February andsaying our policy has been right is correct. I'm still rather nervousabout where we are, but I would certainly at this point support yourprescription for no change with an asymmetric directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "B" mildly symmetric sounds fine tome.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mildly asymmetric?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Asymmetric. There are too manyadjectives in these things!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I come out right where you do but Ireally do feel a great loss in seeing M2 lose its meaning. I feelalmost like a baby who has lost his pacifier! [Laughter]MR. BOEHNE. Well, Bob, you adjusted when you lost Ml.MR. BLACK. It took a while!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I favor "B" but with symmetric language, please.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. "B" asymmetric.MR. MELZER. Which way, Ed? [Laughter]MR. BOEHNE. I imagine we ought to have little ambiguity!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.-30-10/1/91MR. ANGELL. I prefer "B" symmetric butbetter than straight asymmetric.I like "mildly"CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN."B" asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON."B" asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY."B" asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER."B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. First Vice President Hendricks.MR. HENDRICKS. We still have some concern over the continuedweak behavior of M2, so ideally what we'd like is a directive between"A" and "B" with an early reduction of 25 basis points in the fundsrate as reports perhaps unfold in the next week or two.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER."B" asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN."B" asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We're still missing Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS."B" asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG."B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I read it, I guess it falls betweenasymmetric and symmetric "B." But there is a majority for asymmetricby several, so I think that [unintelligble.] If we use in thedirective "slightly" rather than "somewhat," I think that probablycaptures the sentiment. Would the Secretary read the directive?MR. ANGELL. I was on edge wondering how you were going to dothat!MR, BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. Depending upon progress towardprice stability, trends in economic activity, the behavior of themonetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and domesticfinancial markets, slightly greater reserve restraint might orslightly lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in the-31-10/1/91intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expectedto be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period fromSeptember through December at annual rates of about 3 and 1-1/2percent, respectively."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Will you call the roll?MR. BERNARDChairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Black YesPresident Forrestal YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Mullins YesPresident Parry YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, the next meeting is November--MR. BERNARD. Five.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. November 5th. We have a need to have avery short Board meeting before lunch. So, if the Board members wouldjust stay here and others would give us a few minutes to have a legalmeeting, we'll be back at lunch.END OF MEETING