Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeOctober 6, 1992A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 6, 1992, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellHoenigJordanKelleyLaWareLindseyMelzerMullinsPhillipsSyronMessrs. Boehne, Keehn, McTeer, and Stern, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents ofthe Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Kohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Deputy SecretaryCoyne, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPatrikis, Deputy General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. R. Davis, T. Davis, Ms. Munnell,Messrs. Lindsey, Promisel, Siegman, andStockton, Associate EconomistsMr. McDonough, Manager of the System Open MarketAccountMs. Greene, Deputy Manager for ForeignOperationsMs. Lovett, Deputy Manager for DomesticOperations-2-Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Broaddus, Dewald, Lang, Rolnick, RosenblumScheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis,Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas, Chicago, andAtlanta, respectivelyMessrs. Judd and Sniderman, and Ms. White, VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San FranciscoCleveland, and New York, respectivelyTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofOctober 6, 1992CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it is most appropriate for me tocomment that as far as I can judge we've been handling the issue ofconfidentiality awfully well. I haven't seen the slightest indicationof any breach of security out of these meetings--the last two--and Imerely wanted to note that fact and hope that whatever it is we'redoing we continue to do. With that, I'd like to request a motion toapprove the minutes.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MR. SYRON. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. As you know, todayis the first meeting in which Bill McDonough is in charge of bothDesks in New York; he took over obviously very recently. And I'd liketo call on Bill for his usual start--the Foreign Desk report.MR. MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Any questions for Bill?MR. BOEHNE. You ended on a note about staying alert to earlysigns of a run on the dollar. But there really isn't much one can doin terms of contingency plans. Essentially, we have interest rates todeal with that and we have foreign exchange operations to deal withthat, and foreign exchange operations have shown that they're noteffective in [countering] these kinds of massive movements in capitalflows. Domestic concerns would make an interest rate movement not agood course. That exhausts my list. What else is on that list thatone can do if this kind of situation should materialize?MR. MCDONOUGH. Intervention is unlikely to be highlyeffective because it would be very difficult under the circumstancesto organize a coordinated intervention. It is tough to be effectiveintervening on our own. I think it's a tool and, quoting PresidentCorrigan at the last meeting, I'd be inclined to say "never saynever." It is something that we may want to use. The reason it wouldbe difficult to organize a coordinated intervention is that most ofthe Europeans don't have any deutschemarks, which would be thecurrency of intervention. And the Bundesbank, I would think, probablywould want commitments from the Chairman on the future of monetarypolicy that I suspect he would be very reluctant to give. Because oftheir concern about what [intervention] did to the management of theirmoney supply, it would be a fairly tough argument to make in any case.In the midst of a political campaign, if one or more of the candidatescould be induced to say that a weak dollar policy is not what he hasin mind, that could be somewhat useful if it were done with goodtiming.MR. JORDAN. Earlier this year we heard some things about thedifficulties the Germans were having with sterilization and theirdesire to see us diversify10/6/92and so forth. What were they saying during Septemberabout their problems with the other countries? And was that aconstraint on our options?MR. MCDONOUGH. Well, all during September we were very muchin the mode of not wishing to intervene because of the likelycounterproductive effect on [our] domestic markets, especially thebond market. Therefore, in fact, I didn't have any discussions of"What if...?" or "What do you think we should do?" with them. At thattime the main thing that would have inhibited any desire by theGermans to do an intervention operation with us is that they very muchwanted the ERM to come apart in order to stop having the monetarypolicy problems they had and to establish what they think is thesingle most important principle of the mechanism, i.e. that it beflexible. So, I think the main concern they had was purely internallyEuropean.MR. JORDAN. So, our actions would have appeared to be tryingto hold the ERM together?MR. MCDONOUGH. Right.MR. JORDAN. And they didn't want to hold it together.MR. MCDONOUGH. Exactly. When we did intervention operationsduring the summer, the other European countries were just delightedevery time we even mentioned the [possibility] of it. The Germanswere much more reluctant, but they didn't want to get "noticed" asbeing against an operation which the other Europeans saw as positivebecause in weakening the mark it helped them keep the system together.MR. JORDAN. Your remark about [intervention] giving usdomestic problems: Was that because if you're selling deutschemark-denominated securities you are going to be sterilizing them by buyingdomestic-denominated securities?MR. MCDONOUGH. The technical monetary effect of theintervention wasn't what we were concerned about. It was thepsychological effect of an unsuccessful intervention operation onother markets.MR. JORDAN. The psychological effect is one thing, but theidea is that if you sold deutschemark-denominated securities, you'd bebuying U.S. Treasuries.MR. MCDONOUGH. Right.MR. JORDAN. And that would be helpful. Given the positionof other central banks now with deutschemarks and given our desire toreduce our holdings of deutschemark-denominated assets, do you have anopportunity to do off-market sales of some of our deutschemarkholdings and, the counterpart, to buy more Treasuries?MR. MCDONOUGH.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.10/6/92MR. MCDONOUGH.MR. JORDAN. One last question: Going forward, if we dostart to get more stability--even firmness--of the dollar, what isyour attitude going to be toward moving into the market and stillreducing our position in deutschemarks?MR. MCDONOUGH. As you know, we have this [conumdrum] withthe Treasury, and about 55 to 60 percent of U.S. reserves belong tothis Committee and the rest belong to the Treasury. Perhapsunderstandably, given everything else that has been going on, theTreasury has not been able to focus on the whole issue of reservelevels or management since we've had these discussions this year withthe Committee. I think realistically what we have to do is wait untilafter the election and until this Treasury team or whatever Treasuryteam is prepared to talk about it, and then we can come back to theCommittee.MR. TRUMAN. President Jordan, two points seem to need to beadded here. One is that in the second phase--the September phase ofall this--I at least detected from my own contacts that there wasessentially no pressure on us from the other Europeans to operate. Wedid not have the same thing going in August. So, they too were notlooking for us to get involved in Europe. On the last point, I thinkit's worthwhile sharing with the Committee the current attitude of theTreasury, which was that they were not interested in sharing theoperation with Sweden. That's why you are about to approve the entire$400 million. So, there is a certain reluctance there. It is myjudgment, certainly, that these are not the right circumstances to putthat issue squarely to the Treasury. It is probably better to waituntil things settle down.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. I just want to commend those of you who had apart in the decision for having tried to urge the Treasury not to dothis intervention. I think you proved your point very well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Bill, I just want to be sure that I didn'tmishear something you said before. Did you say that you thought themarket had--"built in" is too strong a phrase--a sort of preponderanceof expectation of a 25 basis point cut in the funds rate?MR. MCDONOUGH. The foreign exchange market, yes.MR. SYRON. I was just going to ask you this: To the extentone can reconcile that with the question Ed Boehne raised on yourpoint regarding concern about a potential break away on the down side,is the market seeing that as a factor that might lead to this breakaway? Is that a factor they see that might or might not lead to this?MR. MCDONOUGH. No. It could happen, but my judgment is thatthe highly expected 25 basis point easing in the funds rate would notdo much of anything in the foreign exchange market.10/6/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. How effective have the Germans been insterilizing? I think short-term rates have come down a fair amount,which would suggest that they have [not completed the sterilization]MR. MCDONOUGH. They definitely don't have all of theseoperations sterilized yet; I don't have a good feel of what would be areasonable percentage.MR. TRUMAN. In many respects, given the magnitudes that Billdescribed, which are unprecedented in terms of anything I've heard of[unintelligible], I think they have been remarkably successful--soremarkably successful in fact that they had already put the marketsback in a position in which they were net short of funds at the end ofthe maintenance period last week, which is one of the ways the Germanswere able to stabilize the situation. In talking to people at theBundesbank--though every person one talks to probably would give adifferent answer on that question--my impression is that at a verytechnical level they have been able to force some changes in their ownoperating procedures, but nothing like the price system to[unintelligible] instruments. But they have been quite successful inthe first round. However, there's a big dispute within the Bundesbankthat goes back decades about whether one can fully sterilize any ofthese operations. The only way I could understand it is that if youhave large capital flows, it is not clear that you could return theliability side of the central bank's balance sheet to its status quoante. But it's not clear with that and the same interest rates thatyou have changes in the demand for money that will give you differentmoney supply numbers, a change in the multipliers, or whatever youwant to call it. There's a lot of dispute within the Bundesbankitself about whether one can truly sterilize the [effect on the] moneysupply. That's at a different level, I think.MR. PARRY. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Bill? If not,would somebody like to move to ratify the actions taken by the Desksince the last meeting?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I move it.MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Bill, would youintroduce Joan Lovett officially?MR. MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There are twothings I've learned by this the fourth business day of responsibilityfor the Open Market Desk, judging from the first three days: Decidingexactly how to go about adding or subtracting reserves and in whatamount is a lot tougher than I think anybody, especially me, realized.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Arithmetic is a pretty rough activity!MR. MCDONOUGH. It has been an interesting baptism. Thesmartest thing I could possibly do was not to fake it for the wholeperiod and, therefore, Joan Lovett will give the report.10/6/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Go ahead. Welcome.MS. LOVETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman; thank you, Bill.[Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The bond market was about 1/4 pointlower this morning and I think the bill rate is up about 3 or 4 basispoints. Is there any commentary around as to what this type of moodis suggesting?MS. LOVETT. This morning?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MS. LOVETT. The early read we got was that a technicaladjustment had been taking place in the market yesterday afternoon asthe stock market recovered from its lows. And with the world stockmarket this morning also tending to recover from the lows seenyesterday, there is just what one would call normal, technicalposition adjustments taking place. There didn't seem to be anythingmore fundamental than that at work.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Joan, I know this most recent reserve periodstarted off with continued pressure on the funds rate. I don't knowif that has continued into this week or not. Were you surprised bythat? I know the quarter-end has passed and we may still haveTreasury balance problems and so forth. How do you evaluate that?MS. LOVETT. We were somewhat surprised. The quarter hadfinished on a firm note. We really thought that we had put in[enough] reserves and made an allowance for even higher-than-normalexcess reserves for the quarter-end, but we had a very large miss.Therefore, the next morning, which was the beginning of thismaintenance period, the funds market started out on the firm side; andsometimes that carries over. But I have to say we were surprised bythe carryover firmness because it was the first day of the maintenanceperiod and the banks had the whole remainder [of the period to adjust]and it was also prior to the time when there were widespreadexpectations that the Fed would be cutting the rate. So, we're havinga very difficult time trying to understand why people would pay thesehigher rates so early on. The rates aren't consistent with thereserve numbers either. Reserves don't show [a need for us] to put inthat volume of reserves. So, we've been surprised by it. The markethasn't been as surprised because they think the need is bigger than weare saying. This is one of those periods where right after thequarter-end the Treasury balances plummet because they have to pay outthese social security [checks]. And the market, even though it knowsthat, thinks the need is bigger. So, the market hasn't been assurprised about the firmness of the funds rate as we have been. Thefirmness that we're hearing about is coming more or less from regionalsources, and we just don't have a satisfactory explanation for it.MR. MCDONOUGH. The first couple of days were aggravated, aswas the September 30th quarter-end, when Bank of America's computerswent down about halfway through the day on Wednesday. And I believe,Bob, they didn't get them fully back up until yesterday.10/6/92MR. PARRY. Wells Fargo had a problem too.MR. MCDONOUGH. Well, I didn't know that. Bank of America isusually a pretty good size supplier of fed funds, so I think that wasprobably at least a marginal contributor. But it isn't the wholeexplanation of why funds have been quite as tight as they have been.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It was also in the context, as I recall,of days when the bill rate was actually easing quite considerably.MS. LOVETT. The fact that the funds rate hasn't behavedquite the way it should has been largely ignored by the market thusfar. It is seen as something that's technically driven at this point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. Do the traders look at any of the variousmeasures of bank reserves, the monetary base, or monetary aggregatesin forming their expectations about Fed actions?MS. LOVETT. I guess I could answer that in two ways. Theylook at those kinds of aggregates broadly in terms of their impact onpolicy, but I think they see that impact as being somewhat removed.They look more closely at their estimates of reserve requirements asan operating factor that we have to contend with. And I think that'sas close as their focus would go on that.MR. JORDAN. What would it take to get them to move away fromfocusing on the perception of a weak economy to looking at some kindof monetary indicator in determining what we do?MS. LOVETT. Well, the market looks at what it thinks theFederal Reserve acts on; they feel reasonably confident that that isthe thing to do. They don't see the monetary aggregates as being thedriving force to policy right now. They find it very difficult toread what the aggregates are saying, and everything they read says theCommittee does too. So, they don't tend to look at them that closely.MR. JORDAN. So, at the moment, if miraculously M2 and M3started to soar as in Germany and if Ml and the base plunged--again asin Germany--the Street wouldn't react to it as long as they thought wewere going to react to unfolding real economic indicators?MS. LOVETT. They don't ignore the money numbers by anystretch of the imagination; they do look at them. Some people arecommenting a lot about the rapid growth of M1 being a harbinger oftrouble, but others aren't. Some say one can't look at that becausethe Fed is looking at the broader aggregates. Nobody understandsfully or positively what is going on here. If they thought we weregoing to be acting on it or if they thought we should be because thegrowth rates are out of historical experience, then they would respondto it.MR. JORDAN. One more question: How do you reconcile theperception that in the long run we have big problems--fiscal stimulus,inflation, and all of that--with the constant drumbeat of the need forus to ease because of weak economic conditions? What is it they wantus to do? Do they want us [unintelligible] or don't they?10/6/92MR. MCDONOUGH. I think the attention span of most people whotrade securities is relatively short. [Laughter] The big thinkershave tomorrow in mind! Seriously, one of the things that makes themthink that way is that their bonus systems are based on thinking forrather quick gratification rather than longer term. Going back toyour earlier question, in most of the firms the Fed watchers havebecome much less important than the traders. And the traders verymuch look at psychology; they're getting more and more married to theblack box which says that the past is the mirror of the future. So ithas changed a great deal from the period when the Fed watchers and theeconomists in the big trading firms were really quite powerful. Ithink there would have to be an extended period of this[unintelligible] off to concentrate on the monetary variables for achange to take place because the firms would have to recast their owninternal structures and to whom they listen.MR. JORDAN. But that dichotomy suggests that it's notnecessarily inconsistent, given what is going on there, for theperception to be simultaneously that we're too tight and that we needto ease and we're in the process of inflating.MS. LOVETT. Right.MR. MCDONOUGH. Exactly.MR. KOHN. Then we'll have to tighten later.MS. LOVETT. Right.MR. KOHN. I take that back. I think we've had something ofa contradiction in this whole episode of an upward sloped yield curvewhich suggests that at some point--[unintelligible] through liquiditypremiums or whatnot--rates would have to come back up again and [giventhe] immediate expectations of consumers or constant disappointmentwith how the economy is turning out, the Fed will ease. So, I don'tthink there is anything new. If anything has happened over the lastthree or four months, it's that the middle part of the yield curve--the one, two, and three-year part--has really come down quite a bit,particularly after the June employment report. So, a sense of whenthe rates would have to go up has been pushed out [in time].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sure I shouldn't read this and Idon't have his permission, but I insist. This is a Corrigan-gramwhich says we could put Bill and Joan on the road. [Laughter]MS. LOVETT. I don't know what that means! [Laughter]MR. MELZER. At whose expense, right?MR. MCDONOUGH. I think we'd like to discuss that Corrigan-gram!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any further questions? Ifnot, I think we have to get the ratification very quickly. Wouldsomebody like to move the ratification?MR. MELZER. Move it.10/6/92MR. SYRON. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Let's move on now toMessrs. Prell and Truman.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for either?MR. BOEHNE. Mike, would you elaborate some on your commentabout going from 3 percent to zero--and presumably we could [even]have a negative real [federal funds rate]. It's an article of faithfor anybody who has taken one or certainly two economics classes thatlower interest rates are going to be a positive [for] growth, and I'mnot quarreling with that orthodoxy. But when one goes out and talkswith people in the business community and consumers, one almostinvariably runs into the view that lower rates are not the [solution].If I probe that, an answer I frequently get is: "If I thoughtinterest rates were going to stay down, then lower rates would help.But if you lower interest rates now, I know you'll have to raise thema few months or a year down the road. Just knowing that rates aregoing to be down for a short period doesn't help me because I'm goingto have to finance whatever I'm going to buy with this [loan] for 5 or8 or 10 years." I find increasingly that the view in the businesscommunity is at odds with what most of us have accepted as a good[economic] relationship. I wonder if you could help me through someof that.MR. PRELL. It's a difficult question. I think many peoplein different positions perceive the effects of changes in short-termrates differently. A retiree living on the proceeds of short-termdeposits would not see an improvement coming from lower short-termrates. A business that has a heavy load of short-term floating ratedebt or debt that rolls over frequently is going to achieve somesignificant improvements in the bottom line from the decline ininterest costs. I think it is fair to say that some of the channelsof positive influence from declining rates have been somewhatdiminished in their effectiveness in the past couple of years becausesuch sectors as commercial real estate are just so far out of kilterin terms of the fundamentals of supply and demand that makingborrowing cheaper is not going to make new investments particularlyprofitable. It may enhance property values to some degree anddiminish the write-downs that will occur, but we're not going to getquite the stimulus we would have in other circumstances. Similarly,to the extent that credit availability has been the problem for someclasses of borrowers, a small reduction in rates probably is not goingto make a very great difference.But there are a lot of borrowers for whom lower rates willmake a considerable difference. I think we've seen that the declinein rates has significantly abetted the balance sheet restructuringprocess. I think lower rates have played a role in sustainingrelatively high valuations in the stock market and probably havecushioned the falls in a variety of other asset values. We have notargued that modest changes in short-term rates are going to make a10/6/92night and day difference, but if you feel that there is nothing elsehere to provide a great deal of push to the economy over the next fewquarters, our assumption of a decline in long rates looms rather largeas a factor in the projected acceleration. And the question becomesone of whether some easing of short rates is needed to facilitate thatprocess. If people thought that the Fed was overdoing it and that theimplication of the easing was that we would have significantly higherinflationary pressures down the road and that we wouldn't reversecourse in a timely way, then we might not get the beneficial effectsin the bond market. My sense is that unless the Fed went to 1 percenton the funds rate tomorrow--if the movement was gradual--that in thecontext of weak economic indicators we are more likely to get the "toolittle too late" complaint than we are the notion that we've overdoneit and have shifted to a grossly inflationary posture. So, there area lot of things to weigh here. But, as we suggested, I don't think weshould ignore the fundamental notion that on balance easing probablydoes give us some stimulative effect. It's a very long answer.MR. BOEHNE. Thanks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. On this subject, do we have any evidencethat the marginal propensity to spend out of interest income tends torise as interest rates fall on the assumption that the[unintelligible] part of the standard of living of interest receiversis fixed?MR. PRELL. I'm confident that we don't have any evidence tosupport that but no evidence to counter it either. It's hard enoughto discern a general phenomenon of a lower propensity to spend out ofinterest income in general. They refine it to that point. I don'tknow that anyone has even endeavored to do that. By postwar standardsthis is rather an extraordinary episode in terms of the dimension ofthe decline in interest income, partly because we started the ratedecline early and there's a lag effect here as instruments roll over.I'm not sure we have a great historical sample from which to try todiscern those [relationships].MR. JORDAN. As a response on that, I don't think there isany empirical evidence about the people who already are living oninterest income, but I've been testing the attitudes--this is allpurely anecdotal--of people who are not yet at that stage. Bankerstell me that their customers who are looking ahead to retirement havea threshold in mind of interest income they're going to need. Andwhat they've been doing is raising the amount of assets they feel theyneed in order to achieve their desired interest income as we move to alower rate structure.MR. PRELL. This is the income-to-price effect. We have theclassic question here about how interest rates will affect consumptionand savings.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are you saying that they're moving outon the interest rate maturity curve for a higher yield?MR. JORDAN. No, they're just raising the amount of assetsthat they feel they need to set aside.MR. PRELL. Their target is trying to get current income.10/6/92MR. KELLEY. I'm sure it's more than they have.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mike, relative to previous forecasts, thisforecast seems to get started a bit later and when we get to thefaster growth it's not quite as strong, at least in 1993, as it wasbefore. Would you characterize this as an indication of greateruncertainty on your part as to the strength of the economy, both shortand long term?MR. PRELL. Well, I suppose we ought to be more uncertain[given that] we have been disappointed in our prior thinking, but Idon't conceive of it as more uncertain, though it's still veryuncertain. I think the risks are reasonably balanced at this point.One might argue that we have tipped the scales in a more negativedirection by taking the position we have on productivity, in a sensemaking the personal saving rate more directly a function of what isgoing on in the labor market. But I think this forecast is no morecertain in the end than our prior forecast was. We've been less thanconfident for some time now about what was going on.MR. PARRY. I would ask Ted a question as well. The importnumbers are really quite strong; I guess that's attributed tocomputers. If one looks at the normal relationship between an economyexhibiting the characteristics that we currently see, isn't thisreally an extraordinary increase in imports given what we see for[unintelligible]?MR. TRUMAN. I think most of the surprises are in thecomputer area. If you strip out computers and look at nominalimports, our standard equations are not--MR. PARRY. Doing too well?MR. TRUMAN. --doing any worse than they were before, if Imay put it that way. So, when you take out computers, other importshave not gone up. The real surprise has been in computers which seemsto be [a mystery]. First of all, no one has a good model about whatdrives computer imports at this stage. What seems to be going on isthat there are a lot of applications with more power, but they are atthe low end of the technological scale and that's where we arerelatively import intensive. At the higher end of the technologicalscale we are export intensive. As a result we have a situation inwhich the computer trade balance is reversed. And even assumingexports and imports now grow at the same rate, we would have awidening of that gap.MR. PARRY. Do people in the industry feel as though this isgoing to continue for some period?MR. TRUMAN. We cooperate with R&S on this, and our sensefrom contacts we had after the Greenbook went to print was that thevery rapid rate that we already had in the forecast mightunderestimate what is going on.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.10/6/92MR. LINDSEY. I'd like to ask Ted and Mike a statisticalquestion. We know that the things we don't measure well are exportsand imports. Anecdotally, when I was in San Francisco lately, I wason the Fisherman's Wharf on a Sunday and I heard German, I heardFrench, and I heard lots and lots of Japanese. When I'm on anairplane, I'm one of the few Americans in the first class section.Howard Banks just wrote a piece saying it was cheaper for a Brit tospend a long weekend in New York than a long weekend in Paris. Wehave all this anecdotal evidence. An expression I heard that sums itup best is: "We've become the world's Wal-Mart." Now, with all thesetourists packing their suitcases full of Gucci and whatever else theybuy on Fifth Avenue, isn't it possible that we are seeing amiscalculation of the effect of the dollar and that a lot of whatwe're picking up as consumption might actually be exports?MR. TRUMAN. That certainly is possible, though I will maketwo comments. One is that over the last decade the CommerceDepartment has dramatically improved its collection of data in thisarea. Moreover, we do see a dramatic upward trend in our exports ofservices of all kinds. Now, the question you're asking basically iswhether we're picking up as much of it as we should be. The answermay be that the statistical system probably is lagging behindsomewhat. That's one of the reasons why, as I commented at the end[of my remarks], the services component of exports of goods andservices is growing in the forecast even while the goods side of it isshrinking.MR. PRELL. Your question raises an interesting issue aboutthe consumption behavior that we've observed because consumption hasnot been stronger than one might have expected given the usualdeterminants. So, that would suggest it has been runningfundamentally even weaker if this phenomenon is--MR. LINDSEY. Right. But if our fundamental domestic economyis weaker than we think but the dollar is having a bigger effect thanwe think--MR. TRUMAN. As I said, I think it is unappreciated that, asopposed to the 1970s, one of the big impacts of the weaker dollar--notwhere it has been but where it has gone--has been the income effect asgrowth picked up in the rest of the world.MR. LINDSEY. Right.MR. TRUMAN. Income differentials are less so that foreigntravel, which is generally a luxury good anyhow, is cheaper and easierfor people to do. So, there are two things together: Coming to seethe Grand Canyon or Fisherman's Wharf or whatever is a big deal andit's cheaper and easier, and it affects the--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's true that it affects the net exportposition and personal consumption expenditures, but it does not affectthe current account.MR. LINDSEY. Right.-11-10/6/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It appears in a different line of thecurrent account and, as far as the total system is concerned, itclearly doesn't matter.MR. TRUMAN. It does affect the GNP, I think.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [It does] affect the GNP, but it doesn'taffect the current account balance.MR. TRUMAN. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It is in the services area.MR. TRUMAN. If it's accurately measured, it's in theservices area.MR. LINDSEY. Not if they buy the goods that are in theirsuitcases.MR. PARRY. They're not making the distinction of whetherit's a U.S. purchase or a German purchase.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not in that sense; it is put togetherwith increases in U.S. net exports.MR. TRUMAN. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We also have the same problem withdirect foreign investment. If somebody came and dismantled an officetower in Los Angeles and moved it brick-by-brick abroad, we'd considerthat an export.MR. KELLEY. It's a good idea!MR. MULLINS. We should probably do that!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Ted, maybe I read too much into your comments,but you seem to take some comfort in the fact that the dollar is up ona trade-weighted exchange basis something like 1-1/2 percent over theintermeeting period and maybe 4-1/2 percent from the lows. I must sayI don't share that [view]. The reason is that when one looks at howwe've done against the other two principal reserve currencies, the DMand the yen, [the dollar is] down significantly and at historicallows. I'm concerned that in a period of international turmoil we'rereally not providing much of an option in terms of a safe haven, and Ithink we ought to take note of that. I don't know what your reactionto that is. I would have expected that we would have provided more ofan option and that in fact maybe we were part of the problem ratherthan the solution. So, I just don't take that much comfort in lookingat the broad trade-weighted exchange rate.MR. TRUMAN. I take your point; I actually was trying to haveit both ways, if I may put it that way. It depends on what questionyou're asking. I would separate it into two parts. One relates towhat has been going on with respect to the yen, where the dollar hasbeen weaker. But given the size of the Japanese current account-12-10/6/92surplus, it's difficult to imagine that the dollar isn't going to haveto move down against the yen at least in the near term. It isdifficult to believe anything else is right for that particularproblem.On the European side, the normal historical pattern back inthe 1980s when we had more frequent realignments in the EMS and ERMwas for the dollar basically to be unchanged on average following [therealignments] because the mark was going up and the franc was goingdown. The market in some sense is simply thinking in terms ofcompetitiveness. They had the dollar unchanged. And the fact thatthe dollar has come up on average in the face of all this is somethingthat should be noted because, among other reasons, in terms ofthinking about the outlook it is a real appreciation and it has adamping effect. It comes back to this question of how we live in thisnew ERM [era]. They jumped in the canoe and we have for some periodquestioned whether they would toss us into the lake. So, I think itis not irrelevant that the dollar is down relative to its level at thetime of the last FOMC meeting by 3 or 4 pfennigs against the mark butup 3 or 4 pfennigs from the low of 138. So, in that sense we have abit to go; there is a cushion there, it seems to me, before we reallyare breaking new territory on the part of the European currencies.I would put the yen on the side. But, the important pointthat you're emphasizing--and I agree with it--is that the markets, aswe saw yesterday, seem to be extraordinarily jittery. One needs torecognize that fact. And whether this is the right time to loganother action, which may or may not be fully discounted in themarkets, I think is a question.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. On this issue, just a word on the perspectiveof the dollar being weak. Some have suggested that it has held itsvalue pretty well against commodities, but that's not really my area.MR. ANGELL. I'm glad to have you contribute your part tothat!MR. MULLINS. We're running out of candidates for engines topull the economy out of this. One which reappears--you mentioned itand it is one of the few pluses in the outlook--is the prospect thatthe long bond rate might fall another 75 basis points or so as we movethrough next year. Supposing in the post-election period it becamefairly obvious that the prospects of a large fiscal package were quitehigh. How would that be reflected in the long bond rate in theforecast?MR. PRELL. I guess the simple answer would be that we don'thave that in our forecast. There could be a tradeoff between thedirect effects of lower taxes on income or higher expenditures onactivity that would eliminate the need and probably tend to elevatelong rates relative to what they are in our scenario.MR. MULLINS. Indeed, last year during the first-quarterdebate [on fiscal packages] the long bond went up 60 basis points.-13-10/6/92MR. PRELL. Yes. It's an open question, of course, whetherrates are now higher than they would otherwise be if there were notalready considerable concern about the possibility of some significantenhancement in the size of the budget deficit. So, it's a little[hard] to sort out what the effects would be; but I can envisioncircumstances, as you're suggesting, in which the bond markets wouldbe adversely affected at least temporarily.MR. MULLINS. Or at least we wouldn't get the 75 basis pointsdecline; rates would stay constant.MR. PRELL. I can't say that we have a lot of company in thisprojection. There are some other forecasters who are looking for thatkind of rate effect, but it is clearly not what is built into themarket structure at this point. There are always uncertainties aboutliquidity premiums in the term structure, but I don't think it's builtinto the market now nor is it necessarily clear that the forecastersgenerally are talking about this. But it's interesting, I might note,that most private forecasters are anticipating flat or maybe even aslight upward tilt to long rates over the coming year or so. A growthforecast of the dimensions we're showing here is also quite [common]so they're in essence saying that [a decline in long rates] isn'tessential. We're taking a bit more negative view of what theunderlying strength of demand will be ex any effective fiscalstimulus, post-election surge in sentiment, or something.MR. MULLINS. Don't you think the other forecasters willcatch up in a few weeks once they grind through all the latest data?MR. PRELL. Possibly; it's hard to say. Even before theemployment report last week, having much the same information as wehad, I sensed more positive expectations than we had. For example, Iattended a meeting of the technical [consultants] of the BusinessCouncil last Tuesday and the prevailing forecast--there was a slightlag in this, admittedly--was for growth more around 3 percent withoutinterest rate declines and without a general expectation ofsignificant fiscal stimulus.MR. MULLINS. Three percent for 1993?MR. PRELL. For 1993.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you. Ted Truman already answered myquestion, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Mike, I'd like to follow up on Ed Boehne'squestion. If I understood you correctly, you were saying that withinthe context of having provided a fair amount of liquidity for thereadjustment, you are expecting things to improve down the road nextyear and beyond based on where rates have already fallen. But if theimprovement doesn't happen, you suggested toward the end of yourcomments that we might have to make substantial reductions in rates tomove the economy along. Having said that, is your discussion about a10/6/92modest reduction now an insurance policy on the rates that havealready come down or did I misunderstand you?MR. PRELL. Well, I guess it could be viewed that way in thecontext of a prevailing expectation now that some small amount ofeasing is going to be occurring, which might have a little negativeeffect on bond yields if the market were disappointed, all otherthings equal. Basically, as we were putting this forecast together,my sense was that given the behavior of the Committee what we wereforecasting seemed highly probable and that, unless you switchedgears, some slight further easing would be consistent behavior. Wedid not assume anything that we felt was really material to the basicthrust of the forecast. As we indicated, we are thinking only of asmall fractional further decline in the funds rate as being in therange that underlies this forecast. If our story is right, most ofthe decline in long rates that we have projected would occur even ifthe funds rate were held at 3 percent. But that's a conjecture.Basically what I said in my briefing was that we have the expansionbeginning to pick up gradually fairly soon. If something is wrong inour analysis, the only logical conclusion we could draw in terms ofpolicy implications is that more needs to be done if you want to do atleast as well if not better than the forecast. We're falling short ofwhat the Committee's expectations were for economic activity as itstands, so that was the conclusion we reached.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mike, returning for just a moment to thediscussion a few minutes ago about how we measure things: There havebeen some comments around here recently about the possibility that ourinflation measurements may in fact be lagging the reality. Could youcomment on that?MR. PRELL. Well, I don't have anything new to add. As we'venoted in the past, there is possibly some measurement bias towardhigher inflation than in truth is occurring. That probably hasprevailed for some time. It could conceivably be getting worse, butthat's even harder to judge. The 1 to 1-1/2 percent inflation that Iheld out as a possibility sometime out toward the middle of the decadecould be interpreted in light of the scientific evidence available asbeing essentially price stability. So, if I were at DRI, I wouldprobably title this a price stability forecast. We are following apath very much akin to what we've outlined in the past. Dave Stocktonand his colleagues in briefings to the FOMC have indicated possiblepaths to price stability; and inadvertently in terms of what ourforecast have been, we've been on that unemployment path for the lastcouple of years and our forecast continues on that path in essence.We're on a gradual path back toward full employment in this forecastbut it's far enough down the road that we'd be making a lot furtherprogress on disinflation.MR. KELLEY. If we may be meaningfully overstating theinflation rate, how does that play through to nominal GDP and realGDP?MR. PRELL. Well, nothing obvious on nominal GDP--there maybe some tricks of measuring here that would have an effect--but realGDP presumably is being underestimated. But then so, too, is-15-10/6/92potential GDP in some sense. The benchmark I think you want to put aneye on here is capital resource utilization. The unemployment rateisn't affected by any of these measurement issues and it has beentrending upward in this recovery. We expect it will be going upfurther, so there is room by that measure for the economy to growfaster; no matter how fast it is growing, it can grow faster than ithas been.MR. KELLEY. If all these things are happening, where it mustbe getting absorbed is in even higher productivity growth rates.MR. PRELL. Indeed, and that may go back a considerable waysinto postwar history.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I'd like to go back to long-term interest ratesone more time. You put a lot of emphasis on their decline. Is that--I just don't remember--a sharply different view than you've hadbefore?MR. PRELL. There is no material change, for example, fromthe last forecast to this one in terms of the path for the long-termrate. Now, I think we've gradually come down over the past severalforecasts. In 1992 basically long-term rates have followed the pathwe charted at the beginning of the year. It took a lot of short-termrate decline apparently [Laughter] and that is something that onemight want to consider in terms of the prospects for achieving thefurther interest rate decline that we have forecast. Whether we wouldbe where we are now if we had not had those cuts in short-term ratesis difficult to say. On the one hand, we wouldn't have had the pullfrom those short rates punishing people who don't go out and invest atthe long end. On the other hand, we probably would have reducedaggregate demand to some extent and lowered inflation expectations andtended to lower nominal bond yields. But we've been saying for sometime that we expect the long rates to come down significantly over theforecast period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. I want to ask Ted a question. I don't mean totry to put too fine a point on this, but it's just because I findtoday's discussions even more difficult than usual even though they'reoften very difficult. Ted, you mentioned the jitters in the markets.This links back to what Bill McDonough was talking about before. Doyou see a difference in the jitters in the markets given theirexpectations of what we're going to do one way or the other? In otherwords, are the markets likely to become more or less jittery whetherwe act or don't act or is it pretty much center-weighted?MR. TRUMAN. That's a very difficult question.MR. SYRON. It's a very difficult situation.MR. TRUMAN. I think that's right. In some sense this is theposition we were in at the beginning of September when we had the bademployment report. Do you disrupt the market more by disappointing itrelative to its expectations or do you disrupt it more by giving it-16-10/6/92what it expects, assuming we have [assessed] the expectations right?We can guess, but our guess is not perfect. I'd just add one pointfrom a rest-of-the-world perspective. It's one thing if we were justrunning our own situation. But one of the problems, which makes thisa little different, is the uncertainty that has been generated by theEuropean situation and the fact that that has not played itself out inall its political as well as economic dimensions. That does seem tome to add one small note of caution. I don't think it is decisive,but to the extent that Federal Reserve easing at this pointdisappoints Mr. Sapin again, he may have to cut off a few more heads[unintelligible] go forward. But I think that goes with theterritory. That would be basically my response, but it is apossibility.MR. PRELL. May I correct something I said? While theinterest rate decline going out to 1994 is essentially the same amountas before, in light of the weaker economy over the next few quarterswe've moved that decline up in time somewhat. More of it occursquickly. So, on this forecast we have somewhere between 1/4 to 1/2point more decline by next spring than before; then the rate flattensout more as the economy picks up.MR. MCDONOUGH. If I could pick up on Ted's comment for justa moment: I think we have to recognize that the situation in Europeis still very unstable. So, something could happen in Europe whetherwe lower the fed funds rate here or don't lower the fed funds rate; itcould have very little to do with what we do or don't do. Butestablishing that causality necessarily would be very difficult. Icome to the conclusion that the foreign market does not inhibit theCommittee from doing what it otherwise wishes to do.MR. SYRON. That's precisely the answer. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Well, speaking of what might or might notinhibit our activity, we've had several references this morning to thefact that expectations of further ease already seem to be built intoboth interest rates and foreign exchange rates. Yet we're within amonth of the election and I thought it was conventional wisdom that weweren't expected to act so close to an election. But I never see anyreferences to that anymore. Whatever happened to that?MR. PRELL. I've seen a few, but I think the more predominantnotion is that the recent weakness in economic indicators just seemsto make a compelling case in light of the past patterns of behavior ofthe Committee.MR. BOEHNE. It also isn't true. There are numerous examplesof this Committee tightening within a month of an election, not justeasing.MR. SYRON. And given lags.MR. MCTEER. Well, tightening doesn't affect our credibilitythe same way that easing might. We're usually accused of doing thingsto help the incumbent, I believe.-17-10/6/92MS. PHILLIPS. But it's a long lag.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for either ofthese two gentlemen?MR. JORDAN. I have a couple of questions for Mike involvingquotes from the Greenbook. Some of this may already have been coveredin the questions and responses but I'm still looking. I have twodifferent questions, really. One is about the linkages, the modelthat you use in assessing the effects of policy on the outlook.That's still not clear to me. On page 23 in Section I of theGreenbook it says at the bottom of the first paragraph: "The rise inshort-term rates in 1994 is assumed necessary to prevent aggregatedemand from gaining so much momentum that noninflationary levels ofresource utilization are subsequently exceeded." There's a gap inthere but also an implied linkage from nominal interest rates to GNP,I suppose; you've already responded a little to that in your answer toTom's question. Then the Greenbook says: "Long-term rates areexpected to edge down further as expectations of inflation continue torecede." So, the long-term expected rate of inflation is somehowinfluenced by observed actual inflation. Now, all of this takentogether implies that real short-term interest rates are rising evenif nominal rates are not. But you're saying that the rise in realshort-term rates is not sufficient in your framework to keep theeconomy on a noninflationary path and so you need an increase innominal rates as well as real rates since obviously inflationaryexpectations are coming down and real rates are rising.MR. PRELL. We in essence have the real short-term ratemoving back toward what might be regarded as more the equilibriumlevel in the longer run as we use up some of the slack in the economyto insure that aggregate demand doesn't overshoot a disinflation path.Our assumption is that we have reached further in the direction ofrelatively low real short-term rates, below what would be sustainablein the long haul. We have it coming back up some. Another factor inthis is that we are getting some extra retardation in a sense in thefinancial sphere now from the credit crunch and other experiences inthe financial system. As those ease, some adjustment in the nominalmarket and real market rates would be called for in order to exertadequate restraint on aggregate demand.MR. JORDAN. Meaning further increases in real rates; thenatural increase is not enough and you need further increases in realrates in your framework. But it also depends on a linkage betweennominal interest rates and nominal spending.MR. PRELL. Well, we're thinking of this more in terms of alink from real interest rates to spending decisions. And there's awhole dynamic here of activity and resource utilization and inflation;the inflation results do affect expectations about future inflation.That gets built into the bond yields and so on.MR. JORDAN. Well, I know you have said that in yourpresentations from previous months and in the arguments I havelistened to about inflation expectations, the inflation [component] inthe long rates, and what's coming down based on experience. But whenI talk to business leaders and people in small and large businessesregarding their inflation forecasts, or look at the Michigan Survey or-18-10/6/92[that of the National Association of] Business Economists they havethis persistent 4 to 5 percent inflation range or higher. No onementions the gap between current [and potential] output or theunemployment rate. If they mention anything at all, they mention thebudget deficit or they say: "I don't know, but that's what alwayshappens--inflation goes up." But you are in effect saying thatinflation expectations are going to come down, bringing long-terminterest rates down in spite of these perceptions, [and] thateventually experience with lower prices grudgingly will dominate theirview about [the effects of] fiscal impulses on inflation.MR. PRELL. But I think it's not a sustainable relationshiphere to have inflation running at 2 or 3 percent and inflationexpectations remaining at 4 or 5 percent. Something has to give:Either those inflation expectations will prove such a seriousimpediment to lower wage agreements and provide some momentumsomewhere in the price system that we won't get the disinflation wehave [forecast] or, as experience builds that the norm is not the 5 or6 percent inflation we've experienced over the last two decades but 3percent or 2 percent, there's going to be an adjustment. Theexperience to date suggests that the brute force effect of slack inthe system has been able to overcome any stickiness in this inflationexpectation that's evident in the consumer surveys or even manyprofessional economists forecasts. Indeed, we pointed out over thepast year that it didn't appear that the private economists weregenerally expecting inflation to come down further in the latter partof this year or 1993. I've seen a shift in that. I think there ismore movement in our direction. We're still a bit ahead of theaverage in our expectation about the disinflation progress, but thereis a change. Some of you have noted that businessmen increasingly arethinking that they are going to have to do their planning in a pricingenvironment that is going to be more consistent with lower inflation.MR. JORDAN. But in this transition until the expectations ofprivate decisionmakers come into line with where we think policies aretaking inflation, we do have these very substantial transition costson the economy. Does all of this suggest that you're not relying onany version of the P* model anymore in forming your inflation outlook?MR. PRELL. Well, I will confess that we never did, [atleast] on the straight P* form--though there are elements of the P*model that are very much consistent with our models. That is, theoutput gap there is the critical lever in lowering inflation, and thatis equivalent to the aggregate model we're using. Obviously, themoney growth numbers don't argue against our forecast; they argue foran even more rapid deceleration of prices. And if you believe thatmoney is behaving in a normal way, then I guess you'd want to arguethat we grossly [over]stated where the inflation rate is going to bein 1993-94.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions? If not, whowould like to start the Committee's discussion? Bob Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, economic weakness persists in mostof the Twelfth District and it may have intensified since our lastmeeting. District-wide employment fell in August at a 4.6 percentannual rate, led by weakness in construction and manufacturing. Joblosses have been most severe in California, where employment fell at a-19-10/6/926.2 percent annual rate in August and at a 2.1 percent rate inSeptember, bringing employment in the state of California to a newcyclical low. Other District states also are beginning to show somesigns of weakness. Previously robust growth in Idaho and Utah has[waned], with employment declining on balance since February.Cutbacks in aerospace production are affecting Washington, and thelumber and wood products business is contracting in Oregon in largepart due to environmental restrictions. Both business contacts andstatistical indicators of District activity give little evidence ofrenewed economic growth. The outlook for California is of particularconcern. Already announced cutbacks in aerospace, defense, and stateand local government, together with an overhang in commercial realestate, suggest weakness could persist well into 1993.Turning to the national economy, our forecast is quitesimilar to that of the Greenbook. I would characterize our forecastas one in which the pickup in the economy, instead of being justaround the corner, appears to be just around the corner and well downthe block. In addition, once economic activity gets to that point itdoesn't seem to be quite as robust as we had it before. Thatdevelopment produces greater uncertainty at least on my part. Thatcombined with what appear to be better inflation rates in the offingsuggests that a policy move at this time would be appropriate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. There seems to be little disagreement in theviews that I expect to hear as the go-around continues and the staffforecast. It does not seem to me likely that the economy is going tobe substantially stronger than the forecast. Since I anticipate somuch agreement in regard to the current state of the economy, it seemsto me it would be well for us to continue the earlier discussion,which involved assessing how well monetary policy is working toaccomplish any impact upon the real economy. Now, I for one have moreconfidence, I think, in Mike Prell's forecast than maybe he does.MR. PRELL. You might think about whether it makes sense!MR. ANGELL. My confidence is based upon the fact that he hasproduced consistently biased errors in one direction over the lastthree years. That seems to me entirely likely if you have someone whohas some motive other than getting the forecast right or if the modelis defective. And it seems to me it's time for us to examine morecarefully the model that produced such biased errors. Let me go backto the Humphrey-Hawkins period and the July FOMC meeting: I think thepickup in M2 growth in August and September to a very slight 3 percentrate was due more to the declines in intermediate rates, which werealmost unprecedented, following the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony inJuly. We had dramatic declines in two-year, three-year, five-year,seven-year, and ten-year Treasury rates, and that seems to me toaccount for the rise in M2. Now, I would hold that lower fed fundsrates under some conditions may well reduce aggregate demand and thatunder some conditions lowering the fed funds rate may very well causeintermediate rates to rise. Under those circumstances it seems to methat M2 will grow more slowly rather than more rapidly and we willthen end up with unintended consequences.10/6/92But to me the most important point is not necessarily to lookat the [transmission] mechanism through the fed funds rate on M2 butto look at it in terms of its impact upon household balance sheets andon household income statements. I believe it's time for us to devotea great deal of attention to the question of the duration of householdassets and the duration of household liabilities. If households havetaken [on] a huge interest rate debt and if the duration of householdassets were conditioned by a period of rising interest rates or anexpectation that interest rates would rise again and if householdsthen are holding very short duration assets, under those conditions afall in the fed funds rate is going to result in a substantialreduction in household income. Now, I do not know what the durationof household assets might be by looking at their flow-of-funds. Idon't know whether anyone knows what that duration might be. What I'msuggesting is that there may be some conditions under which loweringthe fed funds rate is not going to work the way we'd anticipate.Since we have watched the fed funds rate come down from 9.90 percentto 3 percent--that's 690 basis points--and it has had less than theintended effect upon credit and upon spending, then it seems veryappropriate for us to look again at this model.Now I'm going to live a little dangerously: I think Idisagree with Bill McDonough's comment that the foreign exchangemarket does not in a sense have an implication for our domesticmonetary decisions. I would agree that a reserve currency countrydoes not take its cues from trying to follow somebody else's exchangerate. But it seems to me that the dramatic fall in intermediateinterest rates in July and August put the spot foreign exchange valueof the dollar on a downward course, unless the implied forward rate ofthe dollar were rising faster than those rates were falling. So, wehave to ask ourselves then: What will happen if we reduce the fedfunds rate at a time when the foreign exchange value of the dollar maybe at a precarious point? It seems to me that making a fed funds ratemove might very well feed into a weaker dollar. I think all of usmust understand that we have a very exploding global money marketcondition; we have almost pure competition in this market--not perfectbecause information is catching up--but it's exploding also. So, withthis very perfected money market that is global, we have to look atthe feedback loops that possibly exist between the fed funds rate andits impact upon the weaker dollar and its subsequent impact, whichcould very well cause intermediate rates to rise. Indeed, if theimplied forward exchange rate is to remain constant, then under thosecircumstances lowering the fed funds rate [and] lowering the two-yearTreasury rate, has to raise the implied forward rate at years 9 and10; otherwise we're going to be out of adjustment on the forwardrates. So., I believe we're in a precarious place here. One of thegood things we have going for us in an economy that needs growth isthat the U.S. equity market has not yet taken a tumble. But I thinkmost are very leery concerning where we are here.My assessment, then, of our current economic condition isthat it is a global-money capital-market-driven relationship. We havegone a long way. And I am not optimistic about the impact of loweringthe fed funds rate at this point in time in terms of stimulatingeconomic growth. Now, if we are willing to make our fed funds ratemoves based upon price level targeting and if everyone knows that'sthe basis upon which we're making our moves, then it seems to me thatunder those circumstances we could very well expect in the future that-21-10/6/92lower fed funds rates will provide us more bang for the buck. So, I'min a mode of saying that there may be lower fed funds rates out therethat will be helpful in the future if we are on the path that MikePrell has suggested toward price level stability. But the questionfor us is: How do we get the most bang for the buck?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. The latest national reports--especially that ofthe National Association of Purchasing Managers, the employmentfigures, and the downturn in consumer expectations--have been verydisheartening to say the least. In light of those reports, I thinkthe staff was correct in lowering its projection; what they've doneseems pretty reasonable to me. But I don't think anybody reallyunderstands why we are getting this persistent weakness in theeconomy. In such a case it looks to me as if the risks of error onany kind of forecast are very high indeed. I would be more hesitantto guess which way the risks of error might lie in this particularperiod of time.I do take a small measure of comfort in the most recentinformation we have gotten from around our District. The economicpicture may not be as bleak as suggested by the national data; some ofthe District information is [more current]. For example, reports ofour directors at the September meeting certainly did nothing tosuggest that there would be any further decline in business activityin their view in our District. The same is true of the reports thatwe got in our regular survey of manufacturers and retailers. In fact,that survey actually suggested a slight improvement in a number ofareas such as retail sales, manufacturing, business sentiment, andresidential real estate. And I think the recent growth in bank creditand money also presents at least a ray of hope about the future.Indications that loans are now more available, as reported in theGreenbook, are pretty well consistent with what we are hearing in ourDistrict through anecdotal information. While the 3 percent rate ofgrowth in M2 in August and September is lower than I would like to seeat this point, it's a big improvement over the negative rates ofgrowth that we had for the previous five months. I hope this could bethe beginning of some sustained period of higher growth.Insofar as the inflation forecast is concerned, as you know,the Greenbook is showing a decline in the CPI down to a rate of about2 percent by the end of 1994. That seems reasonable to me, given thesharp deceleration in money growth that we've had over the lastseveral years. If we were to achieve this low inflation rate,however, then I think we have to be prepared if necessary to let thefederal funds rate rise rather quickly when economic activity and therate of growth of money do speed up, although I hope what GovernorAngell described is really what will happen in that case. I'll returnto this point later when we get to the policy discussion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, conditions in the District have notchanged that much since the last meeting. While the trends aresomewhat mixed, I think on balance the overall rate of economicactivity has moderated; and certainly attitudes have deterioratedfurther. The auto industry and all auto-related activities are-22-10/6/92weaker. Third-quarter sales were lower than the industry's earlierexpectations and the sales forecasts for the fourth quarter havealready been reduced and, I think, still may be on the high side. Asa result, fourth-quarter production plans are steadily being reduced.At one point, the fourth-quarter schedules were significantly higherthan last year--though last year was a weak comparative period--but bynow they have been scaled back and are only about 4 percent over lastyear's level. Again, I think the production risk is on the down side.Farm equipment sales and manufacturing continue todeteriorate. The sales of major [farm equipment] units for the yearthrough August are off 18 percent from last year and off 24 percentfrom two years ago. One major manufacturer has reduced its fourth-quarter production schedule again and is now planning fourth-quarterproduction that is 21 percent below last year. Other parts of themanufacturing sector in the District, however, continue to expand but,again, the growth rate has moderated. Orders for Class 8 trucks, thebig trucks, are running some 25 percent over 1991. But in the last 30days there has been a perceptible change in the attitude of majortruck customers, and the manufacturers are now concerned that this[orders trend] might turn around quite quickly. Therefore, theirconfidence regarding the rest of this year, but more importantly for1993, is not very strong. Medium truck sales, Class 6 and Class 7,are about level with 1991 and no improvement is expected. Offsettingthis, though, housing activity in the District continues to showstrength. New single-family home sales in the Midwest rose 15 percentin July and continued to climb in August. Home starts also werestrong and that strength is carrying through to the manufacturers ofbuilding materials. In the retail area, sales continue to run about 6to 8 percent ahead of last year. Customers, however, as I'vecommented before, are very, very price conscious. And retailers whoimport a good deal of their merchandise are continuing to have toraise prices to reflect the plunge in the dollar. Finally, in theagricultural sector, I think crop production is going to bring verygood news. We're clearly going to have good crops--indeed, perhapsbumper crops--in both corn and soybeans. Prices are way down, butwe're going to have very good production.In the inflation area--price pressures--the news continues toimprove. Intense competitive conditions are continuing to restrainprice increases and many manufacturers are holding the increased costof their purchases to very, very minimum levels. In the case of acouple of large manufacturers, they have actually been able toaccomplish reductions in their purchase prices on a year-over-yearbasis. But at this point inflation is just not an issue, certainlyamong the people I talk with, and they are growingly disturbed thatthey just can't get price increases to stick in the marketplace. Inturn, they have worked [to hold down] their purchase prices, as Isuggested. In the labor area, contracts continue to be settled onwhat I think are very favorable terms.In a national context, I find the overall economic outlookincreasingly worrisome. [The economy has remained] a long time inthis very steady state--I think perhaps too long--and there is a realrisk at this point that [the expansion] will lose momentum. Wecontinue to reduce our growth forecast and are now down to a pointthat the sustainability of even the current very moderate rate has tobe open to question. In this environment, despite the policy easing-23-10/6/92moves that we have made, the risk of the economy taking off at such arapid rate as to cause strong inflationary pressures seems prettyclose to zero. But I think the risk that the economy could fall backinto negative growth is very real and is increasing with the passageof time. Therefore, in a monetary policy context, I think we ought tomove again as early as we have the opportunity to do so.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, leaving aside the effects ofHurricane Andrew, conditions in the Sixth District appear to havestabilized in the last six weeks or so. That, of course, represents achange in our situation because, as you remember, I've been reportingfor some time that we've had considerable deterioration in economicactivity in the first half of the year, particularly on the employmentside. I hasten to add that the improvements that we're seeing arevery marginal in nature, although I would say that the outlook doesseem a little better because the imbalances in our local economy arenot quite as evident as they were at the beginning of the year.Looking at some particular sectors, residential real estateis expanding modestly and we're getting reports from realtors inseveral cities that they experienced higher sales of single-familyhouses in September. Rents appear to be firming in the District,although multifamily and commercial building rents are flat.Construction of industrial facilities is rising, basically because,interestingly, the vacancy rate in the industrial sector in our cityis below that of the national market. We recently completed a surveyof manufacturing plants and that survey shows some improvement inAugust, with more respondents reporting gains in production as well asin shipments compared to July and compared to a year earlier. On theother hand, the survey does show some softness in capital spending andexpenditures; they are going to be confined apparently to productivityenhancements as opposed to plant expansion or expenditures onequipment. Our unemployment rate continues to be above the nationalaverage. In terms of individual states, Florida has been hit prettyhard, of course, not only by the hurricane but by defense cutbacks andvery slow in-migration. Louisiana and Mississippi are being impactedadversely by weakness in the energy sector. Despite this pooremployment situation, retail sales have increased modestly but I guessthe [operative] word there is "modestly." We, too, Governor Lindsey,are seeing sharp increases in the number of foreign visitors to theDistrict; that has been going on for some time but has acceleratedwith the weakness in the dollar. However, the recent hurricane inFlorida has caused tourism to be off there not only in the impactedarea but throughout the state as well. We see bookings off, forexample, in Orlando where the hurricane didn't hit. As we noted inour special report on the hurricane, the District will at leasttemporarily be a beneficiary of the hurricane in the near term becauseof the concentration of industries throughout the District that arerelated to housing and construction. Finally, we see no inflationarypressures and no price pressures at all in the District.Looking at the national economy, like the Board staff, we'velowered our forecast of real GDP over the balance of this year andinto 1993, although perhaps not by quite as much as the Board staff.On inflation we're pretty much the same in the near term. So,basically we're comfortable with the staff's forecast, although I-24-10/6/92don't feel very comfortable about any forecast these days and haven'tfor some time. It's difficult for me to see sources of improvement inthe economy anywhere in the near term. The outlook for growth abroadhas deteriorated steadily and certainly it's not being helped by thevolatility in the foreign exchange markets and the recessionary trendsin the economies of many of our trading partners. Of course, as wehave talked about several times, we are seeing the restructuring ofbalance sheets both on the part of households and corporations, but itseems to me we have a long way to go. A continuation of that processis going to temper spending for some time longer, I think. Frompeople that I talk with and from what I'm observing in the press,people are very concerned and very pessimistic about the state of thefederal budget deficit. I think they are expecting tax increases todeal with that situation and that, too, is going to crimp incomes inthe 1990s and beyond and certainly crimp spending. When I put all ofthat together, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that the risk is very muchon the down side; and we need to take that into account as we dealwith monetary policy.While I have the floor, if I could go back to the hurricanefor just a minute--though this is really a non-FOMC matter--I'd justvery quickly like to say what I've already written to most if not allof you: The people in Miami and certainly we in the Districtappreciate tremendously the wonderful outpouring of support of allkinds that came from around the Federal Reserve System. If ever thefamily spirit of the System was evident, it certainly was in thisperiod. So, we thank you very much.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Conditions in the Philadelphia District aremixed, but on the whole I think they've deteriorated some in recentweeks. The major source of that deterioration has been inmanufacturing. Manufacturing was a source of some uplift to theDistrict economy in the first part of the year, but in the last coupleof months manufacturing activity has slowed and I think it has nowbecome negative. Despite continuing employment declines, which havebeen sharper than for the nation as a whole, particularly in NewJersey, retail sales have held up fairly well. They are not great butthey are probably running a little over a year ago. In theconstruction area, I have nothing to add; nonresidential constructioncontinues to decline and [sentiment] is very sour. There is someimprovement in residential construction.One of the additional changes, besides what is happening inmanufacturing, is that while I would have summarized the condition ofour banks until fairly recently as marginally bottoming out with somehints of improvement, I wouldn't be comfortable saying that now. Ithink more of our banks are deteriorating than improving. If we probethe bankers on that, we hear a number of reasons. For one, they saythat a number of small and medium-size businesses that had held onthrough this period of slow growth are running out of string and arejust dying. That is showing up in loan delinquencies and loandefaults. Some of the banks are able to cover [the resulting losses]because of their spreads; and they've lowered their other costs. Butthe deterioration is clearly showing up, and I think we're in for aperiod of some additional deterioration.-25-10/6/92Attitudes, I think, are worse than the underlying conditions.The Mason-Dixon line makes a big difference! Our September meetingwas about as pessimistic in terms of director attitudes as I haveseen, reflecting this cumulation of slowness and not much prospect ofgetting better. As with other Districts, inflation outside the healthcare industry and the regulated industries is largely a non-issue. Itis just hard to make price increases stick.As far as the national economy goes, its growth is basicallystagnating. I think we have about as much chance of getting somemodest declines in growth as we have of modest increases. There justare no sustainable drivers. The employment-income-consumption dynamicis missing and it's very hard to see where we're going to get thethrust. Despite that, I have found this current period more difficultin thinking through monetary policy. I believe any of us sittingaround the table, if we're at all objective, could come up with somegood reasons to ease and some good reasons to stay where we are. Icome down on the side that some good would come from some additionaleasing. So, I'm in the camp that thinks we ought to ease monetarypolicy--not that I think it will do great things but because I thinkat the margin it will be positive. Also, it's important that the Fedas an institution be viewed as doing whatever we reasonably can tohelp the economy get out of the swamp. Some additional easing inmonetary policy would fall into the column of something we can do thatis reasonable and I don't see a lot of downside risks in that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer. I'm sorry, PresidentSyron.MR. SYRON. I'll cede.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's nothing to cede; it's just mymistake.MR. SYRON. I don't know if there's anything dramatically newin our District. What may be not dramatically new, consistent withwhat other people have said, is that there is a deepening disillusionand fear being reflected in consumption and other things. It's notpanic, but fear is the word that unfortunately is [applicable] Ithink; I suppose [it reflects] regional problems; considering ouremployment is down 10-1/2 percent from the peak, that's not greatlysurprising. Manufacturing over the period since the last FOMC hasturned somewhat more sluggish. That's tied largely to the aircraftand the auto industries and to the problems we have that are endemicto the local computer industry and their competitive niche. Retailingis mixed. Value price retailers report some strength on mixed sales.Actually, an interesting phenomenon is that they're reporting awillingness to hold inventories longer, given the reduced costs tocarry. But upscale retailers are reporting that sales are prettypoor. Auto sales are soft and that has gone on since the last period.The one sign of strength that we have seen is in the housing area forfirst-time home buyers--low-price houses are being built--but therehas been a slowdown again in [sales of] upper price houses. Pricesare very well behaved. We hear these stories about plywood prices--I'm sure everyone does-- and the pickup trucks heading down Route 495.As far as the U.S. economy goes, I find myself as usual inbroad agreement with the Greenbook forecast. I'd quibble slightly10/6/92with some elements of it. Given the employment information we have,for the output that is in the Greenbook I think we might have an evenslightly higher unemployment rate. But I do believe the forecastitself is internally consistent. There are risks, obviously. We'vebeen on the low growth path for quite a long period of time; and wedon't know what shocks or episodes could come along and knock us offthis path from one side to the other. We see some of that potentiallyhappening and then reversing itself in the stock market. Also, Ipersonally believe that there's a lot to this headwind argument--thatthis is a rebalancing of people's internal balance sheets. But it'svery hard, even though we see improvement, to know what the newoptimal balance sheet is that individuals and even corporations havein mind, given that many of them have been through a quite frighteningperiod.At the end of the day, what this comes down to for me isthat while many of us usually say we generally agree with theGreenbook and could be fairly comfortable with the outcome in theGreenbook, I have to say that I'm pretty uncomfortable with theoutcome in this Greenbook. Looking at the third quarter next year, westill have an unemployment rate--and, as I say, mine would be slightlyhigher--that is hovering just below 8 percent and we haven't gonethrough 3 percent [GDP] growth. I think in its broadest terms this isjust not going to be an acceptable outcome. Unfortunately, againrepeating what other people have said, I just don't see the enginesthat are going to bring us away from this. So, I think we're in avery, very difficult position. I'm sure--"sure" may be a littlestrong--that we will see some sort of fiscal package regardless of whowins [the election]. I don't think that's something that we should beweighing in our calculations, so we're in a very delicate position.My sympathy, like Ed Boehne's, lies with doing something more. Theonly thing that would dissuade me in that sympathy is a strongargument that the credibility of the organization would be hurt by ourdoing something close to an election. I personally have a lot ofskepticism about that argument because we're so close now and the lagsare [long], but it's something I think we should discuss a little inthe general monetary policy discussion. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. In the District there has been a discernable butI would say small improvement in activity since the last meeting.Consumer spending has improved a bit; residential construction andsales of residential units have picked up; forest products seem forthe most part to be doing reasonably well, getting a little additionalkick from the hurricane. It has been a good year for tourism bothfrom domestic and foreign tourists. And unemployment rates in theDistrict have continued for the most part to be well below thenational average. Agriculture is mixed, depending on the weather.Perhaps the only real sign of weakness is in mining where some recentlayoffs have occurred up on the iron range in northern Minnesota.Despite this further improvement, I'd say attitudes remain uniformlycautious. I wouldn't describe them as particularly discouraged, butpeople are cautious. I don't think anybody is expecting a sharpchange for the better in economic activity.I came across the same sort of concern about interest ratesthat Ed Boehne expressed earlier. There does seem to be a view that-27-10/6/92interest rates are going to go back up, perhaps significantly, at somepoint in the not too distant future. I don't think it's tied to anyexpectations one way or the other about changes in monetary policy. Idon't think it's tied, at least not very directly, to expectationsabout an acceleration of inflation. It may in some instances be tiedto people's assessment of the budget. But it's mostly that people, intheir business experience, view rates as unusually low today and theydon't believe that these rates are going to be sustained. Theanalysis essentially stops there. It's basically a judgment aboutwhat is typical.With regard to the national economy, we are all emphasizingthe very weak and disappointing statistics that we've received overthe last month or six weeks. That is reflected in the forecast and Ithink that's fully understandable. On the other hand, if you gobeyond the latest statistics--and, of course, we can't do anythingabout them--and look at the financial variables, if anything they looka little better. M2 growth has moved back into the positive range.Bank credit and business loans at commercial banks seem to have pickedup a bit and we hear some anecdotes about greater availability andmore aggressive searching for customers on the part of bankers andothers. If we look at bank reserves or narrow money, we see veryrapid growth, and I would say that this is something we need to keepan eye on as we go forward.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. At the last meeting I reported that our picture,which had been generally positive on the employment front, hadweakened a bit. That would be the case in the most recent period aswell. We have modest declines in employment, more in manufacturingthan nonmanufacturing. Earlier on, gains in nonmanufacturing werereally offsetting the weakness in manufacturing. Notwithstandingthose numbers, I have not detected any significant change in attitudesamong directors and other people I talk with. Last week I was in twoareas of our District that probably have never seen a recession, as amatter of fact. Many businessmen I talked to--these tend to be smalland medium-sized businessmen--are reporting record years and yet theyjust feel lousy. Their complaints run to things like regulation,clean air, ABA, and things like that and the impact those things arehaving on them. There's a great deal of uncertainty or lack ofconfidence--I don't know how to describe it. It's just a not goodfeeling about where we're going or a lack of knowledge or confidenceabout where we're going. And that, I think, is really affectingpeople. I picked up the same thing we've heard from Ed and Gary:Very seldom does anybody say that additional interest rate cuts aregoing to help; in fact they say quite the opposite.On the banking side in the Eighth District, as I've commentedfrom time-to-time, our numbers still are looking very good. We areoutperforming our peers. We tend to look at banks of less than $15billion and I guess the most significant point is that nonperformingloans are lower--about 1-1/2 percent versus almost 3 percent in thepeer group--and charge-offs are half that of the peer group, maybe 1/2of 1 percent versus 1 percent. I think that's the principal thingaffecting results. So, all during this period I've perceived ourbanks to be in a position to extend credit and I've felt that demandhas been the problem, not supply. We've seen modest growth in loan10/6/92demand over the last year and that has continued in the most recentperiod. The most significant point is that it's across the board thistime around. We've all read articles recently about the increase in[banks'] securities portfolios. Over the last year those have grownabout 18 percent in our District but in the most recent quarter only 2percent. So, I sense that what is going on--and I don't know whetherit is a harbinger of things to come more broadly--is that with ahealthy banking sector we are beginning to see a little more loandemand, which is being reflected not only in the loan growth but inmuch slower growth in holdings of investment securities. Probably, interms of the aggregates, as demand picks up that will get reflected inM2. As you all know, the non-M1 components are really very weak--negative--and all the growth we're getting in M2 is from very rapid Mlgrowth.Commenting nationally, the one concern I have about Mike'sforecast is the longer-run inflation outlook. I hope he's right. Ihave no quibbles with what inflation is likely to be next year andmaybe well into 1994, but the lags here are very long. And one of thethings I've commented on from time-to-time is this trend growth in Ml,which is a 3-year moving average. I don't think we can make short-term policy decisions based on the short-term behavior of Ml; but overlonger periods of time it gives us some information on what the thrustof policy has been. From, say, late '86 or early '87 we had broughtthat trend growth down from 11 percent to roughly 3 percent. In early1990 it moved up in a relatively short period of time to over 7percent and, of course, M1 is growing at about 15 percent now. Again,I don't know that it has any relevance for decisions we'll be makingtoday but longer term I worry about whether or not we're trading awaysome of that basis for lower inflation that we had created severalyears ago and that we're reaping the benefits of now.Just a couple of other comments, quickly. One has to do withmarket expectations and whether we should gratify them or not becausethey're there or whether that gives us room to move. I think we haveto recognize that when this party comes to an end, whenever that is,it's going to be disruptive. In other words, we've had a long periodof declining interest rates and human nature, being what it is, isgoing to anticipate more. That's just the way behavior in marketstends to work over time. So, whenever the time comes for us to say"that's it," it's going to be difficult. I don't think that will everbe easy. The other general observation I would make is that I'm moresensitive about the risks in foreign exchange markets, [along thelines of] Governor Angell's comments, than what I've heard in generalaround the table. I just feel that that's a process; we learned thisin the mid '80s. Monetary policy was very stimulative for a longperiod of time and the chickens really didn't come home to roost inthe foreign exchange markets until '87 as a result of actions thatwere taken in '85 and '86. I think we all know from that experiencethat once they do, it's awfully hard to get them under control again.While it's easy to say that another 25 basis points may not engenderany kind of crisis, if it ever did we would have one big problem onour hands.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. We haven't detected much difference in theEleventh District economy from the last time I reported. We still-29-10/6/92have a positive but very flat growth trend. I believe it would put usin the top half of the Districts, though, or maybe even in the topthird. Employment is still growing, largely because of governmentemployment growth. Private sector employment growth is essentiallyflat; the employment growth we get is in fits and starts. The weakestsectors of the economy are energy and durable goods manufacturing.Residential construction has flattened a bit in recent months as well.The strong part of the economy, of course, is along the Mexicanborder, especially in retail sales. Governor Lindsey mentioned thatthis country may be in the process of becoming the world's Wal-Mart;ironically enough, that may apply to the Third World as well as therest of the world. I learned this past week that McAllen, Texas,along the border, supposedly has the two most profitable Wal-Martstores in the country. It has a mall with reportedly the highestsales per square foot of any mall in the United States. All along theborder retail sales are higher than personal income. So, we are doinga lot of retailing to the Mexican customer there. Symbolically,although it's of no relevance to monetary policy, we just gained theheadquarters of Southwestern Bell from St. Louis. They are movingtheir headquarters to San Antonio. One of the main reasons they gavefor that move was to be closer to Mexico because of a joint venturethey have going with the Mexican telephone company.I've been engaged in a series of eight meetings with bankersaround the District to talk about various issues and see what is ontheir minds. Tomorrow will be the eighth of those. It was scheduledfor a room in a hotel in San Antonio. We're being bumped from ourroom so that Presidents Bush and Salinas and Mr. Mulroney can sign theNAFTA agreement; we're going to be pushed down the hall from thatlittle exercise. The mood of the bankers is very negative; they'refocused almost exclusively on the regulatory burden and what is comingat them with this new FDICIA legislation. When you talk about acredit crunch with them, they associate that with supply constraintsand they deny that there is any credit crunch when they [look at] itthat way. They attribute the flatness in lending almost exclusivelyto weak demand for quality loans. On the other hand, in otherconversations with them when we are talking about the regulatoryburden, they seem to be saying that lending is flat in part because ithas become much riskier to lend and a lot easier, and just asprofitable these days, to invest in government securities. So,lending is still very flat in the Eleventh District after all thistime of healing. I guess the lesson from that is that even aftermeasures of bank health improve, and have been improving for a longtime, it's still a long time before that results in additionallending. Most measures of health in banking in the Eleventh Districthave been improving for quite some time and now stand significantlyabove those in the rest of the country. If you look at the bank loansituation from the point of view of potential borrowers rather thanfrom bankers, up until a few months ago they did believe that thecredit crunch was more than weak quality-loan demand; they believed itwas supply constraints from the banks. But there have been reportsnow for two or three months that that is changing. They are reportingthat bankers are out there soliciting loan business to a much greaterdegree than they were previously.From the tone of meetings of our directors and small businessadvisory councils and others I'd say that the mood has deteriorated alittle over the period since the last FOMC meeting. And based on what10/6/92we all read in the press more than anything that has been happeninglocally, our reading of the national economy is that it is much worseoff than the local economy. Also, we have no disagreement with theGreenbook forecast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I find the incoming statisticsvery disappointing, particularly industrial production, new orders,purchasing agents' reports, consumer attitudes, and housing starts.On the other hand, the monetary aggregates look somewhat healthier, orperhaps less sick is the right way to describe it. Bank creditapparently has begun to grow again, although certainly notebulliently. Attitudes are being affected by media expectations ofinstantaneous increases in employment and decreases in unemployment toreflect what is going on in the economy. The predilection to dwell ongloom and doom is exemplified by the way they deal with headlines inany economic article. A good example is recent articles predictingmasses of bank failures and estimates as high as $80 billion of assetsin the banks that are due to fail over the next six months. Theyemphasize all of that instead of talking about the much strongerearnings and the much healthier capital ratios that are typical in theindustry. The increasing uncertainty about our political future Ithink is a major factor here. With neither party candidate forpresident offering a credible program for dealing with the nation'sproblems, I'm more convinced than ever that the current partialparalysis of the economy will continue until after the election andthat the expected clarification of what the future holds [will bedelayed].In that kind of environment, I doubt that short-term interestrates lower than those already in place will have any stimulativeeffect. I think this is a time to say that the inventory in the candystore is sold out; we should hold steady where we are to allow thefull effect of the previous easing and rationalize the attitudes onthe part of consumers to stimulate more vigorous growth. Furthermore,the risk of additional chaos in the foreign exchange markets and thepossible rekindling of long-term inflationary expectations is real inmy mind, and it can only be avoided by keeping with our presentstance.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, as I reflect on the period sincethe last meeting, it seems that a lot has happened but very little haschanged. That may be the one thing that makes this meeting sodifficult for me certainly, and maybe for most of us. We've been overall this; we're still struggling with a recovery. I guess technicallywe're about to have to call it an expansion. We should have crossedover into new high ground during the third quarter by almost anyexpected growth rate, for whatever that's worth. We're certainlystretching out--forever it seems--the expected time to break out. Onthe good news side, the inflation news seems to keep improving. Ibelieve the restructurings that have been going on, financial andotherwise, have been the big story of this situation and have been thecause of this stretch-out we're going through. They need to beallowed to go through to completion. I think it's very important forthe long run that this be allowed to work through. We've made a lot-31-10/6/92of progress and I think policy has been about right in balancing theneed to get inflation down, the need to allow these restructurings tocontinue and be completed, and the need to maintain something close toa decent economy in the process. I still believe all those things.But, as I said last time we were together, at some point this has tobe completed. At some appropriate point we need to see some solidprogress. Otherwise, as has been indicated this morning, we run anincreasing risk of having this sluggishness begin to feed on itself.And if indeed inflation is meaningfully lower than we're measuring it,we may slip into deflation without realizing it and that might turnout to be as hard to stop as inflation was.I'll breathe easier--I guess we'll all breathe easier--whenwe can generate some sense that there's an inertia of motion that isbeginning to take over from the inertia of risk. I don't get thatsense yet. Certainly, in the key area of employment, there's no senseof any dependable improvement. Another issue that's beginning to gnawon me is: What is going to mark a completion of this restructuringprocess? Dick Syron touched on this a few minutes ago. Where is thenew equilibrium going to be? I've looked recently at debt serviceratios both for households and corporations--debt service relative toincome and in the case of corporations relative to cash flow--and bothof those ratios are falling rapidly. But if you look at their historyback to, say, 1960 or so, it's hard to identify any natural supportlevels. There is no easily identifiable equilibrium that one couldsay: "When we get to this place we're going to have it made and itwill balance out." There was no equilibrium at all in the '80s; itwas just a steady increase in these burdens. In the '70s there wassomething that might be called an equilibrium level, but it was at aconsiderably lower level than where we are right now. In the '60s,when there was some equilibrium for a period of time, it was a gooddeal lower on both of those measures than where we are right now. Ican envision, I'm afraid, that we could easily fall back to that '60slevel given the psychology that seems to be abroad in the land rightnow. If that's the case, it might imply that we have a long way to goindeed. I have to say in candor that I've been relatively comfortableso far, but I'm beginning to experience the first faint cringes ofimpatience. As time goes on, I'm a bit more ready to see some signsthat we are getting through this and I don't see them yet. That'sbeginning to make me more nervous than I have been heretofore.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Looking at the data--they've been pretty welldiscussed by a number of people--it's clear that our annual fall-winter swoon seems to be in full flower; it seems to be an annualevent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It has been only two years.MR. MULLINS. Actually, one could say 1990 was not a walk inthe park. To me the data coming in are pretty consistently negative.I thought the September employment report was worse than the Augustone because of the collapse in hours and the implications for personalincome, spending, industrial production, and the like. And virtuallyall the indicators for the real economy at least seem to be pointingsouth. The Greenbook has translated this into 1 percent growth,roughly speaking, in the fourth quarter. We can't really do anything-32-10/6/92about that fourth quarter to speak of here, although we might thinkabout the implications of the fourth quarter on attitudes and spendingas we move into the quarters we can affect.The question has been raised a number of times: The Fed hasgone from a fed funds rate of almost 10 percent in '89 to 3 percentnow and where is the impact? I think there has been an impact. Onecan see it most clearly in the broad statistics on the bankingindustry; when you look at the entire industry compared to the fall of1990 I think it has improved dramatically. As Ed Boehne pointed out,though, there is a segment--and that segment is an economicallysignificant one--which is finding this period quite difficult. Wedon't need to go through the statistics, but I asked at the briefingthe other day about the market value to book value ratios for the top50 banks. In December 1990, it was about 85 percent; they wereshowing 85 percent of book and now it's 150 percent. So, I thinkthere has been a big improvement there. I believe the corporaterestructuring is going quite well. In fact, corporations are issuingcommercial paper again, which suggests that they are moving rightalong. The consumer side is the difficult side because consumers,unlike banks and corporations, can't issue equity. And they have along, tough process. They've reduced debt burdens but it's not clearto me that the principal of the debt has been reduced. So, I thinkthere have been benefits but primarily in cushioning this process andmoving it along. One only has to look at the experience of economiesthat are going through this de-leveraging process without the benefitof a responsive monetary policy. The UK would be a prime example;they've had more than two years of negative growth and 10 percentunemployment. There are a number of economies like that, and I thinkthere but for the grace of monetary policy goes the U.S. economy.Indeed, when you look around--we had a staff review of theindustrialized economies around the world--the United States lookslike the fastest horse or the best horse on a very sloppy track, andit's getting sloppier all the time. I think monetary policy can becredited with the fact that we haven't had a very severe situationhere. I know all of this is cold comfort, but I think it's hardreality, and I'm glad I'm not running for election in this campaign.We just have to admit that this restructuring process is severe,persistent, and long-lived and, indeed, for a consumer with excessdebt, there's no quick and easy fix. It just takes a long time ofdiverting resources to pay it down. People are comparing this withshort-term cyclical adjustments [but] as has been suggested, theprocess is long and severe. And other countries are learning that aswell.The next question is: Would additional rate cuts have anysubstantive beneficial impact? It seems to me that there are soundreasons for believing additional actions would be beneficial--beneficial to the growth of M2, which is still weak. We'd certainlyget another prime rate cut. We're right on the cusp of a prime ratecut, and I do not expect that to unleash a wave of borrowing andspending. It may be helpful to reinforce this recent very modestuptick in borrowing, but most pertinently it would reduce the debtburdens on firms and on individuals who have home equity loans tied tothe prime rate. Moreover, those who analyze the outstanding stock ofmortgages at different interest rates project that a lowering of rateswould ignite yet another significant round of mortgage refinancing.And, of course, the market expects and seems to have priced in-33-10/6/92additional action, so it wouldn't surprise anyone. I might add thatjust because I believe the next shot will be a potent shot does notnecessarily mean we should fire it. Indeed, I'm not so sure about the[potency of the] shot after that and it might be nice to have a potentshot around. I think the timing of any additional action isdifficult.While the real economy is clearly decelerating and thedeceleration has momentum, we do have a substantial slug of ease inthe system. The fed funds rate is down 75 basis points over the pastthree months. As Governor Angell pointed out, the 30-year bond isdown 50 basis points. The 10-year rate is down 100 basis points inthe last three months. The dollar has fallen. We've seen some pickupin M2; even with a yield curve adjustment, it's still probably belowour lower bound, but that deceleration has stabilized. And we havethe slight hint of a pickup in credit demand. Business loans at banksand at finance companies, commercial paper, and the debt aggregate allhave shown some stirrings. Now, of course, this could simply reflecta financing of the modest backup in inventories, but I would hope thatis not the case. So, we have some stirring in both money and creditgrowth and we also already have a refinancing boom in full flower nowboth in the corporate sector and in mortgages. So, I think we do havesome countervailing financial force already at work against the realeconomy. And there is risk in moving in the current environment onthe currency side as the dollar has fallen to new lows. So has thelong bond rate. So, I think it's difficult to argue that this hasignited inflationary fears or flight of foreign investors so far. Butif we should move, I would acknowledge that there is some risk ofdestabilizing the dollar. The hot money speculators are bulging withprofits from their European escapades. And if they did start anattack, who would stop it? Who would stand in the way of a run on thedollar? The Administration has not evidenced any strong concern overa weak dollar. Central bank intervention has not been impressivelyefficacious in recent weeks, to understate the situation. So it seemsto me that there is some chance, however remote, that we could have aproblem there, and that would be disruptive. I agree with Tom Melzerthat it might be difficult to get the genie back in the bottle becausethis [move] would be one which would infect the bond and stock market.And that argues for a little caution. So far it hasn't affected thebond and stock market as far as I see. And, of course, there areother potential shocks and uncertainties looming in the pre- and post-election periods. All of this argues for [some] caution and saving alittle ammunition.There is also, of course, the very real risk of going toofar. This will turn around some day. I have no persuasive evidenceto support that statement [Laughter], but I do believe this will end.Given the lags associated with monetary policy and the risk thatheadwinds could become modest tailwinds, we should not overreact topessimism on the real economy. Nonetheless, given the weakness in thereal economy and the need to reinforce weak growth in money and creditif the current trends continue, we likely will be confronted with apersuasive case for a rate cut. Indeed, I think the case is fairlypersuasive now. The timing and execution are difficult. I tend tothink it has been quite useful that we haven't moved in the past fewdays. Nevertheless, there's some danger in being too cute on timingand losing momentum--and the momentum we have in the aggregates isreal--and risking a severe deterioration. We may be able to avoid a10/6/92rate cut if things start to firm; the timing of additional action isdifficult and we need to discuss that. In my own mind the appropriatepolicy stance is clear. We ought to lean very hard toward additionalaction and be prepared to ease if confronted with more disappointingforward-looking data.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Our District continues [to expand] at a verymodest pace overall and employment is up just a little over last year.The agricultural sector is flat; there may be a little decline in[farm] income, even though crops are good, because prices are lessrobust. Manufacturing is basically flat. Our aircraft industry issuffering because of the reduced demand overseas. Our manufacturingof autos is either flat or there is significant [unused] capacity.So, there is not a lot of activity there. As far as constructiongoes, the residential sector is still strong throughout the Districtand in some areas the nonresidential sector remains good. In theenergy sector, the movement in natural gas prices is in a sensepositive. I think more fundamentally than the effects of thehurricane there has been an improving trend; supplies have beenbrought into a little better alignment with demand so prices areincreasing nationally. In talking to people in that industry, though,they say if that were to continue, they wouldn't really have resourcesuntil sometime next year, so that's not an immediate pickup for ourDistrict at all.On the national scene, we have no real differences with theGreenbook. We're not quite as pessimistic for the fourth quarter.Fundamentally, we're looking at the negative numbers and adjusting ourprojections of real activity down a little. Also, like the staff, wedo not expect inflation to be a major problem.With regard to policy considerations, I have to admit I'm alittle more ambivalent about easing than I was last time, partlybecause we have talked to business people, as others of you have, andthey're saying that interest rates are not a problem right now. Wedon't need it, given the other aspects of the economy and the so-called headwinds we've talked about. Credit growth is a little betterand I have some concerns about the foreign exchange situation. But onbalance I'm personally still comfortable with easing because we arelooking at a continued [sluggish] and maybe even weakening economy.And while I say that credit is improving, it's still weak in everyway. The monetary aggregates, M2 and so forth, are still weak byevery definition. And price inflation is not at this point a majorissue; we don't see inflation picking up again given these otherfactors and, therefore, we have some room to ease. And on the marginI feel that easing would facilitate this restructuring that is stillin process, even though we don't know where the equilibrium may be.We know it is in process and there are still significant adjustmentsthat have to take place. So, as I wash all this out, I have to comedown on the side of some further ease.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. I've met with a number of people throughout theDistrict in recent weeks, and the general sense is that our area ofthe country is now fully recovered from the 1982 recession.10/6/92[Laughter] We didn't experience the 1990-91 one. Employment growthhas been better than the nation; industrial production has been betterthan for the nation; jobs are up about 1-1/2 percent since thebeginning of the year. The unemployment rate hasn't come down as muchbecause labor force growth is very strong. Other people following mecould be moving back from southern California to the Midwest. In manyrespects it's somewhat of a reversal of what we saw in the '85-'89period when I was out West.We have a large number of major national retail organizationsheadquartered in the District. In talking with them they say thisSeptember was better than they had expected, better than earliermonths, and better than they [had first] thought. There was a biggerpickup in sales post Labor Day. We're running retail sales increasesin our District of about 6-1/2 percent versus 4 percent nationally,but they say they are seeing better numbers across the country thanthey had expected and they are raising their expectations now aboutChristmas retail sales. They say home-improvement related items andfurnishings have been extremely strong--double-digit increases.People aren't getting any yield on their assets in the banks so theyput it in the brick and mortar of a patio or something.We're the second largest auto and auto-related manufacturingDistrict in the country. And while the auto companies report flatsales and some concerns, the auto suppliers are more optimisticbecause they've been getting orders from the transplant companies.They feel that they are very competitive with imports. They're takingback some market [share] they previously had lost. Heavy truck ordersare much better than expected just a couple months ago [and the truckmanufacturers] are feeling very good about their backlog. Home salesand home starts are strong throughout the District, going along withthe better employment and labor force that we have in our area.The Fourth District round table economists--mostly nonbankbusiness economists with a few bank economists in there--met recentlyand they are more optimistic than the Greenbook. They have 3 percentreal GDP as an average forecast of the group for 1993. There has beensome improvement in their inflation outlook; it's still up around3-1/2 percent but trending down. More people are talking aboutinflation going under 3 percent than just three months ago when thegroup met. So, we've had a little movement there.Our banks are even better than Tom Melzer's banks. We havethe strongest banks in the country. Aggregate market capital issecond only to New York; without Morgan and Bankers Trust we beat themall. None of the banking assets in our District are owned [by bankinginstitutions] outside the District. Our banks are looking for earningassets; they're giving incentives to go out looking for loans. Myhead examiner was in to see me worried about the banks looking toohard for loans; I said "Don't worry about it yet." They're alsolooking for opportunities to inject capital into banks in otherDistricts, so you will be hearing from them a lot in 1993 as they seekopportunities to spread their skills and their capital.Talking with business leaders about their strategies for the'90s has been very interesting. They characterize the past as havingbeen an environment of counting on rising sales where they hirepeople, order some stuff, mark it up, and they make money. Their new-36-10/6/92strategy is not to expect increases in sales in the '90s but basicallyto view the situation as one where all increases and earnings aregoing to come from cutting costs: reductions in the work force andproductivity increases. When I asked both large and small businessesabout their inflation expectations, there was a contradiction [intheir responses]. They say they can't raise their prices at all; theyhave no expectation or plans to raise their prices and in some casesthey talk about how rapidly the prices would be cut in the future.But they expect nationwide inflation to remain high. So, when Iquestion them about how they are going to handle that with their laborcosts or what their employees think of it, they say "It has to comefrom productivity or we're in a deep stew." Dick Syron asked aboutthe [economy's] engine. I look at what both households and businessesare doing; they are basing their plans on the expectation of higherinflation in the future, with the idea that it is transitorily low[now] and is going to rise. And we're engaged in policy actions thatsay "No, inflation is not only down but it's going to go even lower."That inconsistency between what is out there in the marketplace andwhat we're doing is creating this drag. Now, there are two ways toreconcile that. Either we simply conform our actions to theirexpectations or we try to do whatever we can to help accelerate theprocess of their adjusting their expectations down to where we intendto go on policy. I ask business people why they don't believe us whenwe say we're going to zero inflation. I tell them the budget deficitor other things they worry about don't matter; it's what the centralbanks does that determines that. They just sort of shrug and say theydon't believe it. They say we keep easing policy in order to promotegrowth, and one of these days it's going to wind up in higherinflation. I point to slow M2 growth and how we're all trying to worktoward a stable price environment, and they tend just to shrug it off.I think the issue we have to attack is the credibility of ourcommitment; we as a Committee need to convey in the clearest way wepossibly can that we are going toward zero inflation. That's what weshould tell them about how to gauge our policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. I had two thoughts: One was on the economy andwas prompted by something Mike Kelley said; the second was on thefinancial markets. Twenty years ago I was sitting in freshmeneconomics with Samuelson's Eighth Edition, and the first thing we weretaught was something called the "paradox of thrift." The paradox ofthrift was the 1972--or probably the 1952--way of saying "balancesheet restructuring will lead to less economic activity." When Ithought of Governor Kelley becoming impatient, all I could think ofwas Keynes's famous quip about how in the long run we are all dead.And that was, in fact, the response.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What about the parable of the bees?MR. LINDSEY. Well, we've been trying to unlearn Keynesianeconomics for the last 20 years and that may have been a mistakebecause, in fact, I think it's probably very close to the situationwe're in now with balance sheet restructuring in part caused by thismismatch that Jerry Jordan just spoke of between inflationexpectations and our inflationary reality. As for the economy, Ithink that's clearly in lousy shape, and my normal training would saywe should move to ease.-37-10/6/92The second thing I'd like to talk about is financial markets.Yesterday, frankly, I had a bit of an epiphany. I hope these thingsdon't happen too much in life. I looked very closely at what happenedin both the foreign exchange market and the stock market. I can tellexactly what happened in the stock market because I've set up mytelerate to do that. I couldn't tell [exactly] in the foreignexchange market but it was close. The stock market bottomed at minus100 and something at exactly 11:29 a.m. And it looked as if theforeign exchange markets did a similar thing. What is important about11:29 a.m.? Well, that's Fed time and the markets woke up and said"Oh, they're not coming in." I assume that's what they did. I don'tknow what else is important about 11:29 a.m.; maybe it was just onedata point and so I have an R-squared of one. But it looked prettyconvincing to me. It's also where we hit the circuit breaker.SPEAKER(?). Yes, they hit the 100-point circuit breaker.MR. KELLEY. Yes, it worked.MR. LINDSEY. It worked anyway. So, I think yesterday themarket was telling us that their bet was we weren't in. Looking atthe numbers, I also agree exactly with Joan and Bill's analysis that a25 basis point reduction is factored into the market. So, I have tosay I'm confused because on the one hand the market already has us inand on the other hand the market is telling us not to come in. Theonly way I can work that out--and I worked it out to my ownsatisfaction overnight, if not to anyone else's--was that I had yourmodel in mind. What the market is not telling us is whether totighten or ease. It's telling us something else and that is whetherthis organization is in reactive mode or what I would calldeliberative mode. If you watch the pattern of the market's reactionto our not moving Friday and the pattern of its reaction to our notmoving yesterday, the relief came because we weren't panicked. Wewere waiting for this every sixth-week meeting and we were actuallygoing to sit down and talk through rationally what we were going todo. And I think the markets were applauding us for having done that.Now, again, it doesn't answer what we should do; but it does say thatwe get rewarded for being deliberative and not reacting to the latestemployment report. So, that was my epiphany.Now, what should we do? I think, frankly, that our next moveis going to be to ease. It might be because there is a sharp break inthe market and we have to move in to the stem the gap--something likethe October '87 [episode], perhaps. I hope that's not the casebecause then we are back to the reactive mode. It might be because,as Ed Boehne said, the Fed should be viewed as doing anything wereasonably can in the face of the current economic statistics, whichare bad. That could be reactive or it could be deliberative. Thequestion is: When do we move? Option one is to wait for the newAdministration, until January 20th or later. Clearly, the nextAdministration is going to need help no matter who wins the election.We're going to have a fiscal stimulus which is going to send longrates up; and while fiscal policy is going to be more stimulative, Ithink its quality is going to go down, in particular with regard togetting small business and employment taxes. I think health care isgoing to be hit no matter who wins the election. And while it's goodfor us in the long run, it's lousy for the health care industry in theshort run and that's one of the few growth industries we have. So,-38-10/6/92we're going to add our hospitals to the layoff lists next year.That's a case for waiting until January, when [the economy is] goingto need help. We could wait until after the election but beforeJanuary; I wouldn't recommend that. It's going to be a time ofmaximum uncertainty largely because appointments are going to becoming out at a rate of about one every two or three days. I wouldnot want our actions to be interpreted as applauding or rejectingparticular nominees, say, for Secretary of the Treasury. The otherpossibility is to act now at this meeting. I believe that's thecommendable course of action. Even if I don't know what the rules areon our specifying a time-- whether or not we have to vote to do ittoday--I think we should take the action here at this meeting and notleave it to random events in the future. I think the odds that wewill be [easing] before the next meeting are overwhelming. I think itwill come either from a stock market break or because the economicstatistics will make it imperative for us to do so. Given that choiceand given that reality, I think we should be deliberative and notreactive and we should vote to ease here today.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, it's almost time for dinner,so I'll be brief. First of all, I don't see anything new on theeconomic outlook that differs from the bulk of what has been saidaround the table. I do think that attitudes have gotten at least abit more glum. I put a lot of weight on Mike Prell's simultaneityparadox of linkages or reverse linkages among income, employment, andspending, especially in a context in which the saving rate is alreadyvery low and we're not going to get any more spending through areduction in the saving rate. I think there is superimposed on top ofthat a whole lot of concerns that intensify those things that aresomewhat easy to identify--some of them political, some of theminvolving a growing recognition that out there in the great beyondthere is a very large, very expensive series of national economicproblems that are going to have to be dealt with in a context in whichthere are vast social problems that also have to be dealt with. And Ithink people worry about that. So, as I said, the bottom line interms of the outlook is more of the same with, if anything, a tilttoward a bit more concern and a bit more sour expectations.I agree with those who said that inflation in some sense is anon-issue, whether it's measured correctly or not. I also agree withthose who are saying that whether the Fed does something now or nextweek is not going to have a whole lot of adverse implications for so-called Fed credibility on inflation. The inflation outlook is a lotbetter, but it is a lot better because we're going to have 16, 17, or18 straight quarters with an unemployment rate above 6-1/2 percent and11 or 12 quarters with an unemployment rate above 7 percent. There'sno magic to it at all. We have better inflation the old fashionedway: We paid for it. I do have some sympathy, though, with JerryJordan's comment or quandary as to why nobody quite believes there isat least a fighting chance of preserving that [progress on inflation]over time.The main point I want to make--and others have said it inslightly different ways--is that we do have a renewed case of thefinancial jitters out there. It's not all that hard to explain whythat's there. I do think the principal points of vulnerability are-39-10/6/92the stock market and the exchange market. But I don't think anybodyis even remotely clairvoyant enough to be able to anticipate throughwhat channels a disturbance might work itself into those markets. Andthat was the thrust of Bill McDonough's comments, if I can put wordsin his mouth. I also do not think that a modest change or even a bigchange in monetary policy in the direction of ease right now is goingto forestall the possibility that one of those disturbances mighthappen. It won't work that way; if anything, it might work the otherway. But it will not work in the direction of forestalling it.I agree with a number of comments that have been made that ifsomething starts to tilt the wrong way, the situation could get prettymessy. Ed Boehne's comment about four hours ago about limited toolsin a foreign exchange situation is quite valid. But having said that,it is potentially dicey. I think it's important to recognize, as anumber of people have said, that major banks and major nonbankfinancial institutions in the United States, with one or two obviousexceptions, are in a much stronger condition today than they were in1990, or in '87 or '84 or '82; and that's a plus. What is not a plusis that the second-tier institutions, especially nonbanks, are inweaker condition. And it's also important to recognize that if we getinto one of these [situations], all institutions are going to be a lotmore defensive. That may be good news in one sense, but it's bad newsin another sense in that it makes it that much more difficult to dealwith them. So, no matter what the Committee in its wisdom decidesabout near-term monetary policy in the conventional meaning of theword, I think that decision should be couched in a context in which itis implicitly understood that in the period ahead there could becircumstances in which the Desk or Desks will need at least a marginof greater flexibility.In terms of monetary policy in conventional terms, I am verymuch of the view that for a variety of reasons the better course ofaction, at least for the moment, would be to "maintain." I'd have adistinctly asymmetric bias but I would not do anything. But aboveall, whatever the Committee decides about policy as a whole, we needto recognize that there could be circumstances where on a day-to-daybasis an extra margin of flexibility is going to have to be built in.I don't think that has to be part of the directive, but it has to berecognized.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. Well, since I think I am the last one tospeak, I'll be very short. I'm much more comfortable with theGreenbook forecast this time--the marking down [of the economic growthprojection]. I've been a bit more pessimistic all along with respectto the real economy. I'm not pleased to see a markdown to 1.2 percentreal growth in the fourth quarter, but I think it's fairly realistic.I'm also in agreement generally that inflation is under control byalmost any measure. And I think we're getting to where--with thediscussions of what the CPI means, the measurement problems, and soon--we're recognizing that we may be getting close to thatdeflationary point that Governor Kelley mentioned. The fact thatwe've gone on so long with this weak economy adds another uncertaintygenerally. The uncertainty is reflected in the market. We've talkedabout the political uncertainty, and certainly the internationaluncertainty is reflected in the markets. As for the uncertainty with10/6/92respect to how long this balance sheet adjustment is going to go on,though, the duration of this weakness and of the adjustment process iscontinuing to drag people down and that is further damping thecapability of the economy to recover.The last couple of times we've scratched our heads trying tofigure out what M2 was telling us and whether or not we should changethe cones or move the cones around. So we said we weren't going to doanything because we didn't know enough about what the monetaryaggregates were telling us. We've seen some small improvements in M2lately but it still looks as if it's moving sideways. Maybe themonetary aggregates were telling us more than we were paying attentionto earlier. With respect to exchange rates, I recognize that if weallow the dollar to be a policy constraint for us, we may end uplengthening the cycle--lengthening this long period of slow economicgrowth--and in fact it may hurt us in the long run.Adding all of these things up, I come out thinking that weprobably are going to need another easing move. I'm somewhatconcerned about its timing; care needs to be given to when we do it.I'm not enthusiastic about this reputation that we seem to havegarnered that we react to various things and I'm a little concernedabout getting "gamed" by the traders who I think are having a rathergrand time these days. So, I come out for a move toward ease but Ithink the timing needs to be considered carefully.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's really quite late, so let's take avery short coffee break--in fact, 10 minutes.[Coffee break]MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I saw him nod; some ofus are very attuned to those nods. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Don? If not, let mestart off. This has to be one of the most difficult periods forpolicymaking that I remember. The reason essentially is that we'redealing with an outlook that is far more difficult to fathom than Ithink any of us had really thought about. It is by no means certainthat the restructuring model we're looking at is of the type that Idiscussed here a couple of meetings ago; [that model involves]affecting the restructuring process and the improved balance sheetprocess by a level of interest rates that essentially over timerestructures the balance sheets and induces a restoration of spendingout of cash flows. The alternate model I raised was what I called the"seize-up" model, namely that what we are looking at is an old 19thcentury major balance sheet seizing up under crisis conditions inwhich if we inject liquidity and ease into the market, it temporarilylooks as though it is recovering but then as the stimulus runs out itreverts to the old [19th century process] of very rapid balance sheetadjustments. And what we find is that the cash flow that is beingengendered gets disproportionately shifted toward balance sheet repairand savings and there is general weakness in economic activity. AsGovernor Mullins indicated, this is a sort of periodic "fall" problem;it's the third straight year that we've run into this. I'm not surethat the date is particularly relevant, but there is evidence that[economic activity] does not wish to accelerate. I do, however, thinkit is premature to conclude that what we are dealing with is a-41-10/6/92cumulative process in which the previous injections of liquidity havepetered out and the economy is now beginning to "seize up" again andmove toward a negative growth pattern. If that were actuallyoccurring right now, it's hard to believe we would have the auto andtruck sales numbers that were released yesterday, which were fairlygood. I also wonder whether the other evidence of reasonably goodretail sales would be emerging; and I wonder whether loan demand,which may be nothing more than a shift from external financing tocommercial bank financing, means all that much. These are veryfragile indications [on the positive side] and I must tell you Iscrounged very hard to find them. Nonetheless, it is not immediatelyevident that we are moving toward a cumulative deterioration.As a consequence of that, I would be reluctant to move towardfurther ease at this point. But I do think we may be at the cusp ofsome deterioration which just hasn't cumulated in the usual patternthat one would expect. We have some fairly unstable financialconditions, especially the stock market, that a number of you havealluded to. There is unquestionably a potential danger in easing andI think we have to be very careful of that when we are looking at themarket responses to what we are doing or what everyone thinks we aredoing. We are largely getting a response from the dealers whoinventory bonds and who react very rapidly to what they think we aredoing. It's not altogether clear that they are going to judge theirretail markets, their pension funds, correctly. It may very well bethat one of these times, when we see bond markets getting very strongwith the expectation of ease, we're going to find that that's a resultof a build-up of inventories on the part of dealers who are unable tosell them to their customers, and the markets will reverse verysharply.So, we have a very touchy problem here. I'm aware, as youall are, that everyone expects us to ease and that becomes a self-fulfilling activity. While the case for easing right now is quitestrong, I would be far more inclined to wait for a short while--maybea couple of weeks--to see what is developing in the financial markets,what is developing in the foreign exchange markets, what is developingin Europe, and what is developing in the overall economy. I do notthink one can argue, especially in the context of some of thediscussions I've heard here, that this economy is slipping off theedge. It may; we may find evidence of that within a reasonable periodof time. I would argue further that if we do not get improvementwithin the next couple of weeks, the odds will then very stronglyfavor [the hyposthesis] that this "seize-up" model I mentioned at thebeginning is functioning. So, having gone back and forth in the last48 hours looking at all sorts of numbers, I myself would feel mostcomfortable with a hard asymmetric directive toward ease, reflectingthe fact that we would do nothing at the moment. But unless we beginto see some firming in particular indicators, I do think we shouldmove lower. I say this without a great conviction because anyone whohas a great conviction at this stage about what the economy is doingor what proper policy is I think is under a mild state of delusion.I would like to say finally that I wish we had the luxury tosit back and do nothing until after the election, as is theconventional procedure of the Federal Open Market Committee. I don'tthink we have that luxury. However, I don't think the markets havebeen viewing anything we have been doing as politically motivated.-42-10/6/92There are obviously those who make those statements, but I don't thinkthat's a serious issue confronting us. So, I would dismiss that as aconsideration; it's not something we need to be overly concernedabout. But if the money supply weakens and the markets behave poorlyand we have the evidence that we've getting cumulative deterioration--or more exactly that the economy is not picking up, which is I thinkthe main criterion at this particular stage--I do think that we shouldmove toward ease. And ease in this context I would say definitelywould require a discount rate cut and some action on the funds rate.So, I would put that out as a recommendation to start the discussionand hope somebody may be able to expand on it with some great insightsas to how policy is functioning.MR. LAWARE. Question, Mr. Chairman?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. LAWARE. As stated in the Bluebook, "A" requires areduction immediately in the federal funds rate to 2-1/2 percent. Wasthat your intent?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I'm arguing for "B."MR. LAWARE. All right, "B." I thought you said "A." I'msorry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I may have said "A" then "B." I'marguing for alternative B asymmetric toward ease, with the expectationthat if the economy fails to show signs that it's [improving], we willreconsider whether to move. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. I wish I had more confidence about whatindicator to look at to gauge our policy. But much more so I wish theprivate decisionmakers had more confidence about how they will be ableto gauge our policies in the future because it's our future policyactions that are going to influence their decisions most. It struckme in recent weeks in looking at the turmoil in Europe that theGermans have very slow growth in their narrow monetary aggregates andvery rapid growth in their broad aggregates and they chose to gaugetheir policy by M3. They have a sharply inverted yield curve at avery high level of nominal interest rates and what we would generallyregard as high real interest rates and an extraordinarily strongcurrency. We have had a very steep yield curve, very low short-terminterest rates relative to long rates, [low] recent inflation,extraordinarily rapid growth in the narrow aggregates, which isdisturbing, and almost no growth at all in the broad aggregates, M2and M3. And we tend to characterize our policies by the broaderaggregates as having been restrictive, which is not consistent withour weak currency. The markets seem to be saying--looking at a lot ofindicators, including surveys--that our policies have been and willcontinue to be expansionary and that the Germans' policies have beenand will continue to be restrictive.I'm not sure the Germans are right in looking at M3, but theykeep saying they are going to persevere and people believe them. I'mnot sure that we're right in saying M2 is the right measure, butpeople are not believing it and do not believe that we are going topersevere. Don Kohn in his remarks mentioned the risks about how to-43-10/6/92perceive what we do and why. If it's clear that it's due to a weakeconomy and that in the future we're going to maintain slack in theeconomy, then maybe the markets would take it okay. But that caststhis Committee as being anti-growth, and I'm not anti-growth. I'm notcomfortable with the idea that we're going to maintain slack and slowgrowth as the method of achieving price stability. I want pricestability because I want fast growth.I would prefer at this point to take Committee action tocomplete what we suspended on July 1st, and that is setting targetsfor 1993--what I argued for then but didn't succeed in getting. I'dsuggest that we announce a reduction in the [M2] target range for1993; my preference would be a full percentage point. I think weshould have been at 2 to 6 percent this year and I think we shouldhave 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent for next year. I'd go ahead and announceit and couple it with an immediate action to inject reserves andprobably to cut the discount rate because of the necessity of a pressrelease in order to say we are taking action as a Committee to achievethe minimum of our target range in monetary growth. I'd say we arenot satisfied with being below the target, we want to get growth up[within the range], and we're at the same time lowering our targetrange for next year because we're not going to let [growth exceed] thetop end of the range either. We should take this step, coupling whatis perceived as an easing action in the short run with an announcementof lowering the target range for '93 as re-enthroning M2 because it'sthe only horse we have to ride to gauge our policies at this time.Until such time as the Committee is ready to say we are going torestructure M2 or switch to some other aggregate, we have to stickwith M2 because it's what we have, just as the Germans have to stickwith M3 with all of its faults. I wish we had their credibility.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Jerry, let me just comment on this for asecond. I think you're raising a crucial question about whether weshould lock back in on a specific aggregate. We obviously areconfronted with the difference between the yield curve effect on Mlversus M2 and M3. It would be nice if we had a particular convictionthat one or the other or some other M was the best one; if we did,then clearly we should lock in. But I don't know if we can say thatmerely locking in, irrespective of whether in our judgment it's theright measure on which to lock in, is a wise move. So, while you'reraising a correct issue--that we really ought to review our guidelines--I think it's regrettable but it's a little late in the game for thismeeting. But I do think that should be on the agenda for the nextmeeting because we did, in fact, say that we would do it before nextyear, and the next meeting would be the appropriate time to do it.But to make a judgment that we are locking in on M2--enthroning it asyou put it--presupposes that we have confidence that that's the rightmeasure. I would much prefer to be uncommitted to which particularmoney aggregate we are functioning with until we have a judgment as towhat we want to work with. If M2 is wrong and we lock in, we're goingto have far more difficulties in aligning ourselves than if we lockinto something when we have considerable confidence. I don't think wehave that confidence at this stage. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. As I was reflecting on the policy stance forthis meeting last night, I thought about what I have been doing overthe last three weeks and I came to the conclusion that I have beensitting in front of a screen becoming increasingly depressed almost on10/6/92a daily basis, perhaps even on an hourly basis, by the negativenumbers that were coming in. Not all of them were negative, ofcourse, but even going back to August we had a low number foremployment and industrial production. Orders are down, confidence isdown. Exports, which had been a minor engine of growth, are off. M2is improving a little. All of this led me to conclude that what weought to do is to ease policy now. As other people have said, easingpolicy--lowering interest rates--has helped the economy. And I thinkadditional ease would help in this particular situation. I'm not surethat we're not on the edge of a downward, cumulative, spiral here. Itmay not be upon us at this exact moment, but the potential is there.So, I think we need to ease. But having said that, the case you madefor waiting is certainly a reasonable one; and certainly we haveoffsetting considerations in the international exchange market. So, Iwould support your strong asymmetric-toward-ease directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to set aside for themoment the issues of financial instability and what could happen inforeign exchange markets and the issues associated with being close tothe election. But it seems to me that in many ways this has been avery different meeting from those we've had in the past. In the past,we've seen a forecast where the economy looked as though it was goingto pick up almost imminently and that the rate of growth would besomething on the order of acceptable. There were certainly concernsabout whether or not that would be realized. That generally wouldresult in our having asymmetric language and then when we saw somestatistics come out that confirmed or heightened those uncertainties,we would ease. I think this is a unique meeting. This is a meetingwhere the Greenbook has come up with a forecast that is much morenegative; it shows that the pickup is coming considerably later andthat when the economy does expand it's going to be less strong. Basedon the discussion, I counted approximately 11 who seemed to be insubstantial agreement with that and who voiced concern about thedirection of the economy. That is far more powerful to me as [anindication of] what we should do on policy--the work has been donecollectively by all of us and our staffs and in the Greenbook--thanwhat developments might occur in the next two to three weeks.Consequently, I would recommend that we reduce rates--my proposalwould be 25 basis points in terms of the funds rate--and that we haveasymmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I was hoping we would come intothis meeting and be prepared to be patient, be prepared to seize theinitiative from financial markets and indicate that we were conductingmonetary policy in a deliberative way as Governor Lindsey suggested.I think what you've given us, Mr. Chairman, is a courageous action inthat it does step back from market expectations. However, there is adifference between courage and foolhardiness; and no matter howstrongly I believe that it would be appropriate for us not to take astep at this time, I do want to see how the markets react to this newsbecause what you've suggested is, it seems to me, news. So, it's acourageous step and I think we should see how the markets behave [inreaction to] the step that we're taking. If at a point in time theBoard of Governors were to decide to lower the discount rate, then it-45-10/6/92would be appropriate under those circumstances to have a telephoneconference call. Even though my preference would be a straight "B,"you certainly accommodate what I believe is appropriate under theseconditions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, it may be that epiphanies onlyhappen rarely; it's probably good for the soul that it's that way. Ilooked at the list of upcoming indicators and I have to say I agreewith President Parry: I don't see one that would convince me any morethan the discussion that we had around the table today as to whatshape the economy is in. The major statistic coming out is industrialproduction; we know what that is; that's going to be released a weekfrom Friday. The other two big indicators are the PPI and the CPI. Idon't think they really give us a--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think initial claims, which come out[soon], are a very crucial indicator of short-term deterioration; ithas been one of the problems. The retail sales figure [could] showweakness.MR. LINDSEY. Yes, you're right. Again, what I think weshould do is for this Committee to establish the guidelines; thatdecision should be made here [today] because we're being gamed verymuch the way the European central banks were being gamed. With eachmajor statistic that comes out, people take sides; [people talk about]the possibility that someone may have some inside knowledge or rumorsspread that someone has it and that's going to affect Fed actions;that is what is driving markets. Frankly, I think that's increasingthe instability in the markets. And the way to restore stability tothe markets in part is to have this body make decisions and have afixed date rather than an effectively random date for taking actions.One particular area of instability that has been mentioned is theforeign exchange market, and that is an area of concern. But I wouldmake two observations. First of all, to the extent we have a concernabout the foreign exchange market, it would not fit into the paradigmof strongly asymmetric because the only "cure" that we would come upwith would be an increase in rates, and I don't see that coming.Also, I think the fundamentals are quite different here in the UnitedStates. I think the United States is like France and not like Italyor the UK in that we do not have an obviously overvalued currency;quite frankly, we have an undervalued currency. So, for both of thosereasons I don't think the foreign exchange instability is a reason fornot acting now. I think we ought to make the decision here. In mymind that decision could even be a contingent decision: contingent onhaving over 400,000 or whatever you would like in the initialunemployment claims or a CPI under 3 percent. But I really thinkthere's an advantage in our making the decision here today, and thatwould be my very strong preference.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I might say that the decision will bemade obviously also in conjunction with the Board of Governors on thediscount rate, so that issue gets involved.MR. LINDSEY. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.-46-10/6/92MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the policy decision that weface this morning is, as Don said, essentially a matter of weighingthe risk of a renewed deterioration in the economy against the riskthat a further easing at this juncture will damage our credibility andmight not do any good in any event. My real preference, reading thetea leaves the way I do, is to do something now--move a quarter point--but I can accept your formulation of "B" with an asymmetricdirective. But I want to underscore what Jerry Jordan said: Thisdecision would be a lot easier if we had cut those targets back inJuly. Governor Angell and I felt strongly enough about advocating acut in the [1992] targets [in July 1991] that we actually dissented on[the vote to retain them]. But if we do cut them regularly, I thinkwe establish the credibility whereby we can make these short-termlowering [moves] without scaring the market half to death because wewould reassure them that we have not lost sight of our long-termtargets.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, for all the reasons I statedbefore, I would prefer "B" symmetric because I don't have anyconfidence that a further change in rates can accomplish thestimulative effects that it's supposed to have. And I'm veryreluctant to take the risks that are inherent in the foreign exchangemarkets, which I believe are there. On the other hand, I think yourargument that we need some emergency firepower in the event of anaccident or a surprise is persuasive for asymmetric language. But Iwould prefer to have it symmetric with the idea of reconvening theCommittee if the emergency happens. Maybe the emergency will happentoo fast to make that practical, but until I hear the other commentsaround the table I'd like to be recorded as favoring "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. In general, Mr. Chairman, I support yourrecommendation and would only add a couple of thoughts. First of all,in assessing the question of asymmetry and timing, I hope we cast arelatively broad net. I am concerned about the foreign exchangemarkets. On the one hand, we seem to believe that the dollar is lowerthan is sustainable but the presumption is that it's going to go lowerstill; and that doesn't seem to me to be an equilibrium, let me put itthat way. On top of that, as we weigh the desirability or necessityof additional interest rate cuts to sustain or further the recovery, Ihope that we will bear in mind its consistency with our long-runobjective for price stability. And I must say that I don't quiteunderstand what we would have gained by lowering the monetaryaggregate targets and locking in more tightly on M2 in thesecircumstances. There's certainly some information value in M2 butthere's also a lot of uncertainty surrounding both its behavior andits implications for economic performance in the future, and I don'tsee how we would enhance our credibility by focusing on something withthat degree of uncertainty associated with it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, as time goes on here, economicevents are making the case for ease stronger and stronger. But I dostrongly support your recommendation for today because I do not think-47-10/6/92this is a propitious time to ease. I worry that we could set off arun on the dollar. The traders are feeling their oats these days andthey might just like to take us on, and we don't need that. It's veryimportant that the FOMC regain control of monetary policy, which Ithink we have largely lost to the market and the media. I do notshare the view that today is a day when we could look reflectiverather than reactive. Real rates are very low, as we've seen on thehandout distibuted here this morning. So, I don't think there is anystrong urgency, on that merit, to [move] today. I think it'sdesirable to get a reading on events as time goes along and desirableto have our powder dry in case some of these potential emergenciesshow up. So, I strongly support your prescription.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, I agree with the number of peoplewho have argued for us to take the initiative back [from] the markets.I think the FOMC is the place to make these decisions and generally Iwould prefer to make them during the meetings. I have a continuingpreference for symmetric directives. And given the turmoil in theworld right now and the low level of interest rates that we alreadyhave, I think our best contribution could be to act as a force forstability. So, my preference, if I were a voting member, would be for"B" with a symmetric directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think we all feel the ambivalence that youtalked about; there clearly is uncertainty. I find it difficult tobelieve that any of the new data that are going to come out in thenext couple of weeks will make this any clearer. Jerking the marketsaround--first they think we will ease and then they think we won't andthen we try to come back and do it again--may have a cuteness to it ortoo much cuteness to it, but I think that undermines our credibility.There are times when you step up to the batter's box and you try toget on base. We've had a good discussion but I think this discussionis probably ahead of the data. I would prefer to make the decisionand do it--and not try to second guess this event or that event orthis statistic or that statistic--by sticking to the fundamentals.And I think the fundamentals call for lower rates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I would prefer to act and I'dprefer to act now. But let me add some qualifiers to this. This isas tough a situation as we've seen, at least in a while. And it seemsto me that on the basis of the discussion there is little questionabout which direction--unless we're happily surprised or we getextraordinary shocks the other way--our next move will be. Generally,I prefer to do things at meetings. I have some sympathy for thearguments that were raised by Governor Lindsey in that regard. We dohave uncertainties out there and I have no illusions about my abilityto read these uncertainties in terms of the exchange market or otherthings that might come along. There is this question of just how muchdata we're going to get in. I guess it depends on how one interpretsyour recommendation. I interpret your recommendation on being highlyasymmetric toward ease as saying that the timing to some extent willbe decided by you. The direction is not necessarily completely-48-10/6/92decided yet, but there would be a predisposition to ease--I waswriting down your words--unless we were to see some strengthening inthe economy. On that basis and given all of the uncertainties in theeconomy and in institutions, I would reluctantly support yourrecommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, my view on today's decision reallyis completely separate from either exchange market or other marketexpectations or political issues. It does seem to me that these arematters that we can reasonably deal with, given any decision that wecome to today. Rather, my decision would be based on the economicsituation, which I think clearly has weakened and quite considerablyso. At this point the risk that the economy could fall back into anegative situation is not insignificant; I think the balance here isvery delicate. It seems to me that we already have the data that weneed to make a decision. It's very much there on the record.Therefore, as I indicated in my comments earlier, I could live with"B" asymmetric, but I frankly would have a far stronger preference tomove now and to use this meeting as a reason for making that decision.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. To repeat myself a little, Mr. Chairman, I camein a little more ambivalent, and I think we have had a very gooddiscussion. The preponderance of views is that ease is appropriate. Ithink now would be the time [to ease], having had the discussion, andit would be a deliberative move. However, given your [explanation], Ican live with "hard asymmetric."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Alan, if it were up to me, I'd prefer to takeaction here at this meeting. Having said that, I would vote "no."[Laughter] I basically view the hard asymmetric you've described as adecision to move. It's almost a certainty. And for the reasons I'vearticulated at other meetings, I just can't support that. I thinkwe're expecting far too much out of monetary policy as a short-run,fine-tuning tool for the real economy. Frankly, I think thereprobably would be some benefits in terms of stability and so forth incommunicating to markets: The easing is over; now let's adjust tothis level of rates and work from here. I think there's amplestimulus in train. To cite a quote from you: "My mild state ofdelusion continues." [Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. First of all, I'd like to support PresidentJordan's suggestion that we take another look at the M2 cones. Inessence, if M2 is a policy guide, we should have eased earlier. Ifit's not a policy guide but only an aggregate that we forecast, thenwe should be lowering our forecast. So, I find this inconsistentattention to M2 somewhat troubling. I would prefer to ease today, somy preference is alternative A. However, having said that, because ofmy concerns about the traders' voracious attempts to "game" the System--and having had first-hand experience with that crowd--I willreluctantly support ["B"] asymmetric.-49-10/6/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I think there's a sufficient case for ease nowbut I can support ["B"] asymmetric. In terms of what information tofocus on, I think it will be useful to focus on money and credit flowsand how those develop.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Your prescription is fine with me,Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan, I never did get anindication from you as to how you came out.MR. JORDAN. I'm still working on it! [Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just say something that I thinkis important for us to focus on. This is a very close call here andwhat I don't want to do is to convey a sense that I have some strongconviction as to what is involved here. I want to make certain thatwe're not getting a Committee vote which merely acquiesces in a viewthat I have stipulated because, as we have all indicated around thistable, this is an extremely difficult period. I want to make certainthat we get a vote which is essentially a Committee vote rather anacquiescence to the position of the Chairman. Ordinarily, I wouldnever say such a thing! [Laughter]MR. ANGELL. Which votes are you trying to lose? [Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The fact is that we all recognize thatthis is a very tough decision we are making and it's best that we allsay exactly what it is that we [prefer]. As a consequence of that, Iwant to read off my notes to be sure that I have gotten everyone'sview and priorities correctly. Accordingly, I'm going to poll each ofyou, starting from the bottom. President Syron would prefer easing atthis meeting but will accept asymmetric toward ease. The same is trueof Governor Phillips [and of Governor Mullins]. Do I gather thiscorrectly?MR. MULLINS. I think there's a case for ease now but I--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But that's not the [unintelligible]question.MR. MULLINS. I would go "B" asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That there is a case for ease now isunquestioned, but what's your priority?MR. MULLINS. "B" asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Your priority is asymmetric?MR. MULLINS. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, your preference is asymmetric butthere is a case for easing; it's the other way around.10/6/92MR. MULLINS. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer votes "no" on ease andsymmetric language with "B." Governor Lindsey very specificallyindicated a desire to ease now. Governor LaWare wants symmetric now.MR. LAWARE. Symmetric "B."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry, "B." Governor Kelley wantsasymmetric toward ease, but I gathered from your comments that whileyou could accept [a move toward] ease you would prefer not [to move]?MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I may be the only one at the tablewho supports you on the merits of your case! [Laughter]MR. MULLINS. He [talked] me into it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig is asymmetric towardease but could accept ease, if I gather correctly.MR. BLACK. But not on the merits of the case!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell would not be in favor ofease, but would do asymmetric toward ease. I would suspect that theVice Chairman is asymmetric toward ease because that's his conviction.MR. CORRIGAN. That's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I wonder whether President Jordanfinally has his solution.MR. JORDAN. The reason I have a problem with "B" asymmetricis that no matter what we think it is we're doing [any action] will bethe result of real economic indicators and reinforce the idea that weease policy when the economy is soft and we are going to tightenpolicy when the economy is strong. I have a problem with that. So, Iwould prefer either to act today and do it because of weak moneygrowth and make it very clear that we're trying to get short-termmoney growth up and long-term money growth down or, if we don't dothat, adopt "B" symmetric but without the discretion of judgment forthe future.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, as I now reconfirm what the viewsare, there is a majority for asymmetric toward ease in the form whichI originally stipulated it. Therefore, I would request that you readthe [directive language].MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. In the context of the Committee'slong-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economicgrowth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, andmonetary developments, slightly greater reserve restraint might orslightly lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in theintermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expectedto be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period fromSeptember to December at annual rates of about 2 and 1 percent,respectively."-51-10/6/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARDChairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Hoenig YesPresident Jordan NoGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare NoGovernor Lindsey NoPresident Melzer NoGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Phillips YesPresident Syron YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Let's go have lunch.END OF MEETING-52-