Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeAugust 18, 1992A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 18, 1992, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice ChairmanMr. AngellMr. HoenigMr. JordanMr. KelleyMr. LaWareMr. LindseyMr. MelzerMr. MullinsMs. PhillipsMr. SyronMessrs. Boehne, Keehn, McTeer, and Stern, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents ofthe Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and EconomistMr. Bernard, Deputy SecretaryMr. Coyne, Assistant SecretaryMr. Gillum, Assistant SecretaryMr. Mattingly, General CounselMr. Patrikis, Deputy General CounselMr. Prell, EconomistMr. Truman, EconomistMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis,Ms. Munnell, Messrs. Promisel, Siegman,Simpson, and Stockton, Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. McDonough, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account8/18/92MS. PHILLIPS. So moved.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Thank you very much.Let's now move on to Bill McDonough and the foreign currencyoperations.MR. MCDONOUGH. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. McDonough?MR. SYRON. Bill, the questions I have do not have to do withthe tactics of what we're doing because I have full faith and verystrong confidence in the tactics that we use in carrying out theseoperations. I have to confess, though, to being somewhat perplexed--and I'm sure there's an answer to this--about what our policy is andwhat we're trying to do here and to what extent. I just want to bereassured that what we're doing is in the interest of having moreorderly markets and [is appropriate in regard to] its impact on thedomestic securities market, more particularly the government bondmarket. Just looking at this round of [actions] and looking at thelonger-term pressures, particularly if something were to happen withthe German official rates, I worry about our credibility more broadly,not just in the foreign exchange market. If there's a risk, it'sperhaps inappropriate if we are seen trying to do something that isimpossible to do. So, I'm trying to figure out what we are reallytrying to accomplish here and over what time horizon. I'm alsointerested in your view as to what extent [the exchange market] is afactor that is taken into consideration in terms of short-termdomestic policy. If we are concerned about the credibility of thisinstitution, particularly at this point in time, we don't want to seemto be going in two opposite directions. I'd be interested in how youintegrate these things.MR. MCDONOUGH. I think one must distinguish in foreignexchange intervention between trying to protect a rate level andseeking to avoid markets being disorderly. Now, we have something ofa [conundrum] with the Treasury on exchange rate policy; they, Ibelieve, would be rather more interested in the rate. Our interest--certainly my own and the one I keep preaching to the Treasury withregard to what we ought to be doing--is that we should try to avoiddisorderly markets. [It is only when] we make that second judgmentthat we will be effective in doing anything. As to the twointerventions so far, I think the key tie-in to short-term domesticpolicy is that the Committee has a greater degree of freedom thismorning than if the dollar were a great deal lower. Now, I have noidea what the deutschemark-dollar rate would be if we hadn'tintervened. I think it's reasonable to say that it would be a gooddeal lower and the Committee might be worrying about the weakness ofthe dollar and any inhibiting factor that might be. Going forward, ifone were to apply the test of "Is the market disorderly?" and "Wouldintervention do something about it?", it becomes more difficult themore we intervene. It's a tool that gets dull pretty quickly. Onecan really see the difference between the two interventions if you[count] the second two pieces as part of one. The first intervention8/18/92was very successful because nobody expected it to happen and we did itat a time of day when such intervention normally doesn't happen. Itwas as if there were a rookie pitcher on the mound and Babe Ruth wasat the plate and they moved in the fences; it wasn't too hard. Butnow it would be really difficult because the market is sitting therewaiting for us to come to them, and that's a very awkward position tobe in if we are to accomplish something. So, my own view would bethat at certain periods it gives the System greater flexibility inmonetary policy and at other times it is not likely to be effectiveand could be counterproductive. Philosophically, that's where I am.Exactly how you apply that is difficult.MR. SYRON. Do you think its effectiveness is diminished nowas compared to the first [intervention]?MR. MCDONOUGH. I guess the best test of that is that lastThursday the Treasury staff up to just below the Secretary was veryinclined to want to intervene; I spent a fair amount of time trying toconvince them that it wasn't a good idea. At one stage I moved in mygood friend, Mr. Truman, to help. And the two of us I think dissuadedthem largely, in addition to policy considerations, on the groundsthat it just wouldn't work.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I've heard the rationaleof disorderly markets [as the reason for intervention], but I feelconstrained to say that I was extremely surprised at thisintervention, particularly the second and the third [operations]. Ofcourse, I would respect the judgment of the Desk and Bill with regardto whether the markets were in fact disorderly. But we've hadextensive discussions over the last year or so in the Committee aboutthe effectiveness of sterilized intervention, and I thought it was thesense of this group that, unless we were going to follow interventionwith some kind of substantive monetary policy move, intervention wasnot the policy of the Committee. I haven't been clear, Bill, whetheror not this might have been instigated by the Treasury, but from yourremarks I gathered that that was not entirely so. What reallycompounds the problem with respect to our credibility is havingintervention and then having that followed by the Secretary'sstatement that he's looking for lower interest rates. That to me madeus look extremely silly, to put it mildly. So, Mr. Chairman, I'm justconfused as to what the policy of the Committee is. And I guess I'dbe interested in knowing what really constitutes a disorderly marketin the minds of the Desk. I didn't think hitting a postwar low orcoming close to a postwar low with respect to the mark constituted adisorderly market, but maybe there are factors that I'm not aware of.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. President Forrestal covered it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Go ahead.MR. JORDAN. I have a number of comments. As far as theSecretary's remarks, I remember that a decade ago we had a Secretaryof the Treasury who was very emphatic in saying that we would notintervene and we would sell the foreign currencies that his8/18/92predecessor had bought; this always intrigued me. Bill, youemphasized surprise a number of times both in your prepared remarksand in your response to Dick Syron and that suggests to me that therate effect was the key consideration. In fact, your last commentthat it wouldn't work last Thursday suggests that the criterion iswhether something is working or not working with regard to the rateeffect. And I think President Forrestal's remarks about whether theintervention is sterilized or not becomes the key criterion. It seemsto me that for this Committee to say on one side that we're in themood to see our inventory of foreign currencies reduced, as reflectedin some of the discussions since I've been here, and at the same timeto raise questions about intervening or selling of foreign currencieswould not be consistent. If the general attitude is that we wouldlike to see our inventory of foreign currencies diminished and we'rewilling to communicate that we welcome opportunities to reduce U.S.holdings of foreign-denominated currencies, would that reduce theelement of surprise--the benefits that you see to surprising themarkets? Would the benefits be diminished if we are very open andacknowledge that when the market is receptive to our selling foreigncurrencies, we would do so? Also, one small point: In your firstremark about our intervening with Canada when the European marketswere closed, you said we "bought" DM. I think you meant "sold."MR. MCDONOUGH. Sorry, I did mean "sold."MR. JORDAN. Okay. Also, I understand why traders talk interms of buying and selling dollars, but of course we're the centralbank and we can't really buy dollars. So, when you ask for approvaland say that we purchased $385 million dollars. I would far preferthat you say we sold so many deutschemarks, but give the equivalent indollars for the actual amount of the deutschmarks. I'd prefer that wetalk in terms of buying and selling foreign currencies because we, ofcourse, pay U.S. dollars.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me just make a further comment,partly in response to Bob Forrestal's and Dick Syron's point. I thinkthe sentiment of the Committee is quite well recognized. I would saythe Committee views intervention, however couched, with ratherdistinct displeasure, and that I think is clear enough. But I don'tconsider the kind of thing that Bill tried to describe to bepractically or philosophically out of character with that distinctCommittee orientation. I would say that if the orientation of theCommittee is, to put it in its extreme form, that under under nocircumstances could there ever be intervention for any reason, I thinkthat is a potentially dangerous posture. And while the orientation ofthe Committee is clear enough--I think it is well understood bothwithin the Committee and in the markets--we have to be careful interms of taking that orientation to the point where it is indeed seenas a statement of "never" because experience suggests that such aposition is one that can come back to haunt us. So, I recognize andaccept the sentiment and the distinct orientation of the Committee,but I personally would not be comfortable with the logical extremis ofthat position that says "never." I try never to say "never"!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me add to the general discussionhere and broaden it to evaluate the question and the implications of8/18/92what sterilized intervention does and does not do. I think we're allpretty much aware that there is very little intervention can do in andof itself to affect the average of any exchange rate over a particularperiod of time. But the other side of that issue is not that we aregoing to get a stable set of bilateral currencies without anyintervention at all because we're also aware that we've seensignificant bubbles in exchange rates. We have seen what amounts to,in certain cases, panic selling and clear issues of disorderlymarkets. In principle, the same arguments [apply to] not intervening,on the logic that is implicit in the portfolio adjustment process withrespect to sterilized intervention; the other side of that issue isthat on occasion [the markets] clearly break down. And the evidencedoes suggest that when that occurs we in fact can affect the market.One has to ask how it is possible for intervention even of $1 billionto move the dollar/mark relationship by four pfennigs. Clearly,that's not a fundamental issue. The question is: How in the worlddid that exchange rate for that particular period of time get that fardown and be changed by a very small amount of intervention minuteslater? The same argument that one employs to evaluate that is theargument that markets feed on themselves, get out of hand, andsometimes create some degree of instability. Nobody in this Committeethat I have spoken to is of the view that intervention has any long-term consequences. But I do think the evidence is quite strong thatit does on occasion have short-term consequences. I don't know whatto make of it, but the comments within the market in the last two orthree days--and I heard it on the radio this morning--are that theexpectation that central banks might intervene has stabilized thecurrency. Now, I don't know whether that's true or false, but thattype of market chatter which essentially is saying "Don't get lockedinto a position; be careful because you might get hit by the centralbanks" does tend to create a level of uncertainty in the market thatis helpful. Some uncertainty is not; I would suspect that this is.Now, I don't know in any individual instance whether[intervention] is useful or not. I think that Bill is right: That inthis particular case we would now be sitting, at least for a while,with a much weaker dollar with spillover effects on dollar-denominatedassets. Would that correct itself? Probably. But we are aware thatthere have been occasions in which disorderly markets crack thestructure of the underlying base of the market and the market unfolds.That's what happened when the stock market broke in October 1987; thewhole structure just broke down underneath. That wasn't a fundamentalchange--fundamental in the sense that there were external events. So,while it's terribly important that we stay away fromif we can find times when the market isperceived to be disorderly, [intervention may be useful]. And I wouldeven define a disorderly market as one in which the shorts have becomeexcessive--or longs, depending upon which side of the market it is. Atrue test as to whether or not the intervention worked or not iswhether those people believe that they were wrong. In that case themarkets will adjust. There's no science to this; I agree with Bill.The other day when the market was expecting us to intervene and it wasself-evident that no matter what we did we could not succeed, westayed out and I think that was wise. Were we to go back andintervene within the next two or three days, I think we would fail.It's only when the market begins to perceive that we're not going tobe there that I think we have a shot at it. So, it's a tricky issue.8/18/92only conditions under which [intervention] can be effective--then asingle isolated move probably requires marginal reinforcement at alater date or at some point merely to indicate that there is nopattern which is easy to [discern]. If we had done only the [firstintervention operation] and then stopped completely, I'm not sure thatwe would have gotten the effects, [in terms of introducing a] degreeof uncertainty about when central banks move. I was not one whobelieved at the time that the second intervention would accomplishvery much other than what I just said. I was frankly surprised whenin fact it did work immediately. I thought it would have a very mildeffect; but in my judgment the point was that it would be usefulmerely to have that action there. For the same reason, I think itwould be a terrible mistake to try to [intervene] now, because I thinkthe markets are expecting us to do so. If we were to do it, itwouldn't have any effect. And it then becomes a tar baby to themarket; we can't get ourselves out of it. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Well, even though I really support what you'vesaid, Mr. Chairman, I find it unusual for me to be almost on the otherside of you on this issue in that I have complained so often over sixyears regarding intervention. I need to make my position clear; Idon't think it has been expressed by anyone yet. There are many waysthat we go about conducting monetary policy. In that context, foreignexchange policy is a part of monetary policy. Monetary easingdomestically tends to cause the value of a currency to depreciateversus other goods that are trading in the domestic market.Internationally, monetary ease tends to make a currency less valuedagainst goods traded worldwide and against foreign currencies. Thefull scope of monetary policy then should enable us from time-to-timeto use all aspects of this. Monetary policy is not the sole provinceof the Federal Reserve. When the Secretary of the Treasury makesremarks, in some sense that creates uncertainties in the market inregard to what U.S. policy is.My own view is that the foreign exchange value of the dollarat this time is in a very precarious spot. It's not whether or notthe market is very disorderly but whether or not it will become verydisorderly. We have used monetary policy to take interest rates inthe United States very low for domestic purposes compared to themonetary policy adopted by the Bundesbank in pursuit of their domesticpolicy. As a result of [the slope of] our yield curve out to 10 years[versus] the Bundesbank's yield curve out to 10 years, there is anarbitraged 10-year D-mark/dollar forward rate of 170.[Unintelligible] if the Bundesbank seems to be more concerned aboutinflation than we are, that would tend to make the forward D-markstronger compared to the forward dollar. Now, we are in a spot, itseems to me, where we have to understand that what happens in theforeign exchange market is part and parcel of what happens to 10-yearTreasury securities. If we were to ignore the foreign exchangerelationship in a world with huge international capital [stocks], theinternational capital flows would occur in such a way as to cause anequilibrium adjustment of 10-year notes in the United States. It justcan't be that the dollar will fall off a cliff [relative to] the D-mark and head down from 145 to 140 to 135; if that occurs, then atsome point in time someone will say: "Hey, how in the world can thedollar get back to 170?" And there could be a serious breakdown suchas what the Chairman suggested happened in [October] of 1987. To mewe are very close to that kind of serious breakdown. I believe we8/18/92have accomplished a great deal of what we wanted to accomplish, whichwas to create an interest rate environment in the United States thatwas conducive to U.S. economic growth. I don't believe at this pointthat depreciating the dollar is going to work very much [in thedirection of providing] stimulus to our foreign trade. It's part andparcel of all that we do, and I don't want to tie one of our handsbehind our back at a critical moment in time. If someone says thatthey want us to use the right hand to do one thing and the left handto do something else, then I will vote "no" as I did in the summer of[1989] when we were following an exactly opposite policy in foreignexchange intervention than we were in [domestic] monetary policy.Now, I support this program; it's a good program and I think we oughtto be prepared to do more of it. But I support it because I do notwant to take the foreign exchange value of the dollar down, which willcause import prices to rise and will not be conducive to progress oninflation. I don't want monetary ease. In a sense that could be adrastic kind of monetary policy ease that I believe could upset themarkets. So, I guess that's a more extreme position than has beenheard.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Governor Angell says that exchange rate policyis part of the context of monetary policy and obviously it is. I'mnot clear to what extent we're in agreement on whether exchange ratepolicy comes under the jurisdiction of this Committee. Do we have aclear idea of who's in charge of exchange rate policy--the FOMC or theTreasury--or who's the junior partner and who's the senior partner?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This issue is pretty clear legally. ThePresident of the United States and through him the Secretary of theTreasury--who if push came to shove statutorily could demand that wedo certain things, not necessarily with our portfolio but on theirbehalf--is in charge. There's an ambiguity in the law with respect towhether we could act independently. I suspect that we could find alawyer in this city who would say that we could buy deutschemarkswhile the Treasury is selling them. The operations have evolved overthe years as a joint venture between the Treasury and the Federal OpenMarket Committee. Sometimes it has worked well; sometimes it hasworked less than well. But in general the issue has very rarely cometo a confrontation where we took a hard line position and the Treasurytook a hard line position and there was no agreement, at least in myexperience. Now, since Jerry [Corrigan] was about to talk in anyevent--and he has a longer experience in this than I do--I was curiousto get his recollection on this issue.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think you're about right.Actually, the point I was going to make builds on this. Regardless ofthe precise legal authority in the relationship between the Treasuryand the Federal Reserve, I think when it comes to this area we alsohave to recognize as a practical matter that there are other playersor partners involved--namely, the monetary authorities or centralbanks in other countries. I think it's fair to say--and Ted or theChairman or somebody has--that pretty much without exception the headsof all the major central banks probably in their own way would comepretty close to subscribing to the view that intervention over timedoesn't do anything. But I think as a group they would also certainlycome pretty close to associating themselves with a hybrid point of8/18/92view that would incorporate some of what Bill said, some of what Waynesaid, some of what the Chairman, and maybe some of what I said. And Ithink I can say with absolute confidence that not one of them wouldassociate themselves with the "never" school.So long as that is the case--and I suspect, frankly, that itwill always be the case--it would be very, very difficult as apractical matter for us literally to go it alone in a context in whichwe must maintain these relationships. Now, I think the evolvingposition of this Committee over the years has had an influence inshaping attitudes in other financial capitals on this very issue. ButI must say that in my judgment it would be rather naive, quite apartfrom our relationship with the Treasury, to say that we couldliterally go it alone without running some very, very high risks oneway or the other that such an attitude or policy would come back tohaunt us in spades. It might not be on that issue but on some otherissue. So, putting all the theology aside, I think one has to besensitive to these relationship questions. Those relationshipquestions far transcend 15th Street or 14th Street or 16th Street, orwherever [the Treasury is located]. So, there is also that verypragmatic aspect of this, which is one of the reasons why I subscribeto that "never say never" school.MR. ANGELL. Well, I agree that there's no question as towhere the call is located legally in regard to exchange rate policy.But the monetary policy operations of this Committee can overwhelm anyofficial exchange rate policy. That is, if we decide to buyTreasuries or buy deutschemarks--it doesn't make any difference--if webuy in the open market, we will overwhelm other foreign exchangeobjectives. So, this Committee has tremendous power when it comes todetermining the outcome of the official position that is [decided] bythe Secretary of the Treasury in consultation with the Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's hear from President Black and thenshut this [discussion] down for now. This is the type of subject thatwe can [return to] if we like in our general planning sessions overthe next couple of days. Even though it's not on the agenda, I'm sureit could very well surface. It is an important issue and I thinkwe're coming to at least a temporary close on this question. I thinkit would be useful for us to go on after President Black has had hissay.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, a while ago you said thatstatutorily the Treasury has the primary responsibility [for foreignexchange policy]. I believe it would be safe to say, wouldn't it,that it also has that primary responsibility under the Constitution,just as Congress has the power to coin money and regulate the valuethereof, which gives us primacy in the monetary policy area.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think there is an ambiguityinvolved. The President's power comes from his Constitutionalauthority in international relationships.MR. BLACK. That's what I was speaking of.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, there's no question that there is alegal ambiguity surrounding this whole issue, which has never beenpushed to fruition. I remember we reviewed this in considerable-10-8/18/92detail a few years ago; and the tortured logic of some of the stuffthat I saw was really [unintelligible]. The history of this issue isreally bizarre.MR. TRUMAN. In fact, Mr. Chairman, it's interesting that inthat tortured history, going back to the early 1960s [when] theTreasury agreed to the interpretation of the Federal Reserve Act madeat that time, they did not assert that all we did had to meet with theapproval or the control of the Treasury. We understood at that timethe need for cooperation, but that was not an element of the debate inthe early 1960s. From time to time, there have been some discussionson that point, but it has never been asserted as far as I know that asa legal matter the Treasury had the power to order us what to do withour own portfolio.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not with our own portfolio, but theycertainly--MR. TRUMAN. I agree 100 percent with Mr. Corrigan that wedon't have the power, at least as a technical matter, to operate onour own. We'd be foolish to do so. And the [Committee's] directiveunder which all these operations [are conducted] does require us tooperate in close and continuous consultation and cooperation with theTreasury and, as appropriate, with other monetary authorities, for thereasons that President Corrigan just articulated.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move to ratifythe actions of the Desk since the last meeting?MR. ANGELL. So move.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's move on to Peter Sternlight'sreport.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Questions for Peter? Ifnot, would somebody like to move to ratify the actions of the Desksince the last meeting?MR. KELLEY. So moved.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. They let you off thehook since this is a celebration of your last meeting! We now move onto Messrs. Prell and Truman.MR. PRELL. I'm deferring to my colleague, Mr. Stockton, thismorning in light of my absence through much of the period. He's moreon top of the forecast.MESSRS. STOCKTON and TRUMAN. [Statements--see Appendix.]-11-8/18/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there questions for eithergentleman?MR. SYRON. Did I hear you say--this is almost an exercise atthe margin--that if there were risks in either direction, particularlyregarding employment, you think they might be on the negative side?MR. STOCKTON. On the unemployment rate--MR. SYRON. That's what I meant, on the unemployment rate.MR. STOCKTON. There is probably some upside risk as we lookat it.MR. SYRON. So the risks wouldn't be center-weighted.MR. MULLINS. You mentioned the housing starts figure, and Ithought you mentioned that the permits looked pretty good.MR. STOCKTON. What I indicated was that the permits forsingle-family starts in July inched up a bit but were only at theirsecond-quarter average.MR. MULLINS. Okay.MR. STOCKTON. One wouldn't necessarily want to characterizethem as--MR. MULLINS. It looks pretty flat; maybe the multifamily[permits] were up a bit. What other evidence do we have? We've seenthe big refinancing boom pick up in July again. How about actualpurchases and starts? Do we have anecdotal evidence that we may begetting something going here?MR. STOCKTON. The only other piece of anecdotal informationthat we have at this time is a preliminary August homebuilders surveywhich showed that their views about sales have moved back toward thelevels of earlier in the year. So, they have picked up a bit. Theydidn't sag quite as sharply this spring as did starts and sales, butthey moved back up a little.MR. MULLINS. Okay.MR. PRELL. On these July figures, I think last time in theChart Show one of the exhibits I showed indicated that [the housingdata] had been somewhat out of whack in the past several months. Wewere getting a much higher level of single-family starts thancustomarily goes with the level of new home sales we had observed.The level of starts in the latest month is well aligned with thepermits--it had been running high relative to permits--and it's wellaligned with the recent pace of new home sales. Our supposition is,though, that we are in a period when new home sales are rising. Therewill be some eating away of inventory. And attitudes are favorablefor home buying apart from the concerns about the general economicenvironment. Certainly, home buyers perceive interest rates as beingattractive. So we'll see permits and starts rising a little.-12-8/18/92MR. MULLINS. The recent data on home sales really reflectdecisions of a couple of months ago?MR. PRELL. New home sales are reported fairly promptly aftera sales contract is signed, but we don't have data for July. Andthere are slight lags; [sales are] a little behind when these lowerinterest rates should have had their effect.MR. MULLINS. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Dave, you mentioned some uncertainty about theunemployment rate forecast and, certainly, there is some. If we wereprobabilistic about this, what do you think the chances are that theunemployment rate will hit 8 percent?MR. STOCKTON. Well, that's very conditional on what islikely to occur with overall activity over the remainder of the year.Eight percent, let's say, by the end of the year would require apretty weak fourth quarter relative to where we are right now. But ifyou were to ask me whether that is a standard deviation away from theforecast we have here, clearly the answer would be "no."MR. LINDSEY. I was trying to get a feel for your sense ofthe risks in the forecast. Whether they're balanced or not is onequestion; whether they're diffused or not is another.MR. STOCKTON. Obviously, over the summer period we also havea bit of a difficult time, with the influx of teens in and out of thelabor market, trying to pin down exactly where the unemployment rateis. We face that same uncertainty again this summer. So, in somesense there is a diffusion of estimates that always increases thistime of the year and we are facing that as well. But I don't thinkthere are any unusual risks to the unemployment rate apart from thefact that, as I mentioned in the briefing, the data that we actuallyhave in hand right now show no signs of improvement in the labormarket and are not signaling a step-up in activity. If you were totake that as a risk that we could be seeing just more of the same aswe move through the second half of the year, I think there would besome risks that the unemployment could be higher.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Productivity is just doing too well!MR. LINDSEY. Right, it leaves the less efficient workersunemployed!MR. PRELL. The recent data have been favorable on balancefor consumer spending. Car sales haven't been great, but retail saleshave been good and orders for capital goods have been pretty good.There just isn't any reason to think that we are falling off from thissomewhat erratic but generally steady trend of slow growth. We onlyhave 2-1/2 percent growth [forecast] for the fourth quarter. If wewere to fall short of that by a percentage point, the Okun's lawrelation would add only a touch to the unemployment rate. So, it getsback to what Dave has been emphasizing in terms of these uncertaintiesabout the labor market relationship per se: What is happening withproductivity and what is happening with labor market participation?-13-8/18/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Dave, while we're on this: What is your estimateof potential growth in the economy these days and how do you parcelthat out?MR. STOCKTON. At this point our estimate of potential wouldbe 2 percent with roughly 1 percent in trend productivity and a 1percent increase in labor input. That's a tad lower than where wewere before we saw all the [unintelligible] revisions, which revisedoutput growth down. So, we're just a little below.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a tendency that that 1 percentmight be higher?MR. STOCKTON. On trend productivity? Yes, that's certainlya possibility, although currently when we're coming out of thebusiness cycle trough--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We are? [Laughter]MR. STOCKTON. --it's difficult to pin down what the trend infact is. The good productivity performance that we've seen thus farin the recovery is not inconsistent with normal cyclical behavior ifone were to assume a trend of 1 percent. That is in some sense how weinfer what the trend is. But one could certainly say that at thisstage we don't know how much of this restructuring is actuallyaccomplishing some underlying improvement in trend productivity andhow much of it is just simply using the existing work force moreeffectively as firms always do in a cyclical recovery. So, there'scertainly a possibility that it could be better, but I wouldn't bet onit at this point. If one thinks back to where we were in the early'80s, coming out of that recession there was a tendency, I think, formany people to overestimate the improvement in productivity. Therewas talk then that the trend had improved to maybe 2 percent or inexcess of 2 percent and it turned out to be a disappointment that aswe progressed through the decade we didn't see that kind ofimprovement. So, I think it's always difficult when you see the goodincreases in productivity early on [in a recovery] to know exactly howmuch is trend and how much is cyclical.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. In the last Greenbook you were more optimisticthan private forecasters about long-term interest rates, though notquite as optimistic as what in fact has happened since the lastmeeting. On one side, given the sharp downward movement affectingintermediate- and long-term rates, I would have expected that to showthrough in economic activity. The other side is--at least from allthe anecdotal reports I've heard and probably everybody is hearing--that there are more complaints about lower interest income to saversrather than [happiness about] lower interest expense to borrowers.Once again you have a projection that's more optimistic than privateforecasters, [which is a view] that I share. I still think the 7.3 or7.4 percent bond yield is much too high to be consistent with what isembodied in a [forecast of] 5.8 percent nominal GNP growth, [out] overa year and a half or so [unintelligible]. From this point how do yousort that out if we get a further substantial downward move in-14-8/18/92intermediate and long rates versus if we get a significant backup andwe give back what we've gained in the last six weeks?MR. STOCKTON. I guess we'd come down pretty strongly on theside that we would imagine that lower intermediate- and long-terminterest rates would be beneficial for overall activity. To be sure,lower interest rates always have an income effect in the householdsector given that the household sector is a net creditor. But as Itried to indicate in my remarks, I think we have seen signs that theinterest-sensitive sectors have responded to lower interest rates andwould do so with greater force if rates were lower. I suppose abackup in long-term rates, assuming that the backup occurred forreasons other than purely inflation expectation reasons--MR. JORDAN. Are you saying that even though this forecast issomewhat weaker--and I read it to be weaker than the last Greenbook--it is stronger than it would have been if we hadn't had the rally inthe bond market?MR. STOCKTON. Correct, and I think you can see that in theway that the forecast has changed. We have higher equipment spendingin this forecast; we have some upward tilt now to net exports that wedidn't have before and a little better consumer durables expenditures.But that has been offset in part by a bleaker outlook for the stateand local sector and, given that we think the starting point here isweaker in some sense, weaker consumption outside of durable goods.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for thesegentlemen? If not, who would like to start our tour de table?[President Boehne.]MR. BOEHNE. I think "economic anemia" is how I woulddiagnose the Third District economy. Retailing is listless;manufacturing growth seems to be slowing; bank lending is soft. Thereis some activity in residential housing at the low end but not a lotin other areas. Commercial real estate has several more years ofadjustment ahead. The District economy has settled into a slow-growthrut and the attitudes reflect that. People seem to think things willimprove at some point, but the economy is just in that slow-growthpattern.At the national level, it's very hard to find a sector thatis going to act as an engine for a faster recovery. It's certainlynot in exports; it's not in investment; it's not in consumption; it'snot in government. I think we're just in a long, slow, correctivephase to the credit excesses and overbuilding of previous years.Clearly, as all forecasters are aware, this corrective phase will giveway to faster growth at some point, but I think we need a lot ofhumility in forecasting just when that is going to be. My own gutfeeling is that this corrective phase is going to last even longerthan the Greenbook expects and that inflation correspondingly will beless than the Greenbook expects. I think the role of monetary policyin this environment is quite limited; we can stretch out thecorrective phase, but we can't eliminate the need for it. If we geteven slower growth than we have now or if growth appears to be headingnegative, I think we would have little choice but to respond. But ouroptions are really not all that plentiful at the moment.-15-8/18/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, economic conditions in the Westappear to have deteriorated further since our last meeting.Employment fell in June in all Twelfth District states except Utah.The number of jobs fell especially sharply in the state of California,at an annualized rate of 5.4 percent. And California employmentremained weak in July, rising only slightly. California's budgetproblems are going to be yet another source of weakness in thistroubled area. The implementation of the new budget--whenever itcomes--will have a much greater negative impact than the stalemateitself. Most of the $8 billion plus budget shortfall will be resolvedthrough cuts in spending by state and local governments and schools,which will further weaken the state economy. Now, in addition to the$8 billion plus [shortfall], we have a $2 billion carryover from theprior year which is why in Part II of the Greenbook there is areference to about $11 billion. But there's another interesting pointto be made, and that is that the estimate of the deficit for thecurrent fiscal year is based upon a forecast that is old. They aregoing to be making a new forecast in a week or so and that's likely toshow an even larger budget problem--probably $2 billion above thecurrent estimate of the problem for this fiscal year. There is atremendous incentive for agreement in the next week so they don't haveto deal with the $2 billion problem that at this point is unofficial.Lawmakers from both parties are strenuously opposed to increasingstate taxes, although fees at the state's universities have beenraised substantially and some tax increases by local governments arepossible as well.Turning to the national economy, we continue to forecast amoderate expansion with most of the strength coming from sectors thatare sensitive to interest rates and also to exchange rates. Ourprojection is somewhat stronger than that in the Greenbook, largely asa result of more inventory investment and also somewhat slower growthin imports. With activity continuing to fall below the economy'scapacity, we expect further downward pressure on the inflation rate.In our opinion consumer price inflation is likely to fall from 3percent this year to around 2-1/2 percent next year. While thisscenario seems like a reasonable one, there clearly are downside risksto the real economy. As has been noted, the expected moderateexpansion has seemed likely for a year now and has so far failed tomaterialize. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What is the latest status of thesevouchers or other IOUs that the state government is handing out?MR. PARRY. Well, the problem now is that quite a few of thelarge financial institutions are unwilling to accept them.Consequently that means that some people who are receiving vouchers ineffect have to stick them in the top drawer until they can be cashedin after a budget agreement or they can be given to an institutionthat will accept them or be returned to the state. For example, somebusinesses--I don't think this is very widespread--that receive moneyfrom the state because they sell things to the state are making theirsales tax payments with these vouchers.MR. BLACK. Including the 5 percent interest on them, Isuppose?8/18/92MR. PARRY. Well, it depends on what the market is at thatpoint. If they are just giving them the face value, then the statewould in effect be picking up the 5 percent return.MR. SYRON. Are they in M12?MR. PARRY. I'm not sure where exactly they are!MR. BLACK. Well, they ought to have some value on accruedinterest I would assume.MR. PARRY. Oh, they would. And the market, if you were tobuy them, would reflect that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If the state treasurer were smart, hewouldn't accept them; it's lousy paper! [Laughter]MR. BLACK. That would seem a right unwelcomed message tosend out.MR. LINDSEY. Given that there's this large stock out there,does everyone come in and redeem them the same day? If so, where doesthe state get the money?MR. ANGELL. They are interest-bearing notes.MR. PARRY. Well, the budget agreement presumably raisesfunds to meet all expenditures, including expenditures now being made.MR. LINDSEY. But the flow of that savings is over 12 months.MR. PARRY. The only thing that's not in the budget as arevenue source I assume--and maybe it's being built in--is the accruedinterest as these are held over a period of time. So, I think themoney is there; there may be some timing differences. I don't see aproblem unless I'm missing something.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, in terms of economic activity inthe District, really there has been very little change since the lastmeeting. Some sectors are doing a little better but others not quiteso well.Much of the District's focus continues to be on the autosector which has declined just a bit since the last meeting. Thethird-quarter production schedules, which earlier seemed prettystrong, have been reduced quite substantially, principally due to GM'scutback. Whereas originally the third-quarter schedules were set atabout 18 percent over the third-quarter 1991 levels, they now havebeen reduced to about 11 percent [over the year-earlier level]. Wewould expect the effect of the auto sector, which earlier might havehad an effect on third-quarter GDP of about 1 percent, to be reducedto about 1/2 percent. The fourth-quarter production schedules haven'tbeen announced for all the manufacturers, but one I talked to hasreduced its sales forecast for the fourth quarter from 14 million atan annual rate to 13-1/2 million. They feel in their case that theproduction risk is definitely on the down side.-17-8/18/92Retail sales in the area continue to be very tough;merchandise will move but only at discounted prices. And the pricingtechniques have become very, very aggressive. At least one retailerthat I talked to had a pretty good early part of July; at the end ofthe month things turned sour and the lower sales levels have continuedinto August. Offsetting this, though, the steel business continues tobe pretty good. The industry is operating at a rate of about 82percent. One large Midwestern manufacturer is higher than that, atabout 85 percent, and they now expect shipments for the year to comein at about 82 million tons, which in a comparative sense is not thatbad a year. Part of the strength is based on lower imports. Theindustry, as you know, is involved in an effort to deal with tariffs,and that is having an effect; but also the export business has beenpretty good. The heavy truck business also is showing some favorablesigns. The order flow for Class A units has improved and customersfor these units are feeling pretty good about their business. Theindustry expects to ship about 120,000 to 125,000 Class A units thisyear; that's up from 100,000 last year. Indeed, the current orderrate is a little higher than that, and they expect the order rate tocome out at the end of the year at about 140,000 units.The residential housing business is also quite strong. Newsingle-family home sales in the Midwest have been stronger than thenational average. Housing starts on a seasonally adjusted basis,though down in the second quarter from an unusually strong firstquarter, are still above levels for 1991. And given the reduction inmortgage rates, I think the attitudes about residential housing arepretty good.In the agricultural sector, we've had a very significantchange from the last meeting. We had plenty of rain in July and earlyAugust and at this point the crop outlook is really excellent. Cropprices reflect that; they're down quite significantly. And thatnegative effect on farm income is showing up in the sales ofagricultural equipment. That industry is really having a very toughyear: For example, year-to-date sales of 4-wheel drive tractors aredown 37 percent; sales of large tractors are down 32 percent; andsales of combines are down about 36 percent. So, productionschedules, which had already been reduced, are being reduced further.One large manufacturer expects that their fourth-quarter productionschedules will be about 20 percent lower than last year.On the inflation side, the news continues to improve. Upwardprice pressures just aren't part of anyone's thinking. Largemanufacturers are putting tremendous pressure on their suppliers. Inmany cases, they are holding [down] price increases on their purchasesto very low levels and in a couple of cases they actually are gettingreductions. The pattern of prices on purchases over the last two orthree years really has been very, very favorable.While in an economic sense, in terms of the indicators, thenews in the Midwest and indeed nationally is a bit mixed, I must saythat I think there has been a deterioration in mental attitudes. Manyof the people I talk to seem awfully grim. The uncertainty and thenegative outlook are beginning to creep into business thinking and,therefore, I think the risks here are a bit on the down side. Usingthe analogy of the slow takeoff--and I think we've been experiencingthis slow takeoff for an awfully long time--my worry is that we're-18-8/18/92reaching the end of the runway. And in a policy sense, I think webetter push forward on the throttle until we're sure we are clear offthe ground.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We've seen someslowing in the already modest pace of recovery in the Southeast, andthe anecdotal information has become even less encouraging in recentweeks than it had been. The litany of bad news would go somethinglike this: Consumer spending was not as strong in July as in previousmonths and auto sales in particular, which had shown some improvement,have been quite mixed in the last several weeks; manufacturers arereporting that both production and shipment levels have plateauedrecently and fewer firms are reporting increases in new orders andshipments; and bank lending is very weak, and [the explanation] is onthe demand side basically. Incidentally, on David Mullins's questionrelated to mortgage financing, the anecdotal information available tome would suggest that while there has been a great spurt inrefinancing in the Sixth District, very little of that is going intonew home purchases. Growth in home sales and building hasdecelerated, as I've just indicated. Multi-family and commercialconstruction remain pretty grim; they're in the doldrums. One brightspot--and perhaps it's the only one in the District--is that businesstravel and tourism are up; that's basically in response to the airfareprice wars. But that, of course, is coming at great expense to theairlines, which are a significant employer in the District. Foreigntravel continues to be pretty good, too, as a result of the lowerdollar.So, in general, a slowdown appears to be in train in theSixth District. While some optimism was evident just a few monthsago, attitudes about the future have become quite negative or, to usethe words somebody else just used, quite grim. Business people areseeing growing evidence of caution among consumers. And amongconsumers, there's a belief that the ongoing wave of consolidationsand cost-cutting will lead to further layoffs even in industries thathad been perceived to be recession-proof. So, in this environmentvery little business expansion is being planned in the region.With respect to the national economy, like many others, wetoo have lowered our forecast for GDP for 1992. We do see a littlestronger near-term growth than the Greenbook but not the accelerationthat the Greenbook has for 1993. Our estimate of unemployment isaround 7 percent at the end of next year; and consistent with thatoutlook, we've lowered our inflation numbers as well. On balance, itseems to me the risks to the forecast are now skewed to the down side.There is a lack of confidence out there and it goes beyond thepolitical uncertainties; and that can further restrain consumerspending in the future. On the export side, perhaps we're gettingsome help from the weaker dollar, but growth among our major tradingpartners could fall short of the forecast given the policies that someof our trading partners appear to be committed to.Since we have lowered our forecasts for both real GDP andinflation, it seems to me that perhaps it's time for us to reconsiderour policy as well. To be sure, there is a lot of stimulus in thesystem, measured by almost every measure except M2. But we've seen-19-8/18/92over the past year or longer that it is taking more easing than we hadexpected to achieve any results. So, I'm of the opinion, Mr.Chairman, that we should at least be open to considering a move towardease. The excess supplies of resources at this point make me doubtthat a significant acceleration in growth would lead quickly toincreased inflation. Having said that about moving toward ease, Ialso recognize that this probably is not the week to do it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Unfortunately, I thinkwe're in an increasingly interesting situation here. As far as theDistrict goes, in New England--consistent with what other people havesaid about their parts of the country--we had a little buoyancy beforewe lapsed into a softer state. It's hard to separate all the factorsthat are involved--there are always special factors--but there is noquestion that there's less buoyancy than before. We're not sinkingfast, but there's certainly an increase in people's uneasiness. Someof this may be related to weather. The retail sector has been softafter some earlier encouragement; tourism is not very good. The moodis very gloomy, particularly as we get increased announcements oflayoffs and further restructuring in employment. The tone of thelabor market seems to have softened more recently, even I would say inthe health care sector, which is one area where there had beensignificant [employment] increases. Looking at the manufacturingsector, the source of strength before was exports and to some extent[unintelligible] supplies for autos, but those are softening now. Inhousing, there is quite a lot of refinancing activity and somemarginal improvement in ordered housing--certainly not houses built onspeculation--but not very much.The banking side is interesting. Our institutions haveimproved their balance sheets a fair amount and they are taking a moreactive stance toward encouraging loan demand. But they're not findingvery much demand. I think some of it may have to do with the need toadjust pricing terms to get back to a longer-term equilibrium. Loanofficers and many senior managers complain of still overly cautiousborrowers; but really we just are not seeing very much demand. Onthat score, just as a side point, it was interesting to look at somedata: When we pulled out New England from the U.S. data, our regioncontributed a fair amount to the softness in loan demand in theNortheast and also to the employment problems.As far as the U.S. economy goes, I'm finding myself in broadagreement with the Greenbook. But if we look at previous forecastsover a substantial period of time, there has been a negativecorrelation in our errors. There's no question that at some pointthis will turn, but one never knows when that turning point will be.Now, I'm not critical of the forecasting process; changes are the[essence] of its nature. But when I look at what is going on, Isimply don't see any cumulating strength at all in the economy. Indifferent periods we see a little contribution from housing or exportsand in some cases manufacturing, but nothing that really is comingtogether to accelerate into a consistent recovery. All of this isconsistent with the notion of all the obstacles in this long, longcycle readjustment that we have, which many people have talked about.Another aspect to this--and I think it's why employment and whathappens on the employment rate are key--is that people are writing-20-8/18/92down their human capital as well as their physical assets. With eachannouncement of further restructuring they say: "Well, you see thisnew [unintelligible] you're talking about, what am I going to dolonger run?" And in my own mind that makes it more difficult for usto have any estimate of what their equilibrium or desired liabilitystructure is going to look like and to know when the saving rate isgoing to return to what they think is a "normal situation." Peopleare very much in flux on this as they watch what is happening in theemployment markets. For that reason, I really have concerns--notabout the technical aspects of the forecast but looking at theforecast from a broader perspective--about how even this wretched andanemic forecast that we have can hold together. For example, aconcern I have is that we think productivity will be a little strongerand we see a lot of continued impetus for restructuring, so theunemployment rate may well increase. As the unemployment rateincreases, that is going to have an effect on people's view of theirwelfare and it could contribute to a further increase in the savingrate. Thus, I'd say that the outcome risks are slightly on the downside, though maybe not in a pronounced way. And certainly in my ownmind the costs of an error one way or the other are much greater ifthe error is on the down side.The second reason to question whether this forecast canhappen--and there's nothing we can do about this--is that if you lookat the broad society and the body politic, there is an increasedimpetus from either party for some sort of fiscal package, which isalmost certain to be counterproductive in a long-run sense. I justthink as we get into next year, regardless of who wins the election,that there's going to be an enormous amount of discontent with peoplesaying they are just not going to accept a situation where we havevery slow economic growth. There are a lot of people who are very,very concerned about their economic welfare in the long run. I'm notsure what we can do about this, but I see a lot of stimulus for[politicians] to develop fiscal packages, and that's a concern I have.I don't think our policy has been inappropriate; I think it has beenappropriate. But I believe we're in a very, very tough situation;indeed, it's what I consider in a broader sense perhaps a somewhatunstable situation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Our District continues to show sluggish growthin most sectors except for real estate construction in some areas. Asfor the farm economy, it's stable but as you've heard elsewhere pricesare down and that is bringing the prospects for our ag sector towardthe down side as we go forward; there may even be a decrease in [farm]income depending on what the near-term future holds. Manufacturing inour District is flat. The aircraft industry is feeling the effects ofslumping foreign sales. Our auto industry is not pushing productionat all and that is showing through. In energy, we have had somepickup in the rig count, but that is a very sluggish industry and weare not going to see much economic activity coming from that sector.As far as the real estate area goes, our residential sector does showsome strength. There is a considerable amount of refinancing. But weare also seeing new construction in some parts of our District,particularly in Denver where what is almost a boom situation inresidential housing gives us some pause.-21-8/18/92I would add a couple of anecdotal points. We have talkedwith bankers in our region and we also hear and observe that theproblem is not that they are unwilling to make loans but [that thereis little] demand for loans. But that is a very unique situation.Beyond that, though the banks will say demand [is the problem], wheretheir [loans] have picked up or they want to add [loans], they havechanged their underwriting on the margin--how many guarantees and howmuch collateral they require. In one instance when they did that weobserved that they were able to add significant amounts of loans, someof it taken from other banks who wouldn't change their underwriting.I'm not talking necessarily about throwing out all caution, but justthat some changes will make a difference. I think banks in our regionas they anticipate the need to bring their capital levels up arekeeping their underwriting standards higher than they might otherwiseand are trying to build those capital levels; and it is showingthrough in terms of the level of their lending activity.As far as the national economy goes, we have some differenceswith the Greenbook quarter-to-quarter, but overall our GDP projectionsare now similar. We've adjusted ours down and we've adjusted ourinflation expectations down as well. I see the national economy, withthe things that are going on right now, in a sluggish mode, and as Ilisten to comments here I think we can anticipate furthersluggishness. The situation does in fact suggest that perhaps we needto take a more forceful action.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, a while ago Si Keehn's analogy ofan airplane reminded me of another mechanical analogy that I think isvery pertinent here. In the days when we first began to installantipollution equipment on automobiles I used to get terriblyfrustrated trying to get the car started and running very smoothly.I've been experiencing the same sort of feeling about the economy withits fits and starts and near stalls. But eventually we usually didget the car to run pretty smoothly, and I'm satisfied that sooner orlater we're going to have the economy moving up at a smoother pace.But I do think the downward revision that the staff has made in theforecast over the remainder of 1992 is clearly appropriate in view ofthe lackluster growth we've had in the economy since the end of thefirst quarter. My guess is that the risks of errors are about evenlydivided between the up side and the down side. On the down side, forexample, many of the factors that have been plaguing us in therecovery in recent months--such as the negative impact of thiscorporate restructuring, which I think augurs well for the long runbut is terribly painful in the short run--are still around. But itdoes mean increasing efficiency in the long run. And I think the risein productivity probably means a higher long-term growth potentialthan the 2 percent the staff is estimating. We also have the slowingin defense expenditures; we have situations abroad where the economiesare not really growing very fast; we have the oversupply of officespace and other commercial real estate. And maybe even more importantin the minds of the consumer, there are a lot of non-economic worriessuch as crime and drugs and the breakdown of family values that Ithink have been making people less inclined to part with their dollarsthan they otherwise would be. I believe this sort of thing is goingto be with us for quite a while and is going to exert a drag oneconomic activity in the period ahead, and the weight of the drag-22-8/18/92could even increase. Of course, in addition to that we have theweakness in M2. We've explained a lot of that, I think, but I stillhave a nagging worry that there's some weakness there that we'rereally not explaining away by these special factors.But then one can look at the up side of this and say thatthere are at least some signs now that this might turn into a typicalrecovery--albeit a much less rapid recovery than we've usually had--because of the decline in interest rates, which eventually I think isgoing to stimulate housing. My expectations got a little setback withthe data released this morning. Certainly, sales of durable goods atthe consumer level and also of producers durable equipment are goingto be one of the stronger parts in the recovery when it comes. Andthat, of course, will stimulate jobs and economic growth. But havingsaid that, I think it is important for us to recognize that there's abig downside risk and it's very serious. I'm getting at the same sortof thing that Dick Syron was talking about a while ago.If these reduced Greenbook expectations turn out to be true,this could be pretty serious in terms of jeopardizing our strategy forgetting to our long-term objectives. We need to give that someconsideration in our setting of short-term policy goals today. Now,in the case of the long-term objective, I think the staff's estimateof the inflationary outlook is [about right]; we will certainly bemoving closer to our goal by the end of 1994. That's obviously veryencouraging to someone who thinks that the prime goal of monetarypolicy ought to be price stability. But in the context of the staff'soutlook, it seems to me that this further progress is dependent uponcontinued sluggishness of any projected recovery even as far out asthe second half of 1994. Maybe this continued softness is necessaryin order to get inflation down further. But my own guess is that wecan get the same kind of inflation results with stronger real growthin late 1993 and in 1994 if we maintain a visible commitment to ourlong-term objective of price stability, despite the current weaknessin the economy. And I think we ought not miss any chances to say thatthat is our ultimate long-term goal even though we recognize that wehave some short-term problems on the side of weakness in the economyright now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. There was a definite shift in the EleventhDistrict economy between the first and the second quarters, both interms of economic activity and of mood. Measuring economic activityin terms of employment growth, in the first quarter of this year ouremployment was growing faster than the national average and in thesecond quarter employment was shrinking and not keeping up with thenational average. We have shifted from being a source of strength tothe national economy to being a source of weakness. As for mood, inconversations with directors, bankers, and business people there isthe definite sense that all is not well with the economy, althoughmost people are not urging further ease of monetary policy. I believethe view is that monetary policy has done its thing; it hasn't beenvery effective but we don't find many people thinking that furtherreductions in short-term interest rates will help very much. That'stheir view on the one hand, but in addition to that there isincreasingly the cry from those who are aware of lower interest incomeand the impact that is having on a significant segment of the-23-8/18/92population. On the question of mood, let me say that I've been arounda number of bankers recently, more than usual, and I'd just like toreport that they are a very unhappy, mad bunch of people. They feelbeleaguered--especially the small banks. They recognize the FDICIAlegislation as punitive legislation and they are really dreading theregulations that are going to come out of that. And they don't seeany light at the end of the tunnel; they feel that they're in abusiness that is going down the toilet and nobody cares. Theirnumbers in the context of measures of health of banks are improving inthe District. But after all these years of recovering they stillaren't lending; they're still shrinking their lending [activity]. AndI guess they're turning into bond funds; they're riding the yieldcurve right now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With regard to theDistrict economy, I don't detect any underlying change in activity; Ithink it's still expanding quite modestly. There really isn't a lotof additional information to add to that. I might comment on a coupleof recent developments to flesh that out a bit. I reported before onvery strong sales along the northern tier of the District to Canadianscoming across the border. That currently is in the process of slowingdown, apparently because the Canadians are making it more onerous toget back into Canada with everything that one has purchased. But thatwas due to change for one reason or another eventually, and it has.There is a significant expansion in the paper industry under wayagain. A couple of new plants have been approved and constructionwill start shortly if it hasn't already. Finally, you've probablyheard about the so-called "mega mall" that has opened up in thesuburbs of the Twin Cities. It actually opened about a week ago. Sofar, it has exceeded expectations--at least the expectations of thoseof us whose expectations weren't too high. I haven't been out there,but the press reports that traffic has occasionally exceeded 100,000people a day. There have been lines to get into the restaurants andsome of the other entertainment venues and so forth. Whether anybodyis buying anything beyond that I don't know, but at least by somemeasures it's off to a positive start.With regard to the national economy, I'm certainlycomfortable with the contours of the Greenbook forecast. It's alwaysdifficult in a circumstance like this, when you try to do bottom-upforecasting and look at consumption and investment and so forth, totalk yourself into believing that any of these sectors is going to bevery strong in this environment. Yet my experience has been that justwhen I've talked myself into that, the economy surprises me on thehigh side. I have a hunch that isn't going to happen this time. BobBlack gave a pretty good litany of the problems that are restraininggrowth, and I think those are in place. For what it's worth, my guessis that it will probably take longer for those to diminish than wemight expect. So, the general shape of the forecast portrayed in theGreenbook looks like a pretty good estimate to me. The good news, ofcourse, is that the price and cost statistics are starting to come inmore in line with the anecdotal reports we've discussed around herefor quite some time. It seems to me that we've commented for quitesome time that we have talked to a lot of business people and don'thear much about price or wage pressures and so forth and so on. Ittook quite some time for that to show up in the statistics. But now-24-8/18/92it is at least starting to show up in a more convincing way, whichsuggests that we're making some progress in a principal andsignificant area.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. In our District I would say that the same shiftthat Bob McTeer described has occurred statistically. We are lookingnow at June numbers and I would describe the situation as one wherewe've had modest employment growth, manufacturing more or less flat ormaybe slightly negative, and nonmanufacturing offsetting that. Forthe most recent three-month period, we actually have nonmanufacturing[activity] flattening out and modest employment declines. I would saythat one of the areas in nonmanufacturing that is particularly weakfrom an employment point of view is construction and that's reflectedin contracts--residential as well as nonresidential--although comparedto a year ago we're still up very significantly in the residentialarea. Anecdotally, it's hard to place in time when some of this wasdetectable; it may have been a couple months ago. But basically Idon't detect any major shift in sentiment toward the negative. Ispoke with a handful of CFOs of some of our major companies, and inthe retailing area the description I got was the same as what wasmentioned earlier--I forget by whom, maybe Si--that the first coupleof weeks of July were very strong and then sales slowed and [theslowdown] seemed to continue into August. The retailer who passedthat along said to me that they're not sure but they think the Olympiccoverage may have had something to do with that; he likened it to theCNN effect to some extent. Another retailer described things asgenerally volatile. Every time they think things may be comingtogether they have a downturn. From a profitability point of view,the largest of the retailers I've talked to had just reported a verystrong quarter and they got it basically by controlling costs. On themanufacturing side, a major electrical equipment manufacturerdescribed their consumer-driven business as very strong. They, too,reported very strong earnings, largely again a contribution of costcontrols and so forth. I did talk to a chemical manufacturer as well;a lot of their chemical business is driven by the auto business andhousing and that has been generally sluggish, with no particular signsof strength there. The capital goods side is described as sluggish,basically. Order backlogs are holding up but not growing veryrapidly. So, the general picture I get from business people is thatthe environment hasn't changed dramatically.With respect to monetary policy--just picking up on some ofthe comments that have been made, particularly Ed Boehne's in terms ofwhat the role is for monetary policy in this sort of environment--Iagree that monetary policy can't solve some of the structural problemsthat we're dealing with. And at least in my view, whether you look atinterest rates or reserves, we're pursuing a very easy monetary policyright now: Short-term real rates are negative and reserves over thelast two quarters have grown at almost a 17 percent annual ratecompared to a four-year trend of about 4-1/2 percent. I know it's avery difficult period in which to get a handle on the thrust ofmonetary policy, but I think there's a lot of danger in focusing juston the real economy as our guide for what we ought to be doing--andthat seems to be what is happening--and not trying to look at policyfrom some other perspectives. I think we've had some warnings in the-25-8/18/92foreign exchange markets and in long-term credit markets from time-to-time depending on what statements are made--albeit those rates havecome down--that we may be testing the limits of our credibility. Andwe could well find ourselves in a situation here given the season--andI gather some people are looking at the same facts and coming out adifferent door--where we're going to want all the credibility we canget. If we don't have any, since we're the only game in town in thatrespect, we could have some very serious problems.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I'm increasingly concerned aboutwhat I view as the continued deterioration of the economic psychologyof the country. I believe that psychology creates the conflictingsignals which in turn contribute to the sluggish rate of recovery inwhich we find ourselves. Banks continue to be chary of aggressivelending, but their role in a more dramatic growth rate is alsoconstrained by a very slack demand for credit by both consumers andbusinesses. Consumers, or at least a lot of them, are frightened andvery cautious about taking on more debt to step up consumption.Businesses are still involved in balance sheet restructuring toequitize debt or refund debt to reduce debt service [costs]. Thatposture will not change until demand creates confidence in inventoryproduction and capacity expansion. And perhaps more fundamental thanany or all of the above is the sense of the country that we areadrift: That we are in an election year in the midst of domestic andinternational issues which differ from those of a few years ago andperhaps are more worrisome. Stubborn political and humanitarianissues both at home and abroad are frustrating because the diplomatic,economic, and military tools we might have resorted to in the past nolonger are particularly applicable or available, especially in theabsence of fiscal ammunition. And neither candidate has yet given usa clear idea of how he would approach the final solution to theseproblems.In these circumstances, I believe monetary policy is at ajuncture similar to the doctor who has moved his patient intointensive care, shot him full of antibiotics, given him multipletransfusions of whole blood, has an intravenous going with glucose,and is assisting respiration with shots of pure oxygen. The doctorcan now only wait for all of that to take effect. Furtherintervention will probably not change the outcome. Patience isprudent and patience should be our watchword for now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, the last meeting turned out to bea little traumatic for me. After holding forth at some length, Ireversed myself less than 24 hours later on a discount rate vote. Sotoday I'll just try to throw in a quick speculative thought. It seemsto me that we're clearly in the same pattern that we've been in forsome time now: a slow, struggling recovery that has been severelyinhibited by the financial restructuring in both the financial and thenonfinancial sectors. To me so far--I would emphasize "so far"--thisrecovery has been going along at a pace that may be a bitdisappointing; nevertheless, it's still acceptable because it seems tome that the long-term health of the economy demands that we get thisrestructuring successfully accomplished. In my view this financial-26-8/18/92 -27-restructuring was going to happen and it could have been a great dealmore traumatic than it is given the way things have evolved so far. Ithink we may be able to see in retrospect that monetary policy hasbeen very effective indeed over the course of this era that we're inrather than ineffective as some have alleged.Two things seem to be evolving and I'm hearing both of themaround the table this morning. One is that the timing of thisbreakout to a higher level of growth seems to be getting stretchedout. The second quarter was weaker than a lot of us had hoped itwould be; the third quarter now looks as if it will be weaker than wehad hoped, too. I think most of us are reducing our forecast for thefourth quarter. We haven't started lowering the first-quarterforecast yet, but we'll see about that! The second point is that wemay be making more progress on inflation than many of us had everdared to hope. Year-over-year [measures of] the CPI began to breakaround year-end 1990 and the first quarter of 1991 when we wentthrough that recession period. The core CPI in the year 1990according to the Greenbook was 5.3 percent; and the Greenbook projects1994 at 2.5 percent even considering two back-to-back 3 percent growthyears. So far, the history has been that in the first quarter of 1991year-over-year the core CPI was at about 5-3/4 percent; now it's at3-3/4 percent. That's a 200 basis points decline in the core rate ofinflation over 18 months, and I think that's pretty impressive.Clearly, the very slow growth period and the increase in unemploymentand the concern in the country that we've been experiencing has had anawful lot to do with that. Trying to put those together lookingforward, it seems to me that if this sluggishness does continue tostretch out for a very long period of time, we may need to askourselves if we are beginning to be in danger of our disinflationtrend overshooting and actually becoming a deflation, which couldconceivably have pretty serious downside implications. I continue tobelieve that it's very important that this financial restructuring becompleted. A great deal of progress is being made and I'm comfortablethat our policy so far has been about right. We've been doing prettyrespectably at balancing the needs for a lot of this restructuring towork through and still have as healthy an economy as possible. Buthaving said that, I think this period does have to come to aconclusion at some appropriate point lest it start to feed on itselfwith some serious downside potential. That could turn out to be theissue that we're going to be grappling with a little later in theyear, though probably not just yet.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. Well, after listening to Bob Parry's report, itsounds as if I chose a very good time to leave California! It alsoturns out to have been a good time to go to the Midwest. If I were togo through and talk about sectors and industries we've been in contactwith, it would sound very similar to what Si Keehn has said. There'sreally no difference there. The manufacturing area is doing quitewell, much better than the nation as a whole in terms of employment.Industrial production, whether it's trucking or auto-related, is doingwell. Residential housing, which I think is related to people'sconfidence and jobs, is very positive. Some areas in east Kentuckythat had suffered very greatly for a long time in the '80s havevirtually boom conditions now, with 4 percent unemployment, and aredoing quite well. Agriculture had come through two very bad years and8/18/92farmers were very worried coming into this season. But we're gettingsuch good volume numbers that it's dominating the price effects, andeven the ag sector bankers are much better these days. In spite ofall of that, attitudes remain lousy. When I confront individuals,especially nonbank business people but to some extent the smallbankers as well, and ask why, they keep telling me about good numbersand then complain. They cite the political situation, mainly at thenational level but sometimes at the state level. Companies continueto report: "My numbers are good, my orders are up, my sales are good,I've cut my costs, my profits are at a record, and I feel lousy aboutit." And they don't see much that can help them.I have been struck by the difference in attitudes aboutinflation between the bank and the nonbank sectors. The nonbank sidetells us that inflation is simply not an issue. Large and smallbusinesses are saying that they have no expectation of raising theirprices. It's a question of what the smallest declines are that theycan get away with and if they can match the price pressure they'refeeling with productivity gains and other cost reductions. One majorcompany advises a great many smaller companies in the District andnationally and has told them all that any well-run business can reduceits prices by a percent given the gains in current productivity. Theysay they only want to buy from well-run businesses, so everybodyshould come in with bids that are no more than 5 percent less thanbefore or else they shouldn't bother bidding. The bankers, though,continue to worry about inflation. Whether they're citing declines inshort-term interest rates from easy policy or the fiscal side, whichis more often the case, they're persistent in believing that inflationis heading back up and, with that, interest rates. When I asked ifthere was anything we could do to persuade them differently, they said"no." They're just not willing to be persuaded. The bankers willtell us that commercial loan demand is weak but consumer loan demand,especially for auto financing, is very strong throughout the District.One of the positive things that I see happening in theadjustment process is that bankers in their search for lendingopportunities are finding some very innovative ways throughout theDistrict for doing minority housing lending, including enlisting theclergy as loan officers--conducting seminars and teaching them how toevaluate people's financials--and then making contributions to thereligious organizations for every loan that is based on that. Theyalso are reducing the amount they contribute on a formula based ondelinquencies or default. A lot of volume is being generated by theactivity, with a lot of good sentiment developing in the communitiesabout how available the bankers are for exploring opportunities to dothat kind of lending.One major home improvement supplier said that we have anational boom going; people who aren't doing anything else areapparently remodeling their homes. And that is consistent with astory that I could take as another very positive development. Therewas an article saying that people, in a search for alternatives towhat were characterized as the lousy yields one gets at the bank, inaddition to doing home improvements are trying to start up newbusinesses. They gave a lot of examples of people opening restaurantsor engaging in other distribution-type or light manufacturingactivities because it's better than just leaving the money in the bank-28-8/18/92earning 2 percent. And I would think that that is part of theadjustment process we would expect from price stability.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll start out by saying that whileI agree with a lot of what John LaWare said, I'd make an argument thatat the very least the patient is out of intensive care. I think wehave made some progress. As far as the national outlook is concerned,our people see it pretty much as their Board staff associates do withthe one exception, as has already been discussed, being theunemployment rate. And that, as has been suggested, is probably acrapshoot. Our people have it more in the 7-1/2 percent range at theend of next year. But the point is that regardless of whether it's 7percent or something north of 7 percent, even taking the Board staff'sforecast means nine consecutive quarters in which the unemploymentrate will have been 7 percent or higher. There have been multiplecomments about the gloomy atmosphere and, obviously, that[unemployment rate] in itself has a lot to do with it. A number ofpeople have directly or indirectly touched on what is called a verybroad political landscape; undoubtedly that has something to do withit too. But whatever weight one wants to put on those or otherfactors, I think the tone is pretty darn sour out there.In terms of some of the underlying issues, the budget outlookeven without any new magic is actually worse in the out years; on thebasis of these latest figures some of that obviously reflects thelevel of economic activity itself, but it's not just the level ofeconomic activity. A number of people have said that the inflationoutlook is better; it is. A number of people have also said thatprice increases are not on the horizon or the radar scope for anybody,especially in manufacturing. I guess that's true except for the autoindustry. I never quite understand those guys!On the anecdotal side and the District side, I wish I hadsome brilliant new insight to offer but I don't. It's really justmore of the same. I do think, as everybody has said one way oranother, that we have this Catch-22 situation: Productivity isbetter, profits are better, and costs are better; but in part becausethose things are better, employment is worse, income is worse, andattitudes are worse. I think that to a very large degree is a resultof cumulative pressures. My own sense of it, trying to put it alltogether, is that on net the risks are about balanced. That's aboutall I have to say, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I would agree with the notion that has beenexpressed by a number of people that we're probably stuck in the sameold ditch for a while, rocking back and forth trying to gain themomentum to escape the gravitational pull of this deleveragingphenomenon. I don't really have a serious argument with theGreenbook, although there is the question of the timing of our escapefrom this. I do wonder whether or not we are in a lurching patternwith two steps forward and one step back as opposed to a steadyprogression and gradual acceleration. I don't know how to write downa lurching pattern in the forecast. That's the difficult part, so Iwouldn't argue with that. I tend to think the next lurch is likely to-29-8/18/92be a bit forward, although I'm not so certain about that given thepolitical climate. But I wouldn't be surprised to see third-quarter[GDP growth] a bit better than 2 percent following the reduction inlong bond rates and our [interest] rate cuts. We have another roundof mortgage refinancing going. Even if housing activity hasn't pickedup, we've already seen some revival of retail sales, especially thediscretionary GAF category. So, we might have a little better thirdquarter than the Greenbook projects. I still think we are likely tobe stuck in the range of 1-1/2 to 2-1/2 percent growth for theforeseeable future until these balance sheet adjustments aresufficiently far along to allow sustained growth in spending or untilthis upward ratcheting process pushes employers beyond the limits ofincreasing production hours and overtime and into some hiring and someincome growth. We continue to have the logic of pent-up demandwaiting allegedly in the wings to be unleashed. But on the other sidewe also have the risk of cautious consumers increasing their savingrate. At this stage we have very little rigorous insight into howlong we will be stuck in the sluggish growth rut or the trajectory onwhich we will emerge.We are getting some G-7 companionship, as Ted mentioned, inthis condition. Some countries are climbing out of recession intosluggish growth and others are descending from healthy growth. It isinteresting to see the process of convergence among the G-7 nationswith real growth in '92 converging in most countries to 1-1/2 percent,inflation at around 2 to 3 percent, and unemployment in the 8 to 10percent range. And just as we have no U.S. sector to provide anengine, we seem to have no G-7 country as an engine. Fortunately,we're making progress on that, which might be useful at the margin.Focusing on the near term, I do think we have another shot ofstimulus in the pipeline as reinforced by the reduction in the longbond rate, which has descended barely through the lows of earlyJanuary. The dollar has also descended. So, near term we have somestimulus. This could be just another pig in the python working itsway through the system which, once digested, will leave a hungryeconomy in need of another feeding. That is the Arkansas version ofthe Chairman's seize-up model! [Laughter]MR. LAWARE. They have pythons in Arkansas?MR. MULLINS. They have a lot of pigs! [Laughter] So, it'sunclear at this stage whether that is what is going on or whether weare getting on a more stable recovery [path].I do agree that the disinflation trend is starting to takehold. Two years ago, as I mentioned last time, the unemployment ratewas 5-1/2 percent and manufacturing capacity utilization was 83percent. Unemployment didn't break out of the 5 percent range untilthe fourth quarter of 1990 and capacity utilization didn't break below80 percent until the first quarter of 1991. So, we've had about ayear and half of this slack and I think it's taking hold. We see itnot only in the numbers on wage inflation and the CPI and PPI, but wesee it in consumer attitudes. I think there is a new ethos of bargainhunting which has reflected on business in a healthy way. I wouldagree with the comments that businesses are gradually, and I would saygrudgingly, accepting cost-cutting and productivity improvement as thestatus quo and a steady-state approach to business, rather than-30-8/18/92restructuring and a brief painful period followed by price increasesas the way to go. So, I think that is good news. Commodity pricesalso continue to exhibit no signs of price pressure. Gold attempted abrief breakout recently, you might have noticed, but then collapsed.I think we're likely on the threshold of some real progress here and,again, the reduction in long-term rates suggests this as well. Iwould point out, though, that despite the consumer bargain hunting,inflationary expectations among consumers as expressed in surveys suchas the Michigan survey have not come down much. Those expectationsare still very high in the 3 percent range, at around 3.9 percent.And the 5- to 10-year inflation expectation is about 5 percent, sothat's still relatively high.In terms of the market view of inflation, our 10-year rate,which is the international long rate, is now only 6-1/2 percent. It's150 basis points below the German 10-year rate of 8 percent and thatlooks pretty good. Unfortunately, the 10-year rate is influenced bythe shape of that yield curve and is heavily weighted by the short-endrates included in that. So, our 10-year rate is weighted down by theshort end; the German rate is weighted up by their short end. If youlook at the 1-year implicit forward rate 10 years out, the German rateis about 7-1/2 percent and ours is about 8-1/2 percent. So, our10-year forward rate viewed at the end of that 10-year period is stillabout 100 basis points above the German rate. So, on consumerinflation and in the capital markets we may have a ways to go.I think it would be interesting to try to assess the currentstance of monetary policy. While that's interesting, I don't havemuch insight into it. There's not much new to say. I view realshort-term rates as low, as around zero. I wouldn't quibble with aview that they were marginally negative. If we do get more progresson inflation expectations, we may revisit that issue to see whetherthere isn't a case for an adjustment of nominal rates, but I would notmake such a case now. M2 in the current environment is very littlehelp. We have attained some insight into the distortion caused by theyield curve, and it seems to me we can adjust analytically for thatdistortion by in effect adding back the M2 that has been pulled out ofthe yield curve to see what a corrected M2 would look like. If you dothat exercise, you find that this corrected M2 still has been growingprobably at 2 to 2-1/2 percent since the fourth quarter; it's stillnear the lower bound. So, that distortion does not explain all theslow growth, nor would I believe that all that disintermediation yieldcurve effect is benign. I think it may have some impact. The creditchannel I believe is important, not just the money channel. You canalso, of course, just add back the growth of the [institution-only]money funds; that would get M2 growth up to about 4 percent. When Ilook at those figures I don't see a case [for arguing] that we're tooeasy in those terms. A more direct approach is to look at nominal GDPtargeting; we have been experiencing and are projecting very lowgrowth in nominal GDP. Still, it seems to me that it's very hard tomake a case that there's compelling evidence the economy isconstrained by an overly restrictive monetary stance or lack ofliquidity or rates that are too high. So, I think it's quitedifficult to gauge effectively the stance of policy. Perhaps thisdoes lend credence to the Chairman's alternative model of an economyresponding to liquidity shocks rather than to a stable relationshipwith the monetary stance in a traditional sense.-31-8/18/92The other thing I would say is that in this environment Iwould agree with those who continue to argue that there are concernsabout going too far. I don't believe we have the ability to pursueaggressive fine-tuning effectively or to respond to a blip in theunemployment rate and avoid a bad quarter. That may sound odd sincewe've come from 10 percent down to 3-1/4 percent on the fed fundsrate; that sounds like contra-cyclical policy. But I think theeconomy in the late '80s was growing rapidly, fed by debt andleveraging; and that process went into reverse to deleveraging andfinancial contraction. And it's wholly appropriate for the nominalrate structure to decline dramatically just to maintain an appropriatestance of monetary policy, which is not overly restrictive but isstill consistent with progress toward price stability. I think thatis what we've done in that adjustment. We haven't yet gone too far.If we do go too far, with the long and variable lags in monetarytransmission mechanisms and the unreliable navigational aid of M2, weobviously risk losing an opportunity it has taken years to earn. So,that's something to be wary of.A final reason to be concerned about our near-term policy isthe long list of potential shocks and risks in the currentenvironment. Bob Black presented the litany of restraints. I'd justlike to mention some of the potential shocks and risks. We havemilitary situations--potential military action in Iraq and Bosnia-Herzegovina--fragility in markets in Japan, weakness in the economies,markets, and foreign exchange relationships in Europe, and in theUnited States we have the dollar, the election, and of course thestock market. Moreover, I'm not at all sure we are completely out ofthe woods with regard to some of our large financial institutions.So, one argument is that these are downside risks to be concernedabout; another is that we might save a little ammunition. Overall,the early returns on the July move are encouraging, especially interms of the response of the long-term rate and another round ofrefinancing under way, which can help reduce [financial] burdens andaccelerate the adjustments. I think we should continue to learn aboutthis unusual economic environment, to do research into the forces atwork here, and to work at understanding them. I would also argue thatwe need to be mindful of the risks, and I agree with those who suggestthat the risks remain tilted toward the down side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you. On the one hand there has beensome progress in the sense that I've managed to move myself from thebottom or the last on the list to talking at least before a few otherfolks! On the other hand, and even after listening to the Gipper lastnight, it's a little hard to find the bright spots--or maybe I shouldsay the points of light. The economy and the monetary aggregatesappear to have weakened since our last meeting. Maybe I should saythe monetary aggregates have weakened and then the economy hasweakened. In trying to locate likely sources of strength, I don'tthink we're going to see it from the consumer. Housing may be apotential source of strength, but with the unemployment uncertaintyand because trying to get out of the recession into a strongerrecovery situation has taken so long, it seems to me questionable thathousing is going to provide the spark that we may need. And,certainly, the news from different parts of the country tends to bespotty. Investment spending is a possibility, but again that may be8/18/92somewhat constrained by the retrenching that we're seeing in business,the emphasis on efficiency, and just simply the slowdown in spending.The downward Greenbook revision in GDP for the third quarter isparticularly disturbing in view of the fact that last time we did notassume there would be an easing. What this implies to me is that ithas taken an easing to feed this restructuring process that we've alltalked about and that we've all observed. It appears that it is deep-seated and more widespread than many of us might have thought. As forthe unemployment situation, I tend to wonder whether or not there'smore pain out there in the labor market than is evidenced even by the7.7 percent [unemployment rate]. I cite that because people knowthere is more restructuring to occur; the defense cutback is reallyonly getting started. The fact that it is taking such a long time tomove [along] is protracting some of the pain. And I guess thequestion for us is how satisfied we are with this picture of slowgrowth and an economy that doesn't seem to be generating jobs.So, for me, the risks seem decidedly on the down side. Icertainly recognize the arguments that another easing may not help.On the other hand, the question is: What are the risks of anothereasing? Inflation doesn't appear to be flaring up. And maybe, asGovernor Kelley mentioned, we are approaching the point where we haveto start wondering if we are overshooting. The politics, the press,and the concern about timing are problems only if we make themproblems. That is to say: If we allow ourselves to be dictated bywhatever happens to be going on in a particular week, then it becomesa problem. We have to do what we think is right. And I don't thinkwe should be waiting around for fiscal policy. That is tenuous atbest. So, on balance, it seems to me that since last time the riskshave moved more to the down side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I woke up in a goodmood and then I heard these words: listless, torpid, mixed, slowing,softer, sluggish, shrinking, flat, lousy, and sour. That was thereport. The only good news was from Minneapolis. I read recentlythat TIAA is 40 percent owner of that mall. And given some of thetrash they bought in the First District, I'm glad that at leastsomething is running well. I don't know how much I'm going to stakeon that.I agree with Tom Melzer that we err when we look too much atthe real economy. What I learned was that we were supposed to look atnominal GDP as our ultimate target objective and that money,particularly M2, might be a good intermediate target--which may not betrue so much anymore--but that was only because it was a good guide tonominal GDP. When I look at that, I see we just ended over two yearsof nominal GDP growth at the 4-1/4 percent level and now it's droppingdown to the 3-1/2 percent level at least for two quarters. And 3-1/2percent is summed up as listless, deteriorating, mixed, slow,exhausted, sluggish, etc.; it's lousy. It is a number that is belowany of our forecasts. In my view it should be sending off alarm bellsas to what we are doing to the economy. We cannot control the mixbetween real and inflation, but we can control the sum of the two.And 3-1/2 percent is not the right sum in my mind. With all respectto Dr. LaWare, if I were on the operating table, I wouldn't want tocounsel patience. The patient after all is the U.S. economy. Sitting-33-8/18/92back and waiting for the outcome, when the outcome could be quite bad,is not something I would advise.Therefore, I share the sentiments expressed here that ourlikely next move is a cut in nominal interest rates. The question iswhether to do it now or later. The case for later I think is a goodone. We have all kinds of risks out there in the next three or fourmonths. Bill's report included the possibility that Germany may raisethe Lombard rate. I'm not an expert on this, but my bet would be thatthat will cause a European currency crisis. The French are voting onMaastricht on September 20th; the polls are all moving in thedirection of defeat. As a little follow-up, the Danes recently had apoll last week asking people how they would vote now on Maastricht andit was booted down 57 to 43, an even wider margin. The pound is nowbelow where it was when we were certain that Kinnick would be the nextPrime Minister. The Financial Times Stock Exchange [Index] is down;it has lost all of its gains since the election; there is certainly apossibility of a pound crisis. There's always a possibility of a lirecrisis. The Japanese market is weak, down another 4 percent. Thelikely reaction to that is going to be an easing by the Japanese,which will put downward pressure on the yen. They've reacted to thatby selling dollars and that is not going to help our situation. Wehave our own stock market problem. There is also the possibility ofinstability in any part of the world. I would add to GovernorMullins's list the USSR. We recently had a briefing by a friend ofmine who is an oil market operator and he pointed out that we risk anoil supply shock due to unrest in the USSR. That certainly has notbeen factored into the market. So, those are all reasons to wait.The best reason to [move] now I thought was summed up in Bill[McDonough's] report. The best time to act is when we surprise themarkets. And because everyone "knows" we would never act this week,that may be the best time to act. I am agnostic on when we're goingto act, but I would give long odds that the proper next move will be acut.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I wanted to hear all the news and I agree thatGovernor Lindsey has summarized it pretty well. There is almost atotal lack of anyone who thinks the economy really is going to gocharging ahead, and maybe that's the best news there is. I've hadsuch low nominal GNP forecasts for so long that I'm glad finally tohave some company with forecasts the same as mine. I think you'reright also, Governor Lindsey, in looking at the international arena.That's not something we can control. Yet the U.S. dollar is still themajor reserve currency for the world and the U.S. dollar is affectedby activities that take place in the world. Even though the goodsmarkets may be very imperfect, with a lot of protectionist devices outthere, the capital markets are not imperfect and they do move veryquickly. When we look at the question of whether or not thedisinflation in the United States has gone too far and whether we aremoving into deflation, the fact of the matter is that wholesale pricesaround the world on a year-over-year rate of change basis indicatemuch more disinflation as do prices in other G-10 countries than doprices in the United States. Of course, in Japan [prices havedeclined] year-over-year; but even in Germany, with the Bundesbankworried about inflation, the year-over-year change in wholesale prices-34-8/18/92is lower than ours and very close to zero. It even looks as if theUnited Kingdom's disinflation rate is such that their year-over-yearchange in wholesale prices might slide under ours in a couple ofmonths. Our year-over-year change in wholesale prices at 1.8 percentjust doesn't show what I would call disinflation turning intodeflation. So, I don't see how we can build the story that we're in adeflationary environment.Clearly, we're in an environment in which economic conditionsare very sluggish. To me this is to be expected. It seems to me thatAmerican households should want to alter their balance sheets and toincrease their saving rate. And it seems to me that there is someprospect that the saving rate before we get to 1994 might move upbeyond 5 percent from the low of 4 percent that we had a few yearsago. We've seen it move on up to 5 percent and I think it quitelikely could move up to 5-1/2 percent before 1994. That would meanthen that the source of our growth would not be from the consumersector as we might expect. As we look at the patient, Dr. LaWare,maybe we ought not just be patient but monitor a few things as we goalong. I think we ought to monitor commodity prices and see thatcommodity prices do not turn downward. Gold has quite often ledcommodity prices; gold has bounced around some and is now in somewhatof a downward mode. I don't think we ought to ignore that leadingsignal which might be more important at this point than M2 in terms ofour seeing where we're going. Frankly, if the price of gold were totake another strong leg down, I'm not sure but I might join GovernorLindsey in regard to where we ought to go. But I do believe that weneed to be on a very secure price level stability base before we makethe next easing move because, if the world doesn't know that we arecommitted to price level stability and we ease in that environment, werisk destabilizing financial markets around the world. GovernorPhillips says: What do we have to lose? There's not much danger thatthe inflation the bankers are worried about is going to come chargingback. But I do think in the environment that we're in that we couldvery well destabilize international capital markets and we mightunderstand that the notion of sour is a whole lot better with the DOWat 3320 than if the DOW were losing 200 points a day. So, I thinkthere's some strength out there. In addition to commodity prices, Iwant to monitor M2. I think M2 in the coming months is going to bevery important because I've had an hypothesis that M2 is going to beguided more by what happens to intermediate rates [unintelligible]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Kohn.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll attempt tosummarize my presentation in an effort to cut it down at least by afew minutes. That may make it slightly more incoherent than usual![For Mr. Kohn's full statement, see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it would be helpful at thisstage to get a judgment of the Committee on this particular point. Doyou want to say anything in defense of any of your proposals for thelast sentence of the operational paragraph?MR. KOHN. Well, I tried last time and I got beaten up! Thereason alternatives C and D are in the Bluebook is because of theissue that arose last time about writing down a monetary growth number-35-8/18/92--particularly now that it would go through the end of the year--thatwas inconsistent with the range you just gave to the Congress.However, I went back and looked at the report and the testimony and Ido believe that they are sufficiently ambiguous as to leave open thepossibility that monetary growth would drop below the range. And thatwould be judged on the basis of incoming information about howvelocity was behaving. So, I think a sentence along the lines ofeither "C" or "D" would line up with the report and testimony and thedecision of the Committee at the last meeting that it didn't knowenough, really, to change the existing growth rate [objective] for theyear. So, I think you could do either "C" or "D."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Jerry Jordan.MR. JORDAN. In helping us to choose among these, let me makea couple of comments about what I've heard and observed over the lastfew months. From the standpoint of an outsider, in the 1980s itseemed to me that you were in a pretty good position on two counts:Having had pretty good results both in getting a model that helped toalert the Committee on what M2 to expect and [thus] hitting the targetand on interpreting what it meant in terms of velocity, P*, and so on.Recently, at least since I've been here, we've only had two problems:One is that we don't know how to hit [the target]; and two is that wewouldn't know what it meant if we did. So, if you have to indicate arelative confidence, would you have greater confidence in your abilityto indicate what money growth would be, given the funds rate orwhatever, or what it means in terms of the velocity? Where are wesupposed to indicate that we have more confidence? If we put in thestatement about velocity, it implies that we have more confidence inthat than we do in something we are supposed to hit.MR. KOHN. That's a very difficult choice. Clearly, we havemajor questions about both of those. They go together; I can'tseparate those two questions; I can't answer one or the other. Theway we do the forecast is to take the path for [nominal] income in theGreenbook and the path for interest rates implied in the Greenbook andask what money growth would come out. That's how alternative B is puttogether. It's all part of the same process. I don't see it as twodifferent questions.MR. JORDAN. To me it is two different questions. But that'sa matter of a framework or a model or control versus--MR. KOHN. Well, the other question is: If the Committeesaid to Peter Sternlight that it wanted 2 percent M2 growth, give ortake a percentage point, and didn't care what interest rates andincome went with that, I believe Mr. Sternlight could achieve thatover a period of six months or so. Now, we might get some very wildinterest rate [movements] in the process and perhaps as a result wild[variations in] income growth; but if that's all the Committee caredabout, I feel some confidence that within a tolerable range and over asufficiently long period we could achieve the M2 growth that theCommittee asked us to achieve.MR. JORDAN. I interpret that to mean that you're morecomfortable explaining the misses rather than putting the weight onhitting the target?-36-8/18/92MR. KOHN. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I'm uncomfortable with "C" because putting thevelocity in there makes it seem that the resulting nominal GDP isexactly what our policy objective is, whereas my understanding is thatwe would like the resulting nominal GDP to be higher than it might beor than we might be able to make it to be. So, I would prefer just todo the straightforward "B," I'm presuming with your revised numbersthat you might be able to put a "2" in there. Is that right?MR. KOHN. Yes, I think so.MR. ANGELL. So, I'd prefer "B" with 2 percent in it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I would not favor "D." I had some sentiment for"C," but I am a little concerned about the precision that secondsentence might imply. I don't have any problem with the concept ofdoing "C" and then saying we don't think we're going to make theranges for the year. I don't have a suggested change, but I think thewords here may imply more certainty about these relationships than wehave; I think Wayne was saying the same thing. I could live with "B."MR. KOHN. In support of that, we can certainly take manymore words in the Policy Record itself to explain how the Committeedecided to do what it did. We're not confined to [the wording in thedirective]. So, the record would accommodate this relationship.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me cut this whole thing short. Withthat qualification, could we all accept "B" at this point?MR. SYRON. Could you tell us a little more about thequalifications?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we do that unless somebody hassome objection. If I hear none, I'll just assume that we will go with"B" with the addition that Don suggested.MR. KOHN. The Policy Record would explain that the Committeerecognized that this put [M2] on a trajectory where it might fallshort but took into account a number of different things in choosingthis without having to specify exactly--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any general questions then to Don? Yes,Jerry.MR. JORDAN. Following up on what Wayne Angell said earlierin his remarks about the rally of the market affecting theintermediate term: Don, I would have expected you to come back andsay that in view of the market developments since the last meeting ourmodel is now showing a lot stronger M2 growth. So, one of two things[must be true]: Either other things weren't equal or I was wrong inguessing which way that goes.-37-8/18/92MR. KOHN. Well, you have the direction right; it's aquestion of what the size is, and in particular our models operatewith some lag. So, a lot of this would be feeding through into thefourth quarter. It gives us more confidence. Yesterday, GovernorAngell was challenging me on why I had any more growth underalternative A than I did under alternative B, given our recentexperience. I think the decline in intermediate-term rates gives us alittle more confidence that we'll get the 2 percent [M2 growth] or alittle more in the fourth quarter under "B" and that we'll get somemore under "A." So, I think it's the kind of thing that buildsconfidence. We had a shortfall in July--more than we expected--and wecarried that shortfall forward but slanted up growth from here on out,partly based on the decline of intermediate-term rates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions? If not, I'llstart off on the policy issues. We've all been looking at variousmodels. In the earlier go-around members made major additions tomacroeconometric models by employing such concepts as economies inditches, the end of runways, terminal patients, and the python in apig, or is it vice-a-versa! [Laughter] I have two models which I'vediscussed previously, and I'd like to raise them again merely on thegrounds that I think it's fairly apparent that the basic structuralmodels that we employ of necessity are not capturing what essentiallyis going on in this environment.The one we used in the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony is what Iwould call a somewhat benign model. It essentially argues that therehas been a diversion of cash flows in both the household and thebusiness sectors away from purchases of goods and services to debtrepair, largely a reduction in debt. That obviously engenders ahigher saving rate and a subdued level of economic activity. But itbasically stipulates that the saving rate is stable at a higher-than-desired longer-term level, that the balance sheet repair will continueuntil balance sheets get into pretty good shape at which point theamount of diversion of cash flow that is required for the eventual[recovery finally] supplies enough money, then spills over into goodsand services, and ends up in gross domestic product. That argumentstipulates that if the balance sheet repair [process] is, say, to asubstantial extent completed in the business sector and, say, halfwaythrough in the household sector--which the data on debt serviceburdens somehow but very crudely imply--then one would conclude thatwe're over the major part of the adjustment or at least in the middleof it and are sort of going down hill. One would not expect it to bean all or nothing adjustment on the balance sheet until the balancesheet repair is complete, but rather the beginning of a gradual movingaway from savings toward purchases of goods and services as thebalance sheet repair gets 80 percent complete, then 90 percent, andeventually 100 percent. That argues for something not terriblydifferent from the Greenbook projection: a rather moderate, subduedgross domestic product increase but with characteristics essentiallyas described in the Greenbook.The alternate significantly less benign model is the one Iraised at the last FOMC meeting. It differs from the first model inregard to the presumption about the extent of balance sheetstringency--which you may recall I characterized as having many of thecharacteristics of the 19th century type of economic processes in theperiods when we had a major speculative increase in assets financed by-38-8/18/92debt, followed by a decline in market value of assets, debt burdensbecoming oppressive, and people effectively seizing up on theirexpenditures in an effort to pay off their debts and restore theirbalance sheets. The effect is an implosion in economic activity. Istipulated at the last FOMC meeting that one way of looking at thisprocess that we are involved in and have been involved in for the lastthree years is that it is one in which we forestalled this[adjustment] by continuously injecting liquidity--or I should saybasically injecting funds and reserves into the system. Thatstretched out the adjustment process and effectively worked towardease and toward a sort of relaxing of the grip when we eased, but onlyfor a limited period of time. That is, one can view the essentialplayer in the economy as having a desire to repair the balance sheetvery rapidly but the process was being stretched out so to speak bysome form of tranquilizer or whatever we may call it. And thattranquilizer has a limited life expectancy so that when we ease we getan economy which is not collapsing but tending to stabilize. But wehave to ease continuously in order to get the economy just to standstill and prevent it from seizing up and collapsing.Now, at the moment I think we can be on either Model 1 orModel 2. If after the substantial amount of liquidity we haveinjected in the system we are still at a stage in which there is asignificant endeavor to repair balance sheets at a pace thatimplicitly [consistent] with negative gross domestic product growth,then what we've heard around this table would lead us to conclude thatthe cumulative weakness is going to go an awful lot further. Thisleads me generally to conclude that what we have to do at this stageis just to watch what happens. I felt that the [strengthening in] theM2 data, which Don mentioned just this morning, was helpful. It's notgoing in the wrong direction. And it's at least not inconsistent withModel 1. If Model 1 is in fact working, then we've probably doneenough at this stage and no further actions would be required on ourpart. But we don't know that; the reason we don't know that is thatit is conceivable, for example, that when housing sales figures comeout at the end of this month they may be revised down sharply for lastmonth and the newest month may be down; and automobile sales may startto go south. And even though [businesses] have very significant cashflow and profitability, plant and equipment expenditures data, whichwe will be getting in several weeks, may provide at least anindication of what is going on in corporate planning. All of thatwill at least give us an indication of where this whole process isgoing.Listening to various views of the Committee, I would suspectthat one way or another a significant majority of us are somewherearound alternative B asymmetric toward ease, but with a generalawareness that if the economy starts to look a little better or evenjust continues to grow, no action would be required. Action would beimplied only under the condition that expectations begin to emergewhich suggest that the expansion is going to be running under theGreenbook forecast or if we get further important downward revisionsthat are relevant. The basic reason I would argue in those terms isone that Governor Mullins raised: namely, that we're running out ofammunition for potentially dangerous episodes. We do have a stockmarket, whatever [index] it is we're looking at, which is quite high.And I would hate to be at a point where we couldn't do anything torespond to that market because we had expended all of the ammunition-39-8/18/92available to us. But having said that, if in fact it is turning outthat this malevolent Model 2 type of seizure is going on, I suspect weprobably would have no choice at that point and would wish to move andhope that if we run out of bullets in the process that at leastthere's no one left to shoot at. So, that's my addition to a python-in-the-pig!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. That's acceptable to me.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Jerry Jordan.MR. JORDAN. I have a question. I know this is a Boardmatter, not an FOMC matter, but in terms of using ammunition: Withthe projection for seasonal increases in reserves in addition to thecontinuing trend of reserveable deposits growing very rapidly, wouldthe Board consider using the ammunition it has, i.e. the bullet oflower reserve requirements?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do we have room right now?MR. KOHN. I think if we lowered them in October we'd have toraise them in February. I would doubt very seriously that we'd haveroom to get to the next seasonal low point even after the actions wehave taken. We could take at look at that this fall, but I'd beskeptical at this point.MR. JORDAN. The statutory limit is 8 percent and I don'tunderstand the operating point. Peter tried to explain this to me,too, and I simply don't understand it. But the legal ammunition isthat you can go down to 8 percent without seeking new legislativeauthority.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The basic question is clearing balances.MR. ANGELL. But if more banks were to choose to adopt thealternative clearing balances, that would alter that prospect, right?MR. KOHN. Right. The key is to have a stable andpredictable demand for central bank liabilities, whether it's thereserves or clearing balances, off which Peter can operate in his openmarket operations.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "B" asymmetric is fine with me.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. "B" asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I don't see anything aboutsymmetric language that forbids a change, but to have asymmetriclanguage seems to me like giving you a loaded gun that is alreadycocked, I would really rather have symmetric language so that you-40-8/18/92would have to have a consultation with this group before you cock theweapon and certainly before you pull the trigger. So, I wouldcertainly strongly favor "B," but I would favor symmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. I favor "B" asymmetric. To tell the truth, if wedidn't have the situation of wanting to be consistent--I'd be afraidwe'd lose credibility in the exchange market if we did something now--I might be inclined to do a little now. So, for that reason I'dprefer to be asymmetric and leave it on hold.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The only argument I would have againstJohn LaWare is that I feel a little uncomfortable or awkward abouthaving been symmetric then asymmetric and going back. My view is thatthe safety catch is on the gun, if you want to put it that way.MR. LAWARE. But symmetric language as opposed to asymmetriclanguage might also be interpreted as an expression of confidence.The asymmetric language is saying we expect trouble.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you have that confidence?MR. LAWARE. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You do?MR. LAWARE. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm delighted.MR. LAWARE. Well, I'm lonesome but I'm delighted too![Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible.]MR. LAWARE. I have a patient; I'm waiting for him torecover.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. All doctors have patients! That wasn'tvery funny. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. "B" asymmetric is fine.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm going to be even alittle more lonesome than Dr. LaWare. I think your arguments are verypersuasive for staying where we are. However, it does seem to me thatwe've had considerable slippage in economic activity from the firstquarter. I see very few signs or areas of strength that will give usany forward momentum here. I ask myself the question, first of all:What good would easing do at this point? It's questionable I suppose.But on the other hand, it may help, and I don't see any substantialrisks; in fact, I see very little risk in moving. So, I would preferto make a move now.-41-8/18/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the risk in question is how muchammunition we have left. That's the only risk I see.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, we still have 2 percentage points to 0.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's right and we may need it.MR. FORRESTAL. We may need it. Well, I think I would preferto shoot the bullet now with alternative A.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I agree with Bob Forrestal. Iwould prefer to ease now in the direction of "A" but certainly find"B" with asymmetric language acceptable.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. "B" asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. I feel a lot more comfortable with several[recent] developments: the rebound in July in reserve growth, in themonetary base, and in Ml, whereas everything was negative in June.And I would want to see that--especially [the growth in] reserves--continue to be positive. I wouldn't want foreign operations to showup and drain reserves. Partial analysis, of course, [indicates that]they do, but I would hope that would be offset, or sterilized,consciously or not either way. I would be with John LaWare onpreferring symmetric language at this point because I think things arein motion except--and this is not a policy issue but a communicationsissue--if we went with symmetric now, when that is released in themiddle of October after the next meeting I would expect that theheadlines would read that the Committee had tightened. And that isenough to dissuade me from changing the directive even though mypreference would be to do so.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I support your proposal for "B" asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. I would be more with President Forrestal'salternative now, but I would accept your argument of holding back andthus would accept "B" asymmetrical.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I favor "B" symmetric, Alan. I won't go into alot of reasons; it's essentially for the same reasons that I cited atthe last meeting but I feel even more strongly about them. I thinkcredibility is more of an issue now. Also, we just eased and, if youthink about it in percentage terms, it was a 15 percent cut in thelevel of nominal rates; that's not insignificant. Finally, I thinkthis view captures a number of people who want to ease right away, and-42-8/18/92I just feel so strongly that that's the wrong thing to do that I guessit's hard for me to put myself in that group.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, ordinarily I'm biased very much infavor of symmetric language but I think your reasoning on why weshouldn't switch from one to the other and then back again iscompelling. So, I would say "B" asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I will support your directive.However, I'd like to associate myself with the views of PresidentsForrestal, Keehn, and Hoenig. There is the number of bullets and alsothe quality of bullets. I think a little bullet shot now because it'sunexpected would have a big effect. So, had you not expressed yourview, I would have been inclined to favor "A" and shoot 1/4 point now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. I support your recommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I think "B" asymmetric is the appropriatestance given the current environment and the changes we've seen. Itend to support the stronger asymmetric stance.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. I'd prefer "A" but will support "B"asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we have a majority for "B"asymmetric toward ease. If you'll read the language--MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. In the context of the Committee'slong-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economicgrowth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, andmonetary developments, slightly greater reserve restraint might orslightly lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in theintermeeting period." Moving on to page 14 to alternative "B" for thelast sentence, but I'm not sure what Don's latest numbers are--MR. KOHN. Taking account of today's data, 2 and 1/2 percent.MR. BERNARD. "The contemplated reserve conditions areexpected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the periodfrom June through December at annual rates of about 2 and 1/2 percent,respectively."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Take the roll.-43-8/18/92MR. BERNARD.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN YesVICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN YesGOVERNOR ANGELL YesPRESIDENT HOENIG YesPRESIDENT JORDAN YesGOVERNOR KELLEY YesGOVERNOR LAWARE NoGOVERNOR LINDSEY YesPRESIDENT MELZER NoGOVERNOR MULLINS YesGOVERNOR PHILLIPS YesPRESIDENT SYRON YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, thank you very much. We willadjourn for lunch.END OF MEETING-44-