Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeFebruary 4-5, 1992A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, February 4, 1992, at 2:30 p.m. and wascontinued on Wednesday, February 5, 1992, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice ChairmanMr. AngellMr. HendricksMr. HoenigMr. KelleyMr. LaWareMr. LindseyMr. MelzerMr. MullinsMs. PhillipsMr. SyronMessrs. Boehne, Keehn, McTeer, and Stern, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents ofthe Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta,and San Francisco, respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and EconomistMr. Bernard, Deputy SecretaryMr. Coyne, Assistant SecretaryMr. Gillum, Assistant SecretaryMr. Mattingly, General CounselMr. Patrikis, Deputy General CounselMr. Prell, EconomistMr. Truman, EconomistMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis,Lindsey, Siegman, Simpson, and Stockton,Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. McDonough, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account1. Attended Tuesday session only.Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Feinman, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs,Board of GovernorsMr. Wascher, Senior Economist, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Beebe, Broaddus, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum,Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond,Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas, Chicago, andAtlanta, respectivelyMr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bankof BostonMr. Guentner, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of New York2. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee'sdiscussion of the economic outlook and its longer-runobjectives for monetary and debt aggregates.3. Elected for the period in 1992 until a new president of theFederal Reserve Bank of Cleveland assumes office.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meetingof February 4-5, 1992February 4, 1992--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If we can get started.... I'd likefirst to welcome Bill McDonough. Welcome, William, to your inauguralmeeting. This is our annual organization meeting. We start off withthe election of officers, and I'd like to turn the gavel over toGovernor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. The floor is now open for nominations for theposition of Chairman of the Federal Open Market Committee.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, in an unplanned manner I would saythat I think it would be a wonderful idea for us to have AlanGreenspan as Chairman. Now, would you want me to go ahead and do more[and nominate a Vice Chairman] or do you want to do one at a time?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, let me request that you stop there.MR. SYRON. You wouldn't like to take a chance on a groupticket!MR. MULLINS. I think we need a second.MR. KELLEY. Second.MR. MULLINS. Without objection. The floor is now open fornominations for the position of Vice Chairman of the Federal OpenMarket Committee.MR. KELLEY. In like spirit I will nominate PresidentCorrigan.MR. MULLINS. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.MR. MULLINS. Without objection. We have a new team.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I thank you and, speaking for the ViceChairman, he thanks you! I now would like to have the Secretary readthe list of staff officers for potential election.MR. BERNARD.Secretary and Economist, Donald Kohn;Deputy Secretary, Normand Bernard;Assistant Secretary, Joseph Coyne;Assistant Secretary, Gary Gillum;General Counsel, Virgil Mattingly;Deputy General Counsel, Ernest Patrikis;2/4-5/92Economist, Michael Prell;Economist, Edwin Truman;Associate Economists from the Board:David Lindsey;Larry Promisel;Charles Siegman;Thomas Simpson; andDavid Stockton;Associate Economists from the Federal Reserve Banks:Alicia Munnell, proposed by President Syron;Richard Davis, proposed by President Corrigan;John Davis, proposed by First Vice President Hendricks;Anatol Balbach, proposed by President Melzer; andThomas Davis, proposed by President Hoenig;CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any objections?MR. LAWARE. All good men and true!MR. ANGELL. And women!MR. LAWARE. And women!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no objections and noadditional nominations, I will assume the list is approved. I willnow entertain a motion regarding the Bank--which I would require to bethe Federal Reserve Bank of New York--to serve to execute transactionsfor the System Open Market Account. Would somebody like to do that?MR. LAWARE. So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MR. MELZER. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there any objection? If not, so beit. We have now separately the selection of the Manager for DomesticOperations. Our current incumbent is Peter Sternlight, and I trustthat somebody will nominate him for reelection.SEVERAL. So move.MR. MULLINS. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It has been nominated and seconded. Isthere any objection? If not, we move to the election of a Manager forForeign Operations; our [candidate] is Bill McDonough and I would seekhis nomination.MR. MULLINS. So nominate.MR. SYRON. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. I think that we arenow down to the review of--MR. BERNARD. The Domestic Authorization.2/4-5/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh, yes. Would somebody like to movethe adoption of the Domestic Authorization?MR. CORRIGAN. So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MR. SYRON. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. I would now call onTed Truman to review the three foreign currency instruments and thewarehousing agreement.MR. TRUMAN. We would recommend that you approve the ForeignCurrency Authorization, the Foreign Currency Directive, and theProcedural Instructions as they now stand. With respect to thewarehousing authority, as we discussed at earlier meetings of theCommittee last year, the warehousing agreement with the Treasury onbehalf of the Exchange Stabilization Fund and the Treasury's generalfund is subject to annual review. You have received a memorandum fromme on this subject. To summarize that memorandum, the amount of DMwarehoused has been reduced from a peak of $9 billion in March of 1990to the current $2 billion. And with the prospect of a furtherreduction in the near term to zero, it would seem appropriate to us toreduce the size of the arrangement from the current $10 billion to themore historically normal level of $5 billion; that level prevailedfrom 1978 to 1989. Therefore, I recommended a renewal of that sizeand Bill McDonough concurs with that recommendation.I would note three points. First, if the ExchangeStabilization Fund repurchases the remaining $2 billion, as we assumeand expect it will, its dollar position will be relatively low, so wemight have to reverse that later. Secondly, the Treasury hasexpressed some anxiety that conditions could change such that theymight want to warehouse more than $5 billion. In staff conversationswith the Treasury, we noted that the size of the arrangement has beenincreased in the past and we assured them that the Committee isprepared to consider any reasonable request for changes in the future.Lastly, Bill McDonough and I have told the Treasury that once the $2billion is repurchased, the terms of the arrangement should beadjusted marginally to conform more closely to market practice. Inthe future, the forward "leg" would be at a forward market rate ratherthan being flat. This seems more sensible. It basically equalizesour interest returns and our foregone earnings. The Treasury staffhas agreed in principle to this change and has agreed that it isappropriate to make the change not in the middle of an arrangement butonce we've gotten it cleaned away. I'd be pleased to answer anyquestions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any questions? If not, wouldsomeone [make a motion]?MR. ANGELL. I would be happy to move the adoption of theproposals that have been presented by Mr. Truman. And I would like toexpress appreciation and gratitude that we're back to [an authorizedlevel of] $5 billion and [the amount warehoused] will not be close tothat amount.2/4-5/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SEVERAL. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further discussion? If not, all infavor say "aye."SEVERAL. Aye.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Opposed? [Secretary's note: Noneheard.] The "ayes" have it. We're now up to approval of the minutesof the meeting of December 17. Would somebody like to move it?MR. CORRIGAN. Move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without exception. We'll now move toforeign currency operations and I call on Mr. McDonough.MR. MCDONOUGH. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. McDonough?MR. SYRON. I'm just curious about the intervention. I don'thave any real problem with it, but could you give us a little morebackground on what was going on at the time? Were the markets felt tobe particularly disorderly? What was happening that precipitated thedecision to intervene at that particular point in time, presuming thatwe don't have a target?MR. MCDONOUGH. The dollar had rallied very strongly and veryquickly, as I mentioned, almost certainly basically on short covering.And that strength had continued through Thursday, January 16th. Inthe morning we had a rather [sloppy] market because of the questioningof how best to interpret the trade figures. At that time the Treasuryexpressed a very strong view that it was "appropriate," as they putit, to cap the dollar and to adjust it downward somewhat.MR. TRUMAN. One additional point: This had been discussedat least in principle the day before in the context of a strongdollar--the dollar having gone up. The ambiguity came when we had themarket that we had on Friday. On our part we felt that since thedollar was backing off, the Treasury probably would no longer beinterested [in intervening]. But they turned out to be interested andwe had to confront the question of whether to go along; we felt thaton balance it was better to go along.MR. SYRON. I think I understand why we did it.MR. KELLEY. That puts you ahead of the rest of us!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions? Let me take aminute to review what occurred at the G-7 meeting.MR. CORRIGAN. We need a motion on the transactions.2/4-5/92 -5-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a nice idea.MR. CORRIGAN. I will move it.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is a motion to ratify the actionsof--MR. MCDONOUGH. To ratify the Federal Reserve sale of $25million against yen on January 17th. That was our only operation onbehalf of the Federal Reserve during the period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It has been moved and seconded. Anyobjection? If not, I take it that is approved.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, we've already talked about it, butlet's just go ahead and vote for it anyway! [Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just take a minute to update youon the G-7 meeting. That meeting obviously comes out of the Tokyomeeting between President Bush and Prime Minister Miazawa in which, asyou may recall, there was a communique which specified that they werejointly in agreement on the issue of a "growth agenda" withoutspecifying particularly what that concept meant. There was in thecontext of those discussions a reaching out to the other members ofthe G-7 to join them in that particular view of the world. And theTreasury decided that a meeting of the G-7 finance ministers andcentral bank governors would be the ideal vehicle by which that couldoccur. So the meeting was planned and as the days went on, inendeavoring to create the usual advance communique, it became fairlyclear that uniformity of view was not exactly how one would describethe nature of those negotiations.As a consequence of that at the end we all movedup to Garden City. It turned out that while the Treasury, I think,was quite successful in moving its broad philosophy of growth, itnonetheless acquiesced in language which very specifically maintainedthe long term anti-inflationary posture of the G-7 and the need tocontinue not to dissipate the gains that have been made againstinflation. Discussions on potential intervention really got verylittle support and, as Bill McDonough indicated, the communique inthat regard was relatively noncommittal.We discussed the Soviet--or I should say the former Soviet--republics and their problems a good deal. The issue of astabilization fund was raised by It got remarkablylittle support in the group; that never really proceeded very far.Although I suspect there is considerable latent support within thegroup to do something when the time is right, nobody at that meetingreally held the view that the timing was such as to make itparticularly useful. As a consequence, the communique ended up with a[statement in] support of the growth scenario promulgated in Tokyo anda number of individual country reports on their specific policieswhich struck me very much as national travel agencies describing thegoodies of coming to visit. But nothing much else was involved. Ithink it was a harmonious meeting, certainly compared to the one inBangkok. It did have a significant element in that there was a very2/4-5/92clear tilt in the basic philosophy of that group, which I must tellyou I would more readily describe as the views of the financeministers because we central bankers were sitting there on our handsto a large extent. The substance beyond the growth area was mainly inthe discussion of the Soviet quota in the IMF; there was considerablediscussion of it. It was assumed that a specific conclusion would notbe reached except that obviously there [would be] discussions leadingup to the Interim Committee meeting. Is that in April, Ted?MR. TRUMAN. Late April.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That meeting would bring that tofruition. There was very strong support for a fairly quick resolutionof the Russian federation's application and that of several of theother republics. That was pretty much all that was involved in themeeting. It was not one of the more significant endeavors on the partof the G-7, but certain things were accomplished.Any questions? I'd be glad to entertain them. If not, we'llnow move on to the Domestic Desk and Peter Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Sternlight?MR. PARRY. With regard to the increase in long-term rates,all of the factors you cited are domestic in nature. Did marketparticipants ever refer to any international considerations that mighthave been placing some upward pressure on rates?MR. STERNLIGHT. They did on occasion, President Parry. Iperhaps should have mentioned that, although it did not seem to be abig factor in the recent period. But in the fairly recent past I washearing as one reason for the rise in domestic long-term interestrates the competitive pull particularly of German rates.MR. TRUMAN. Most German interest rates were down over theperiod since early January.MR. PARRY. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions? If not, wouldsomebody like to move to ratify the actions since the previousmeeting?MR. CORRIGAN. Move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MR. MULLINS. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We now move on tothe Chart Show with Messrs. Prell, Simpson, and Truman.MESSRS. PRELL, SIMPSON and TRUMAN. [Statements--seeAppendix.]2/4-5/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That report was pretty impressive,gentlemen. Questions for any of them?MR. PARRY. One of the characteristics of the forecast isthat the interest sensitivity of real spending is different than Ithink traditional elasticities are. Could you indicate how much of adifference there is and whether you assume that the historicaldifference between those elasticities has disappeared over the period?It seems to be a big factor in the forecast, for example in componentssuch as commercial office space.MR. PRELL. Well, that very clearly is a deviation from pastnorms of cyclical behavior, and I think it does reflect an unusuallylow degree of interest sensitivity. Basically, we think that processhas been short-circuited by the buildup of so huge a stock ofunoccupied buildings. Traditionally there has been a modest butsignificant contribution from nonresidential construction in the firstcouple of years of business upturns. Outside of that area, there areindications--and we've tried to gauge this econometrically--thathousing may be less interest sensitive than it once was. It's alittle hard to disentangle historically because of thedisintermediation or reintermediation with segmented mortgage marketsthat produced a credit rationing effect that outweighed whateverinterest rates effects there were. So, one has to disentangle that.There is also more reliance than in the past on adjustable ratemortgages, which scarcely existed earlier; and that conceivably mayaffect interest sensitivity. So, we may not have as great an interestsensitivity in the housing sector as one might expect. But, indeed,our models have been surprised at the weakness of residentialconstruction. And that may be partly a matter of gauging theperceived real cost of home buying. It is quite conceivable that inthe past year or so people have perceived the prospect of capital lossas being much greater than any trend in prices over recent years,which is the normal effect that the models capture. I think those arethe major areas. It's possible, too, that inventories don't have agreater interest sensitivity than we have built into this. And in theconsumer durables area, we're torn between a couple of considerations:(1) the interest sensitivity probably isn't all that high to beginwith; and (2) the movements of consumer loan rates haven't beenenormous, but on an after tax basis they have moved somewhatperversely in recent years. On the other hand, somebody looking atthe option of whether to invest in a consumer durable with theexpectation of a return of flow of services versus the 3 or 4 percentrate earned on a deposit might feel that isn't a bad deal and might bestimulated to spend a little more than otherwise.MR. PARRY. On the issue of elasticities, my recollection isthat the growth of imports is a little slower than one normally wouldexpect, particularly in 1993. Is that correct that the incomeelasticities have been lower?MR. TRUMAN. Yes, the models will give you a higher incomeelasticity. However, a statistical test in which we essentially re-estimated the elasticities suggested that those elasticities have comedown over time pretty much like the [actual behavior] and are closerto an elasticity of one on both the export and import sides.Therefore, we have in the forecast a relatively modest pickup in thereal [import] component.2/4-5/92MR. PARRY. That's an interesting development.MR. TRUMAN. In general imports have been performingthroughout the last several years at a lower level than we hadanticipated. And those two things together plus the other factor,which [has been] important for a number of years, led us to put in asmall adjustment [unintelligible].MR. PARRY. Thank you.MR. KEEHN. Mike, a curiosity question on productivity asdepicted in Chart 14: Am I right that overall productivity includesmanufacturing and services?MR. PRELL. Yes.MR. KEEHN. The question relates to my impression that on themanufacturing side productivity seems to have been pretty good overthe [past] few years and, therefore, in an inflationary sense it hasbeen a constructive thing. Am I right about that?MR. PRELL. Yes, indeed. In the 1980s there was a distinctimprovement in productivity performance in manufacturing. Theresidual has not shown that kind of improvement, and basically ourexpectation is that we will continue to see manufacturing do well interms of gains in output per hour and that probably we will see theremainder of the economy improve its performance somewhat. I wouldcaution, however, that it's not so clear that the developments we'vebeen seeing recently--the restructuring--constitute a vastly differentkind of event than we have seen in other cycles. So at this point Ithink one should be cautious in anticipating a really radical shift inproductivity gains.MR. SYRON. A question for Tom Simpson: In your discussion,you talked about the balance sheet restructurings of both householdsand corporations. This is not a well-defined question, but do we havesome notion even in a generalized sense of how much more desire theremight be to do that? I'm trying to get to how much intermediatedversus nonintermediated funds are going to the open market in thisarea with some vague presumption of conditions in the market remainingabout as they are now.MR. SIMPSON. Well, it's really hard to pinpoint. In dealingwith the corporate sector, we certainly hear a lot of stories aboutfirms wanting to strengthen their balance sheets. And theannouncements of reverse LBOs and so forth suggest that there still ismore room to go in that area. What is going to constitute the newnorm once all this adjustment occurs is an open question. Personally,I'm not so sure they will go back to the leveraging ratios of the late'70s or early '80s. The household sector is even a little moredifficult to evaluate. We do hear a lot of stories about individualsstraining under the weight of their debt burdens and holding the lineand restraining themselves. But there again, I'm just not sure--MR. KOHN. In terms of intermediation and [unintelligible]depositories, which is part of what I thought you were getting at, wehave this securitization process for mortgages, which has beenunderway for a while but has certainly gotten going on consumer debts.2/4-5/92So, the relative contribution of depository institutions to the wholecredit flow has been depressed by their own choice through thissecuritization process. Other intermediaries are taking it.MR. SYRON. I was also trying to get at some of the cyclicalaspects of it in the short and intermediate run, which I think Tom hasanswered as well, so--MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, we've just received auto salesdata. For those of you who want to be brought up to the very minute,there was some improvement in the last 10 days of January. On ourseasonal adjustment factors auto sales were 6-1/4 million at an annualrate with almost 4 million in sales of light trucks. So we ended themonth at 5.9 million autos sold and 3.6 million trucks sold; that's alittle better picture than we saw in the first 20 days of January.The cars were close to the December rate; trucks were off a bit; youwill recall that the year-end incentives distorted it. So, I thinkwe're on a steady-as-you-go [course] in the motor vehicle market.MR. HOENIG. Mike, I want to ask something relating to thesingle-family residential area because it's an important part of theprojections as we come into 1992. Given the comments on restructuringof debt that have been made and some of the demographics, can youexplain to me again why we're going to have such a strong residentialrecovery even without the fiscal stimulus which, if I understand it,was not part of this projection? [Your forecast] seems veryoptimistic to me.MR. PRELL. Well, it's very difficult to get a precise fix onunderlying longer-run trends. We know something about the demographicsituation. It's certainly clear that the relevant population isgrowing more slowly than it was several years ago. It's also clearthat if past patterns hold, that would favor single-family relative tomultifamily construction because people are passing into years wherehome ownership rates typically rise very markedly. We think we havebeen below the longer-run trend recently and that we're going to moveup relative to that trend--conceivably to around trend or a bit aboveit--in response to what is much enhanced affordability. We've had avery distinct improvement for people who want to buy houses, and thesigns are that there is some response already in train here. We'veraised our forecast since the last meeting despite no change, really,in our mortgage rate assumptions. It just appeared to us that peoplehave been responding more than we had anticipated previously and thatwith perhaps a small degree of optimism we could carry that throughthe forecast period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Tom.MR. MELZER. Ted, I don't know quite what to make of this,but it seems as if your projection of consumer prices in the G-7countries represents an extraordinary convergence of inflation ratesand even of real output. Am I right in making that observation? Andif so, what do you think the implications of that are for exchangerates and so forth?MR. TRUMAN. Well, I think you're right in making thatinference; there probably is some degree to which we have a naturalconvergence of these things at least on the inflation side. After we2/4-5/92put all this together, we noticed that several of the 1992 numbers onthat chart are at 3.0 percent. I think that reflected a reluctance toput "2" [as the first] number. On the growth side, it seems to methat there is a convergence, but the movement is from differentdirections. Germany and Japan essentially are moving down and theweaker economies are moving up [in their respective growth rates]. Insome sense that reflects the fact that a period in which we've hadquite a lot of divergence in the experience and the needs of thedifferent G-7 countries is coming to an end, though we end up with aforecast in which certainly for the United Kingdom and Canada growthstill remains pretty weak relative to potential. As far as theexchange rates are concerned, to the extent that we do have both thisconvergence on the inflation side and less divergence in terms ofcertain short-run macroeconomic policy needs, it would seem to me thatwe're likely to have less shocks, if you want to put it that way,coming from abrupt shifts in policy over this period. I suppose theone set of question marks associated with this is that we're in aperiod, taking the two-year period as a whole, in which we have notonly here but abroad--in Canada, the United Kingdom, France, andJapan--a lot of elections. If you put that all together, we couldhave some political shocks. In the case of the United Kingdom, Idon't think we will see a fundamentally different policy even if theTories should lose because Labor is as committed to staying in the ERMas the conservatives are and that is going to constrain monetarypolicy. Plus they think things are so bad that they would undertakeonce and for all to make exchange rate adjustments. It's uncertainwhat that may mean in terms of macro policy. And on the fiscal sidethey may move from a situation in which they have quite a lot of roomto maneuver to one in which they really don't have that much anymore;but they're pretty much boxed in, even if there is a change ingovernments.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions? If not, let memention Mike Prell's insistence that any changes in your forecastsarrive by the end of this week. Who would like to start the tour detable?MR. PARRY. I'd be happy to, Mr. Chairman. Economic weaknesspersists in the Twelfth District economy, unfortunately led by aworsening California economy. California continues to reportdeclining employment in nearly all sectors. Weakness is mostpronounced in construction and also in manufacturing. In 1991construction employment fell in excess of 7 percent, and we actuallyhad accelerating declines in the fourth quarter. Manufacturing showeda similar pattern, with employment declines of about 4.4 percent in1991. I also have to point out that additional defense cuts areexpected in 1992. Retail trade activity is also off sharply.Searching for a positive sign in the California economy, I was able tocome up with one, and that is in real estate activity, at leastresidential, where median house prices actually have not fallen andresale activity has risen in several major markets. Even in LosAngeles, looking at year-over-year comparisons for single-familyhouses, the prices seem to be very similar to what they were a yearago. Throughout the rest of the District conditions are clearlymixed. Two of the largest of the remaining states, Arizona andWashington, are showing weakness. The state of Washington, which hashad quite a few years of uninterrupted prosperity, actually showed aloss of employment in 1991. And Arizona has shown considerable-10-2/4-5/92weakness in the last four months. Other states--Alaska, Hawaii, andOregon--are relatively sluggish. The only two states in our Districtthat have shown strong growth are Idaho and Utah; of course, both ofthem are quite small in terms of the number of residents.Turning to the national outlook, we expect the economy toexpand only slightly in the current quarter, which would mean we mightsee some further declines in the near term. In the quarters tofollow, growth is expected to rise at around a 3 percent rate. Ourmajor sources of strength come from inventories in the interest-sensitive sectors of the economy, although we would certainlysubscribe to the Greenbook's expectations with regard to reducedinterest sensitivity in most sectors. I do feel, however, that thereis a rather large band of uncertainty encompassing both sides of thisforecast. Nevertheless, the outlook for inflation continues to beencouraging. And consistent with a downward trend in underlyinginflation, we expect to see a reduction in most major inflationmeasures this year compared to 1991. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, our forecast is quite close to thestaff forecast for 1992. Indeed, we probably are closer now than wehave been in a while. Our outlook for both inflation and unemploymentis just a little lower, but the differences aren't really worthtalking about.With regard to the District, in the period since the lastmeeting of the Committee, I think the District economy really hasweakened. This seemed particularly true as we approached and thenwent through the year-end period. In some respects, I think theDistrict just caught up with the conditions that were prevalent aroundthe country. The employment situation is perhaps the most evidentindicator of that. Total payroll employment in the District declinedin December, and the District unemployment rate went up to 7-1/2percent; that's the highest level we've had since May of 1986.Illinois really did stand out in that; its unemployment rate went upto 9.3 percent and that got a lot of attention. There are somespecial factors behind that; nonetheless, it was a very, verysignificant increase in the level of unemployment in Illinois. Andthat puts us, I believe, at the top of the industrial states.Announcements of employment reductions, closings, early retirementprograms, and the like, are continuing at what seems to me to be avery disturbing rate. Since the year-end, I've been trying to lookaround pretty hard for better news and I have to admit it is a bitscarce. I will say that there are some categories in which there aresigns, if not of improvement, at least of stabilization. The steelbusiness is perhaps in that category. One large manufacturer in ourarea is clearly operating at a 72 to 73 percent rate, but its currentorder rate is a little higher, coming in at about 75 percent. So,that should mean their total production will go up a bit. And theforecast for shipments this year is a little higher than was the caselast year. In the steel industry, though, the pricing is stable,which from their point of view means that it is just terrible. Theirprices currently are generally at about the level that they were in1980-81 on a nominal basis. On an inflation-adjusted basis that meansthey're about 30 percent under that level. The outlook for heavytrucks also is just a bit better; sales are expected to be some 5 to 6-11-2/4-5/92percent higher this year compared to last year. But I will say thatthat improvement is very much a forecast for the second half of theyear; there's an awful lot of focus in the District on the second halfversus the first half. Machine tool orders increased in December;that was particularly true for metal cutting tools, which should meanthat those industries will be producing at higher levels.Also, I think there's something of a brighter note on theretail front. One specialty retailer I talked to said that in theearly part of January their sales around the country were up some 14to 18 percent. Another very major retailer in the area said they hada good January; their sales for the full month were 17 percent overlast year. On a cautionary note, though, last January sales were verybadly affected, of course, by the so-called CNN factor. And all theretailers say that discounting continues to be just very, very tough.In the automotive business, though, as Mike has said, the last 10 dayswere a little better. Still, for January as a whole those sales camein a bit lower than the earlier forecast. I think that means that thefirst-quarter production schedules are at further risk. But onemanufacturer that I talked to said that they had seen some improvementin the order rate from dealers, which is something I've been lookingat pretty carefully. And, indeed, last week they had a verysignificant increase in the order rate from their dealers. They'renot quite sure why. If that is maintained, then their productionschedules in the first quarter might be okay.In the agricultural sector, the equipment business has hit arough spot. One major manufacturer has had a decline in sales ofmajor implements of some 24 percent over the last couple of months.There's a comparison issue there, but they still are down verysignificantly; the reason is supposedly that the farmers are lookingat the ITC and are going to hold off until that gets clarified. I dothink that for many of the businesses in our District, this ITCuncertainty is going to be something of wild card.In an overall context, while I can't find people whoseattitudes are particularly positive, nonetheless some of the veryheavy depression that was rather pervasive when we last met haspassed, and I do think our policy change in December had an importanteffect on that.On the pricing front, the outlook continues to be positive.The competitive conditions speak for themselves: Price increases justdon't stick; and wage increases, particularly in manufacturing, aremodest and can be dealt with through productivity improvements.Therefore, I think the staff forecast on inflation is very realistic.Also, I think the restraint on credit extensions by banks is beginningto stabilize. As nonperforming loan problems begin to unwind here andcapital ratios continue to improve, lending attitudes are getting justa bit more expansive. It hasn't shown up in the numbers yet, but mysense is that the lending officers are being encouraged to go out andfind good loans, and I certainly would want to emphasize the "good" inthat comment. Net, I think the risks continue to be on the down sidein terms of overall economic activity, but I do think, though it'shard to give you statistical evidence of it, that there has been atleast a mini-improvement on balance from the last meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.-12-2/4-5/92MR. ANGELL. Si, has the Caterpillar labor negotiationprogressed?MR. KEEHN. It has not; it has gotten worse. Caterpillar, ofcourse, built up very large inventories going into the strike. Andbecause of the low sales level they are still very much working offthose inventories. And the union has an enormous strike fund. Thisis getting to be tougher; they are not talking, and it's difficult tosee a constructive way out of this one.MR. ANGELL. What are the union wage demands?MR. KEEHN. It's not so much wages as it is the issue of [theindustry] pattern. The UAW settled with Deere and is insisting on thesame settlement out of Caterpillar. Caterpillar is saying they shipto different industries and face different competitive factors, andthey cannot settle on the [basis of the] Deere package. Again, it'sthe pattern that is the ultimate issue here.MR. ANGELL. It would seem, with farm sales down 24 percent,that maybe Deere made a mistake also.MR. KEEHN. Well, Deere had a bad [strike] the last time andwent into this one deciding they were going to find a way of settling.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, activity in the AtlantaDistrict has softened since the last time we met, but I'm happy to saythat there seems to have been quite a turnaround in expectations.Most of the contacts we've talked to expect an upturn, although amodest one, in the spring. On the manufacturing side, even thoughactivity slowed in the last few months of 1991, a large number offirms that we surveyed recently indicated that they expect an increasein production and shipments as well as in orders over the next sixmonths. We've had informal contacts with retailers, and they'resuggesting a similar outlook. Retail sales were somewhat better inJanuary; that [improvement] was concentrated in nondurables.Retailers continue to be very cautious about their inventory levels.One bright spot in the District that was picked up for the nation inMike Prell's report is the sale of single-family homes. This has beentrue across the District generally and is concentrated in the lower tothe mid-price range. And that obviously has implications for durablesales, which I mentioned. Another positive factor in the AtlantaDistrict has been a rise in convention bookings as well as in thenumber of visitors and tourism. Foreign tourism in particular isexpected to benefit from the weak dollar.The agricultural sector is generally favorable, but thesituation is really quite different for the energy sector. InDecember, for example, Louisiana operated 40 percent fewer rigs than ayear earlier. The number for the country as a whole is 30 percentless. This is giving rise to continuing layoffs in the District inthat industry. Banking contacts are reporting very weak loan demand,as was suggested a few minutes ago. Loan officers are out therelooking for good credits; the problem is that they're not finding verymany good credits. The banks also are reporting that they're notchanging their underwriting standards at all, and some of them are-13-2/4-5/92reporting that there has been really no change in the regulatorypressure that they had seen earlier on. So, in general, while thingshave softened, the attitudinal situation is considerably better thanit was six or eight weeks ago.With respect to the national outlook, we're reasonably closeto the Greenbook in terms of the GDP forecast. Although we see alittle more strength in the first half of '92 and somewhat less growthas time goes on, the GDP forecasts pretty much converge. Our outlookfor inflation is somewhat less optimistic. We may indeed get the goodresults that the staff is forecasting in the Greenbook, but I thinkthe risk on inflation is on the up side. My hunch is, although ourforecast and the staff forecast are based on no fiscal change, thatwe're going to get fiscal stimulus probably above what the Presidenthas suggested. And that suggests to me that the GDP forecasts areprobably on the low side; if we get that fiscal stimulus, the economywill probably do better. Having said that, I do think our decisiontoday should be based on our assessment of what the situation is goingto be ex fiscal policy. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I don't have much to add to thisvery excellent presentation the staff gave us and the fine coverage inthe Greenbook. Our projections really are not significantlydifferent. We do expect a little more real growth and a littlegreater slowing in the rate of inflation. But the broad profile ispretty much the same, with some pickup in the rate of increase of therecovery in the second quarter--but only to a very moderate rate incomparison with what has happened in past recoveries--and continueddeceleration in core inflation, even though we are projecting that theoverall CPI will come in a tad higher this year than it did last year.Insofar as the risks of error are concerned, I guess a carefullyreasoned analysis would say that they are about equal on both sides.Certainly, there are some downside risks: the heavy overhang ofcommercial real estate; the corporate restructuring; the balance sheetadjustments that are taking place; the restraint on credit. Also, allthese temporary dislocations that have taken place as a result ofdeclining rates of inflation could produce another year of lower-than-expected growth.But on the other side of that, I think the substantialfurther easing in monetary policy we engineered in November-Decembercould easily produce a more rapid recovery than we are expecting here,particularly if a fiscal package is enacted early in the year orrelatively early in the year. For what it's worth, my instinct isthat the upside risk is probably a little greater than the downsiderisk mainly because of the actions that we took in the fourth quarter.We engineered a very significant easing in policy; it has not at thispoint had a very positive effect upon the economy; the stock marketreally seems to think [it will] over the next several quarters.Moreover, we're seeing a decided change in the comments that we hearfrom our contacts around the District. There is not much hardevidence yet that things really have improved, but the outlook for thenext six months or so is decidedly better than it has been over theseveral times we've made contacts; it's quite a shift away from whatwe heard [unintelligible]. It always seems to me that the pessimismis the greatest right at the bottom of a recession. So, since it-14-2/4-5/92looks a little better now than it did a while back, I hope that meansthat we're beginning to come out of this a little faster than mostpeople seem to think.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It could also mean we're not at thebottom of the recession!MR. BLACK. I hope it doesn't get any worse than it is now.It would really be bad. It's the worst I've ever seen since the '30sand I don't know very much about that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. First Vice President Hendricks.MR. HENDRICKS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At a January 24meeting of the Fourth District round table, economists agreed that theeconomy will be flat again this quarter but will improve throughoutthe remainder of 1992. Similar to the staff forecast, the group ofeconomists expects 6 percent growth in nominal GDP over the next fourquarters, and that's about evenly divided between output and prices.They pointed out that structural changes in the economy, such ascorrections in overcapacity in retail and banking and long-termadjustments in the automobile and computer industries, are restrainingthe recovery. With respect to our projections, they are very close tothose included in the Greenbook.Currently, activity in the District is mixed and has perhapslost a little ground in terms of the momentum it enjoyed in recentmonths. Nonfarm payroll employment fell in January after threesuccessive monthly increases. Our unemployment rate rose 1 point to6.6 percent but is still, of course, below the national average.Construction contracts, retail sales, and manufacturing production alloutperformed the nation through late 1991. Auto production remainsweaker than expected, although the auto economists who participated inthe round table still believe that production this year will be atleast 10 percent higher than last year. [They base that assessment]on the strength of sales and inventories that they feel are a littlebetter than they originally had expected. Auto suppliers note thatorders softened late last year, but Goodyear has just announced arecall of 300 workers because of good demand for replacement tires.Steel operating rates at nearly 80 percent of capacity are expected toease a little this quarter in the view of those economists because ofthe recent let-up in orders. The signals from capital goods producersare also mixed. Those sensitive to auto and truck production noteeasing in orders, but the industrial machinery and equipment producersreport that orders are either flat or, in the case of machine tools,rising. The capital spending outlook for 1992 is also mixed. Moredurable goods producers plan either the same or higher levels ofspending than those who plan cutbacks, but petroleum producers,retailers, and real estate developers will cut spending. Although thecommercial real estate markets in the Fourth District are not as softas in some other areas of the country, developers of shopping centersand office buildings are concerned about too much capacity.Inadequate financing and cash flow have put several projects on holdin Ohio, New York, and California.It appears to us that we are perhaps at the threshold of anexpanding economy. Of course, we thought that was the case lastsummer. We are encouraged by the absence of price pressures and by-15-2/4-5/92the modest 2 percent increase in the price deflator again lastquarter. And we expect continued moderate inflation in the monthsahead. That concludes my report.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the First Districtwe had thought that the economy was on the verge of rebounding but nowit seems perhaps to be stalling a little again. The sector wherethat's coming from is the manufacturing sector. A significant amountof that has to do with defense, and it's probably a long-termstructural adjustment. Defense is an extraordinarily importantindustry in Connecticut; on a per capita basis it dwarfs evenCalifornia. So, everyone wants peace to break out as it affectssomeone else's factory; but we know we're going to have a lot of cutsthere and it's causing a fair amount of uncertainty for the District.Also, the people who produce the capital spending more generally arefinding that their customers are concerned. With respect tomanufacturing in softer goods, several discount retailers have told usthey've had calls from producers saying: "Can you take things from usnow because we're starting to be concerned about cash pressures andour inventories are building a little more than we'd like?" For theretail sector, the post-Christmas period has been a little better thanexpected, as was the Christmas period. So, that is relatively goodnews. In the banking sector, loan demand for "acceptable" loans isstill weak. Several banks have indicated that they are going to bemore cautious as a result of the recent legislation in terms of promptprogressive intervention and capital standards. We are seeing thebeginning of some improvement in nonperforming loans; the level ofnonperforming loans has actually dropped slightly at the margin. Andthat is consistent with what has been talked about in other Districts.We have seen some pickup in residential construction in single-familyhomes even in New England; I'm not quite sure who is going to buythem, but I'm told that they are all contracted for before the[shovel] goes in the ground. Again, I'm not sure what the reason is,but the mood is generally improved somewhat as well. I think part ofit has to do with our December cut [in rates]; it is being seen as awatershed event to some extent. But people are saying: "Well, it hasto get better, and we expect it will get better in the spring."As far as the nation goes, our own forecast would be quitesimilar to the Greenbook forecast, though I must confess notnecessarily on the same policy assumption that's embedded in theGreenbook. I don't mean that as a criticism of the Greenbook; Irealize the institutional constraints. But I think we do have to takeinto consideration that a forecast based on the "no change" approachto policy, which has become more of a standard assumption in theGreenbook, may have been biased toward optimism as we've gone throughthese periods. I realize looking immediately ahead that we do havethis unknown in fiscal policy out there. I was very interested inMike's comments that even the things that have been talked about now--the presumption that this [fiscal package] doesn't get "Christmas-treed" too badly--would not have a dramatic effect. At any rate,that's something that we can't anticipate very well at this point.The one place where our forecast does differ is with respect to theunemployment rate. For any given level of GDP, we would have aslightly higher unemployment rate forecast than what is reflected inthe chart. I think that goes back to our own little model [at the-16-2/4-5/92Bank] where we have the labor force increasing slightly more than isanticipated in the Greenbook forecast. We think that could add asmuch as a couple of tenths in some of the intermediate periods and,consistent with that, we'd be somewhat more optimistic on inflation.To sum up, on balance we think that the risks still are onthe down side. One reason has to do with the consumer and thenecessity of forecasting that we're going to see a snapback inconsumption to some extent. If that doesn't happen, I have a fearabout what that would mean for inventory behavior and what that[implies in turn]. We've obviously made an enormous amount ofprogress on inflation and we don't want to give that up. Butconsistent with that, we've also seen this restructuring phenomenonthat is going on, which will be very beneficial for productivity inthe longer run. And it seems to me that the proper role of policy, asothers have said, is to "facilitate" that restructuring phenomenon. Ido have a concern that were we to see a significant further slowing inthe economy, we'd see demands for all kinds of protectionism, not justin the international trade sense but in a slowing down of therestructuring process in many industries. That may be because I comefrom a District where a lot of people have been restructured out andI'm very sensitive to it. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. In terms of the outlook, our view is similar tothe Board staff's. We're somewhat more positive on real growth andright in the middle of the central tendency as far as inflation, asmeasured by the CPI, goes. But what I want to comment on are theassumptions. It's interesting how two people can look at the samething in different ways. Dick was worried about an unchanged interestrate [assumption] and I'm worried about what I think is another policyassumption implicit in there! [Laughter] When we do our forecastfurther out--this would have very little impact on '92--ourpresumption is that at some point, not in the reasonably near futurebut in the course of this year, we'd get back to Ml growth of 4 to 5percent. We don't run our projection solely on that; there's a lot ofjudgment implied. But implicit in the policy assumptions in theGreenbook and the Bluebook is an 11 percent plus growth rate in Ml forall of 1992. Now, I guess my view is that an unchanged interest rateis not necessarily an unchanged monetary policy. If we're pegging aninterest rate and we have an economy that is picking up and there isgreater demand for credit and associated with that transactionbalances are created, we have to supply the reserves. So, my view is--though some things could occur in the short run to disturb this--that over longer periods of time if we're fostering growth in reservesand narrow money at double-digit rates, that's going to come back toroost in terms of higher inflation. So, in terms of underlyingassumptions looking further out, there are considerable differences.The other thing in this context that troubles me in general is thatthis can go on with an apparently benign policy as far as M2 isconcerned because only 25 percent of M2 is comprised of the Mlcomponent; 75 percent is in the non-Mi components. And specialfactors will hold the growth of those non-M1 components probably tozero in 1992. So, we can sit there with 10 percent Ml growth and haveM2 growing at 2-1/2 percent. Enough about that now, but I think wehad the same sort of problem between the middle of '88 and the middleof '89 in reverse in essence, where M2 looked as if it was growing-17-2/4-5/92fast enough at a rate of about 4 percent. We were comfortable withthat, but in fact what we were doing to maintain our pegged fundsrate--which arguably was perhaps too high--at those levels was that wewere pulling out reserves. Ml declined and we pulled out reservesover that one-year period at an annual rate of 3.2 percent. So, Ithink those are important considerations as we look ahead to tomorrow.In terms of the District, I didn't go first today--thatdidn't do any good last time--but the numbers still look pretty good.Non-agricultural payrolls in the most recent period for which we havenumbers were growing at 1.3 percent compared to 0.3 percentnationally, and we're seeing that growth both in [services and goods-producing industries], with particular strength in food and kindredproducts and in textiles. I continue to hear this anecdotal storyabout textile mills running flat out [in our District]; it's partly adelivery problem as I understand it. Inventories have been run downto the point where wholesalers and retailers can't wait for foreigndeliveries so domestic mills are benefiting in the short run. As faras construction goes, residential construction has been particularlystrong over the last year. Contracts have been growing at twice thenational rate over that period. Nonresidential construction is offover the year and most recently, but it's off I would say modestly--about 4 percent over the course of the year--and there are no signs offurther declines at least at the moment. I picked up the same thingBob Black did on the anecdotal side. Over the last two or three weeksfor the first time in many months, I have started to hear somepositive comments from people in the housing area, from a couple ofbankers talking about a pickup in loan demand both in the consumer andcommercial areas, and also from the retailing side. A major nationalretailer based in St. Louis saw activity pick up in the week or twobefore Christmas and that pickup has been sustained throughoutJanuary. At the same time they point out that this is a verypromotional period in terms of prices and that, as Si mentioned, lastyear is really a bad benchmark. But they're doing better than theirplan. Anyway, District-wise, the story is really about the same as Ilaid out last time. At the moment things look pretty good.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. My assessment of the District economy is thatit's just bumping along the bottom. I don't think there are any firmtrends, up or down. But I, too, have picked up in recent weeksperhaps just a tad of improvement in sentiment. Some is fromretailing, some from banking, and some from the housing area. If youdidn't want to see it, I don't think you'd see it; it's not a bigdeal, just a little here and there. You would have to put your fingeron the pulse; it's just a sense, and I think that's a positive sign.As far as the nation goes, I think the Greenbook is aboutright. That forecast is the most likely outcome and I think it's wellreasoned. Nonetheless, it could be wrong and we could relive what wewent through last year. I just put my finger in the air and came upwith my own assessment, which is that there's probably about a 60-65percent chance that we will get an expansion along the lines theGreenbook sees. But I think there's maybe a 25 or 30 percent chancethat we won't and that we could see a repeat of last year, with thebalance [of risks] being that we could get a stronger expansion. So,-18-2/4-5/92it's a profile that has the odds favoring an upswing but enough of achance of a downturn that one can't dismiss it. I do think this is atime when we need some patience; we need to be very pragmatic aboutapplying patience. We ought to wait a reasonable period and look forsome indicators that the economy is picking up. If we don't see thosesigns after some reasonable period, we have to keep an open mind abouthow to proceed. But at this point I'd be willing to play the odds ofa pickup.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. We think our District is growing somewhat moreslowly; it might be described as flat at best. In the agriculturalarea, because of the subsidized grain shipments, the wheat price thatwe've talked about has gone up and that, of course, has been positive.But livestock prices, which had fallen sharply, have only come backslightly. And we're still projecting a slowdown in agriculturalincome, which has [adverse] effects on suppliers to that industry.Also, with natural gas prices being so weak, the energy industry,which is a very important resource in our District, is suffering. Assomeone said, the rig count for us is about the same as for thenation--about 33 percent less than it was a year ago--but very weak;and employment in that sector is very weak as well. In manufacturing,we are involved in the auto industry. Shifts have been eliminated andcutbacks in production schedules have caused unemployment to increasein that industry; layoffs of about 1,000 people in Kansas City werejust announced recently. General aviation has also seen some modestfalloff, but for us that is important. The construction industry hasbeen positive, particularly in the residential area. Some significantgains have occurred there, and that has been the most positive noteout of the District.On the national economy, our projections are less robust thanthose in the Greenbook, partly because we have seen such a poor fourthquarter for the economy and we look at what impact that would havegoing forward. We see a slower increase in the first quarter, orperhaps no increase at all, and a pickup after that, putting ourprojections below the central tendency [unless] we assume that therewill be some modest fiscal package, which would bring us back uptoward the central tendency. With that we see unemployment in thesame range as the staff projection and inflation without the fiscalstimulus probably being within the same range or lower. So, that ishow we see the national economy as well as the District economy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. The Eleventh District economy can be classifiedas flat to down slightly. As Tom [Hoenig] indicated, we're alsosuffering from the low natural gas prices and not too high oil prices.A lot of drilling activity is being shifted overseas. Also, in ourmajor metropolitan areas, defense-related industries at leastprospectively are losing employment, and that's getting a lot ofattention. We continue to hear a lot about the potential loss of amajor GM plant in our metropolitan area. The leading indicators thatour staff looks at for Texas and the District, though, have beenoffering some promise recently. There has been improvement in some ofthe labor market indicators. The average workweek is up and initialclaims for [un]employment are down locally. There is good news along-19-2/4-5/92the border areas: The smaller towns are benefiting from a strongerMexican economy than the U.S. economy. Our contacts, Beigebook andotherwise, have been mentioning being squeezed by their inability topass on a lot of their rising costs. For the first time in a longtime, we've heard complaints about higher minimum wages and the highermandated benefits in health costs and so forth. I've been in Dallas ayear now--this is my first anniversary--and in my [staff's] briefingyesterday I couldn't help but notice that we were at about the sameplace this year relative to the recession and hope for a recovery aswe were a year ago. The main difference was that the staff seemedmore pessimistic this time than they did a year ago. In the area ofhope and better sentiment, the people I talked to reacted veryfavorably to our easing move in December. That seemed to give somehope. They're very skeptical about any benefits coming out of thefiscal side. They don't know what [the fiscal initiatives] will be,but they know they won't do any good and may do harm. I was at TexasA&M last week and I heard about an Aggie doctor who illustrated thisfiscal package very well. He amputated a patient's leg, came in thenext morning and said: "Well, I have some good news and some badnews. The bad news is I took the wrong leg; the good news is theother one is getting better." [Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern, can you improve onthis?MR. STERN. I won't even try! For a long time, I've beenreporting that the District economy is relatively steady, ploddingahead at a slow pace. That continues to be a reasonable descriptionof the situation. Obviously, some sectors are doing better thanothers and some regions of the District are doing better, but none isreally doing awfully. So, in that sense, we seem to be doing okay.On the positive side, as several people have already commented,recently almost wherever one goes, residential construction seems tobe improving; that is underway. And as other people have commented,attitudes clearly have improved in the sense that while they alwaysseem to me to be worse than justified by circumstances some of theintensity of the gloom seems to have lifted, if I can put it that way.So, slightly better attitudes at least seem to be emerging.On the negative side, some manufacturers have commented--andI think this is implicit in the charts that Mike presented--thatinventories are excessive upstream and that has started to affect themin the sense that orders have slowed and so forth. Although we're nota big textile district, our textile manufacturers are running prettywell full out, as Tom [Melzer also] commented. So, there is somethinggoing on at least in that area.With regard to the national economy, I do think the stage isset for something like the Greenbook forecast. I don't have a verydifferent view as to how things will turn out. I would reemphasizethe point that has been made that it is by most comparisons a veryconservative forecast, and it wouldn't be altogether shocking to me ifthe economy did somewhat better than that. The one thing that doestrouble me a bit, looking at the national circumstances at the moment,is the state of the long-term bond market where clearly nothingfavorable has been happening in recent weeks. Indeed, rates are atthe levels they were before the discount rate cut back in December.-20-2/4-5/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I have very little substantivelyto try to offer today, but I would like to put out one notion. I amstruck by the very strong consensus that I read in the press--andindeed it seems to be here as well--that the economy is likely to be"flattish" in the first quarter, that it will be a little better orthat a recovery of some magnitude will occur in the second quarter,and that the economy then will move on up from there. I share thatview. What worries me is that I have a bit of the contrarian in me,and I ask myself: If we have this very strong consensus, it'sprobably wrong, but in what direction and how? Is it too strong ortoo weak? Again, I'm part of the consensus, but my suspicion is thatwe could very well see events prove to be on the stronger side. If wewere going to have a collapse, it seems to me that it would likelyhave been evident in the fourth quarter and would be underway now, andI don't sense that it is going on now. And the longer that doesn'tappear, it seems to me the less likely that it will. It's probablytoo soon to rule it out, but [more strength than is projected] wouldseem to me to be the way things are liable to go. We have some thingsgoing for us already that should help, maybe more than we know. Theshort-term rates and the monetary stimulus that's in the pipelineshould help. The refinancing of homes is putting more spendableincome into the pockets of people every day. And I wouldn't be a bitsurprised if this little uptick in long rates doesn't accelerate that[development]; and it might accelerate home sales as well. I'd alsobet that the white collar layoffs have seen their peak. I think mostCEOs who felt the need to lay off workers probably wanted to be ableto report it in their year-end statements and got it done in thefourth quarter. If there's anything to that, layoffs are going todecline and that should help confidence. The credit crunch may bebeginning to ease and the bank crisis may be beginning to ease. We'rehearing here today and we read that banks are looking for good loans.My suspicion is that if they look, they're going to find them alongthe way. Fourth-quarter earnings of banks were better; their stockprices are up; and the loan officers' survey says that nobody istightening anymore. So, maybe we will begin to get some relief there,although I don't think it's going to be very dramatic very quickly.On balance, I'm with the consensus but if the consensus does prove tobe wrong, I think it's going to be on the up side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I want to discuss for a minutethis confidence issue. If the consumer is truly the key to thiseconomy and if a lack of confidence is what is driving his behavior atthe moment, I ask myself: What are the things that are going tochange that? Now, my previous suggestion that we hire a behavioralpsychologist was rejected by this Committee last time, so I waslooking around for other solutions!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Couldn't afford it!MR. LAWARE. We couldn't afford it; well, the Administrativegovernor put a veto on that!MR. KELLEY. You already voted for the budget; it's too late!-21-2/4-5/92MR. LAWARE. We've been told since November that thePresident's speech would lay down a program for the country that wouldinspire confidence. It was a letdown; it certainly didn't draw any"hazzahs" from the assembled throng and it certainly did not create aconsensus that we are now on a high road. The corporaterestructurings and the layoffs, which Governor Kelley referred to,have continued, and they increasingly involve Blue Chip companies thatwere considered above the storm. And I think that has further alarmednot only blue collar workers, the traditional layoff victims, butwhite collar workers as well. Congress is certainly mushing aroundwithout much show of confidence-building leadership. The fiscalsolutions involving massive cuts in defense spending seem to me toinstill panic in the hearts not only of employees of defenseindustries but also their shareholders. And modest tax cuts don'tsound to the recipients as if nirvana has arrived. Having said that,it is hard for me to believe that further monetary ease in the absenceof some statesmanlike political leadership can really restore theeconomy to vigor. At the same time, it seems to me that previousmonetary policy moves and the accumulated demand that has to be therein the economy should make something close to the staff Greenbookprojections for GDP a realizable target without further monetarystimulus. In the pursuit of price stability, I don't think the modestgrowth rate outlined in the Greenbook is an undesirable outcome,although I must confess that the staff outlook for inflation issomewhat disappointing in the context of that slower growth rate. Mr.Chairman, that's all I have to say on the confidence issue today.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I don't have much to add. I like theGreenbook. I liked it last February as well. And I hope I never seeit [repeated] again--not next February at least! I think the economyremains in a state of lethargy, although perhaps the intensity of thegloom is burning off. I think it's worthwhile to ask where we stand.We're in pretty good shape in the sense that we do have a lot ofstimulus in the pipeline and we can see that working visibly andforcefully in financial markets--all the things we've mentioned interms of the refinancings. Of course, we've been making this argumentfor some time now and someone is going to ask: When does thisstimulus start to trickle out the other end of the pipeline? We havecut the fed funds rate 175 basis points in the last six months; 125basis points of that has come in the last four months; our last movewas six weeks ago. Sooner or later people are going to say: "Where'sthe beef here?" What real economic data do we have, even the forward-looking data like orders, that would suggest that we have found theappropriate monetary stance consistent with recovery? The housingmarket continues its modest rebound and we have exports as well. Ofcourse, it's still pretty early in the lagged response cycle.However, so far we have relatively little to show for our actions.Those actions were certainly received as a credible move to realignshort-term rates with lower inflation expectations but they have yetto produce much in the way of real economic stimulus. It's good thatM2 is growing a bit more but it's still in the lower half of itsrange. When I look at the outlook for persistent slack in theeconomy, capacity utilization and labor, and the continued slow growthin M2 and credit, with significant sectors of the economy clearlysitting on the bench out of the recovery game--I mean by that stateand local governments, commercial real estate, and consumers in the-22-2/4-5/92sense that they lack the debt capacity for explosive spending--it'sstill difficult for me to conjure up much fear that an overly robustrecovery will ignite inflation.I guess there is some fear on the fiscal side, although Ithink that will tend to lead to chaos rather than effective stimulus.Nonetheless, we have had growth in M1 and reserves that has gone fromhigh to very high. We also have a high long-term bond rate. Giventhe way the long bond has been reacting to statements on the screen,the evidence tends to suggest that the long bond rate would fall if weeased again. That's no reason to ease, necessarily. Despite that,the fact that the long bond rate hasn't come down more is clearly aconcern. I think underlying that concern is primarily the fiscalsituation. Despite a rigorously binding budget agreement, the deficithas continued to balloon even before one considers the fiscal package.And now we're moving to a fiscal bidding war where the first bid is adeficit of $400 billion. If I were a long bond investor, certainly Icould understand why I would be a little concerned. There is thesupply side of that and also the artificial supply in the sense thatdealers have been heavily shorting government securities as part ofthe process of issuing this record volume of corporate debt. And Isuppose there may be the expectations of recovery as well. So, Ithink the long bond rate has to give one pause. It is consistent withthe expectation of a cessation of progress on inflation once therecovery starts. It's interesting to note that many privateforecasters as well as OMB and the Administration project a flatteningout of the inflation rate once the recovery gets underway--aflattening out in the 3 plus percent range rather than the continuedprogress that the Greenbook shows. And this is despite very extendedperiods of slow growth in M2 and the persistence of slack in theeconomy. So, I think there's ample reason for caution. I, for one,don't want to see us go so far that a major tightening is inevitableonce the recovery gets underway. And I'm certainly sobered by therealization that some on the Committee would suggest that we may havegone that far already.So, I would agree with Ed Boehne that it's a time forpatience. We're at a critical period here in the sense that we have afew weeks of relative quiet before the fiscal or political battleintensifies. I fear that will be even more unsettling for the marketsand may tend to immobilize us. While it is a time for patience, Ithink it's also a time for vigilance. We should start to see some ofthis stimulus dribble out of the pipeline soon and we ought to startbeing concerned if we don't get some movement soon or if we shouldstart to get some convincing negative news or significant signs ofdeterioration.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.MR. CORRIGAN. Speaking near the end, there's not much leftto say in terms of the national economy. It's very hard to takeserious exception to Mike's forecast at least for 1992; 1993 isobviously another question. I would agree, as many of you have saidin one fashion or another, that attitudes at least have stoppedgetting worse. Whether they are better, it's hard to say; but one can[at least] say they are no worse. Even some of the most bearish majorcorporate CEOs now associate themselves with that. I also think onecan make a pretty darn good argument that the stabilization of-23-2/4-5/92attitudes, even if that's all it is, is fairly directly related to thechange in monetary policy that was made at the end of December.Now, in terms of the shaping of the future, I have managed toconvince myself that we probably are a bit further along in thiscorrection of the debt overhang [problem] that Tom Simpson was talkingabout than maybe is fully recognized. I also think we can now beginto make a case that the banking sector--and perhaps the financialsector more generally--looks a little better even if there still is along way to go. And I do agree with several people who made thecomment that banks are more [receptive to borrowers]. Just in termsof advertising space in the New York Times, we see a lot of full pageads now about loans, not deposits. If those two points are accurateeven at the margin, I'd stipulate that one of the key assumptions ofthe chart show, to the effect that the credit crunch will ease"somewhat"--I think that was the word--in 1993, might be a bitpessimistic. I might be able to envision that [easing] at least in"somewhat" terms some time in 1992. But having said that, I agreealso with John LaWare that the confidence factor is the wild card.Even if there are some straws in the wind that smell a little betterand look a little better, the economy does remain vulnerable to shock.That's one of the reasons why I blow a little hot and cold about thelevel of the stock market. But I also think, as a number of peoplehave said, that the source of particular uncertainty is political witha capital "P," bipartisan. I can't top Bob McTeer but I agree thatthe great [risk] on the fiscal side is that [the stimulus] will getoverdone or that the process will get ugly, or both. If it gets uglyin a process sense, that certainly is not going to help confidence.If it gets ugly in a substantive sense, financial markets aren't goingto like it. And that is a major risk.Perhaps a bit longer term, I must also say that I take thisJapan/U.S. thing as a symptom of what I perceive as a real rise inprotectionism and some elements of neo-isolationism. This is a realconcern even though it may not seem as imminent as the fiscal[actions]. And while it's even less imminent, the point that BillMcDonough made in his remarks at the opening of the meeting about thistension among the Europeans--with a quite different economic profilein Germany on the one hand than in most of the other countries, withits implications for exchange rates and interest rates and some othersymptoms of a political stress point--can have important economicimplications, though maybe not immediately. So, there's no shortageof things to worry about out there. But the risks as I see them aremuch better balanced today than I viewed them over much of the fourthquarter. I think we always run the risk of instant replay but forthat reason I feel more comfortable with the kind of profile in Mike'sforecast right now than I have for the last few months.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that the bond market continues tobe a check in regard to our ability even to re-inflate. I have somequestion as to whether we can cause the growth path to be much morerobust than is forecast. Probably we would have to demonstrate thatwe're re-inflating before we can alter some of these conditions thatexist in people's confidence level. I don't think I've ever seen somuch ill regard for our government among people. And even though wethink that inflation is a monetary phenomenon, people out there have a-24-2/4-5/92lack of confidence in government and what spills over from thatsomehow or other is that things won't be dealt with in a propermanner. Maybe that is what causes long bond prices to be at the sameplace they were 2-1/4 years ago. That's a rather sad commentary.Now, clearly, the housing market has been helped because the seven-year Treasury rate has come down quite substantially over the last2-1/4 years even though the long rate has not. I sense, as many ofyou do, that there is some perking up, particularly in the housingmarket. Houses are selling; old houses are selling. And that doesinvolve new activities. Certainly, a lot of refinancing is going on.As to whether the refinancing is being done in such a manner as toreduce the payments, the best sources that I have indicate that 70percent of the refinancings are going to reducing the length of thematurity and keeping the payment [amounts] about the same.Clearly, M2 looks a little better than it did a month ago. Iagree that in the commercial banking system the capital positions ofmany of the banks are improving; and the stock market seems to be aplus. But I can't find any robust sector. I can't find any area, inany industry or any geographic region, that really is alive. I know,Tom, that you have those textile mills running at capacity; but as faras robust and entrepreneurial spirits being charged up, that doesn'tseem to me to be really there. I think some additional mischief couldoccur on the international scene. Europe could be a little softerthan the staff has [projected] in the Greenbook. I see very littleprospects for the GATT round getting anywhere by April, as everyone issaying. And if that doesn't occur, I tend to share the feelings thathave been expressed about how protectionism might slow us down. So,we have what I think is a recovery out there, but I certainly don'tthink it is a very robust one. If it is, I'll be mistaken. I'msomewhat more optimistic on the GDP deflator for this year, but onlymarginally so.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. I think that we're back to the problem of thelaw of averages. Listening to the comments around the table, onaverage, the Greenbook is correct. But with all respect to our staff,when I did a count I counted five who are more optimistic, five whoare more pessimistic, and two who think you're about right. It meansthat on average you're right. I think about Mike Kelley's comment tothe effect that the consensus is wrong; our dilemma is that we don'tknow in which direction it is wrong. One of the reasons that's trueis that we have begun in the legislative and executive arenas to adoptpro-cyclical policies instead of the usual anti-cyclical policies.Now, if you'll excuse a witticism: In the current environment, pro-cyclical policies mean that when things are bad, act aggressively tomake them worse. If you look at the particular legislation that haspassed, I think the pro-cyclical nature is clear. Beginning with thebanking legislation: Through regulatory fiat and through legislativepolicy we've adopted banking provisions that, when things start todeteriorate because they feed through into the capital environment,rapidly shrink loans. When things begin to turn around and we haverapidly rising capital, either through market values or through theability of the banks to raise equity we will hopefully, sometime, havea rapidly rising ability for banks to make loans, but right now we'reon the down side.-25-2/4-5/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sounds like the Banking Act of 1863.MR. LINDSEY. It very well could be; my memory doesn't goback that far, Mr. Chairman, and unfortunately nor does my history.MR. BOEHNE. You were on the wrong side of the war!MR. LINDSEY. Yes, that's right; we were fighting you guysback then! [Laughter] In labor markets we also have adopted pro-cyclical policies. They were well intentioned, but they have theproblem of being pro-cyclical. In particular, I point to plantclosing legislation which requires substantial advance notice. I canunderstand the humanitarian reasons for doing so, but when the economystarts to turn down, or when we're in a down cycle, a company isforced to announce more plant closings, which has an adverse feed intopsychology [and] the confidence factor. And if you look at what ishappening on Capitol Hill, the other two potentially bad things thatwill happen if things continue to get worse--and they've already beenmentioned--are a gross fiscal stimulus, which will push up long-termbond rates, and a revival of protectionism.We have to think about how to interrupt this pro-cyclicalpolicy. The keys have already been mentioned. The first is that thepublic knows that the political apparatus is not working well. Onecan see that in that the purpose of the politicians is to engenderconfidence. The President certainly billed his speech as one toengender confidence and the opposition appropriately called it "warmedover" and said that there was no confidence there. Further, if youthink about why our December policy was apparently as successful as itwas in building confidence--just about everyone commented on that--Ithink it was because it was decisive.With all that as background, I think that on average thestaff forecast is right. I don't know which way it is wrong, but I doknow that it is wrong. I do know that the risks are high on both theup side and on the down side. And the proper policy call is that weshould be as flexible as possible and should be prepared to take onthe risks whether it turns out that we're wrong up or wrong down. Inaddition to being flexible, we should also learn the lesson ofDecember and we should act decisively when we act. But in whichdirection that action should be, I share the Vice Chairman's view: Idon't know. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you. Coming toward the end of thisdiscussion, there's really not as much to say. Based on the Greenbookanalysis and the comments that have been put forward describing whatis going on in each of your Districts, it still seems to me that atbest we can say the recovery is sluggish. We've been saying that forquite a while and I agree with Governor Angell in that I can't seewhere that source of light is that will lead us out of this. Some ofthe disappointing news that we're continuing to hear really confirmsthe hypothesis that we're seeing some structural changes. This is notjust a cyclical move. The problem with that is that it may take uslonger to come out of the recession than might have been the case inthe past. I will say, on the positive side, that the positive signswe are seeing are very good for the long run. The balance sheet-26-2/4-5/92restructuring certainly is good for the long term, as is thestrengthening of the banking sector; and the fact that inflation doesnot seem to be as much of a concern in a broad variety of sectors isgood for the long term. We're seeing some change in people'sviewpoint toward savings. We've been saying for a long time that weneed to have savings policies in this country, and I think we'restarting to see some improvement there. And the easing that occurredin late December was about as positively received as we might havehoped. So, that was very helpful. I do think that a lot of theeasing that has occurred over the last year and a half probably hasbeen soaked up in the balance sheet restructuring. So, a lot of theeasing that we may have thought was in the pipeline may be used up. Ido agree that we're not yet seeing in the real economy the easing thatoccurred in late December. We certainly saw [mostly positivereactions], with the exception of the long bond situation. Certainlythe stock market reacted very favorably. I'm concerned, as is Larry,about what might be happening on Capitol Hill to fix the situation.In view of the fact that I don't think the easing is fully reflectedin the real economy, I don't feel quite the same pressure to ease thatI was feeling in December. But like the Vice Chairman, I think wehave to be quite vigilant over the next perhaps couple of weeks. Inthe next couple of weeks there may be a window before Congress startsdoing all kinds of things. If there is a desire generally to ease,from a political perspective--though I hate to say it--it may bebetter to do it sooner than later. On the one hand, it's not expectedbefore Congress gets going, and it may well strengthen the hand ofthose who wish to try to address the deficit situation. So, if we'rethinking in terms of ease, I'd be inclined to urge that it be soonerrather than later. Nevertheless, having said that, I'm not feelingquite the same strong pressure that I was in late December.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. With that note I think itwould probably be appropriate to adjourn until 9:00 a.m. tomorrowmorning.[Meeting recessed]-27-2/4-5/92February 5, 1992--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next item on the agenda is the long-run ranges for the aggregates, and I will call on Don Kohn to briefus. I'm sorry, Don, could you hold up for a second? Wayne Angellwould like to amend some of the remarks that he made yesterday, soperhaps the best time to do that would be right now. Governor, thefloor is yours.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I don't know whether "amend" isexactly the right word because as I was talking yesterday andlistening to myself it sounded very confusing to me. [Laughter]MR. BLACK. You can imagine how the rest of us felt!MR. ANGELL. I decided last night that the reason it wasconfusing was because I wasn't really willing to put the proper labelson what I think are our current circumstances. I don't think we cando the right job of selecting policy unless we understand moreprecisely the nature of the circumstances that we're in. Thosecircumstances are, I believe, that we are [involved] in a long-cycleevent. And it's a long-cycle event about which we must understand thecause because we can't do the cure if we don't understand the cause.I think the cause of this long-cycle event was the very expansionistmonetary polices of the 1970s that created double-digit inflation.That double-digit inflation began a debt cycle in the private sector,which in a sense was not sustainable unless the rate of inflation wasto be increased continually. I believe it was not possible for theworld's reserve currency to be subject to a continuation of thatinflation. So, it was entirely proper that under the Volcker FederalReserve that was headed off and brought back down.But, ultimately, no more inflation means that the privatesector--either corporations or households--does not wish to hold thedebt as a ratio to their income that they did before. Now, during along-cycle event it seems to me that the proper policy is one ofprice-level stability in order to get real stability to the event. Aswe've found during this period, to keep disinflation from turning intodeflation we've had to provide reserves at a rate much [higher] thanwe ordinarily would think necessary, and we still have had a hard timekeeping M2 and M3 growth where we wanted it. If it's the case thathouseholds and corporations are trying to reduce debt as a percentageof their cash flow and their income, then it seems to me that we haveto admit something that central bankers never want to admit, and thatis that the government has to become the debtor of last resort in sucha circumstance. Because if we're going to force the growth of creditat a 3 percent rate or whatever even anemic rate may seem desirable,then someone has to be the owner on the other side because creditcan't grow faster than debt grows. I think it's entirely responsibleand important for the continuation of the creation of the privatesector that those debt ratios be brought down. And under thosecircumstances I do not know how government debt can keep from goingup. That raises the question for me as to what we say about thisborrowing because it's the borrowing that causes the people out thereto be so unhappy. The people are unhappy with their governmentbecause they don't understand how during this critical time we canhave what they call "irresponsible borrowing."-28-2/4-5/92Now, if that's the case, then I am somewhat admitting thatKeynesian economics is really depression economics and I don't want tosound Keynesian; it's terrible for me to sound Keynesian, but I thinkwe ought to be wise in regard to what the government does as itincreases its debt. As defense spending comes down and as we havelayoffs of highly skilled workers in the defense sector, it seems tome that it will be important for us to have [other] capitalinvestment. It's not good to replace defense spending withoutemployment compensation. That's a very bad tradeoff in regard to ourgetting done what we need to get done. So, I would much prefer torecognize the desirability of public sector spending on theinfrastructure, that is, building highways and bridges and doingpublic sector spending that has the best multiplier in regard to theprivate sector. In other words, what I was trying to say yesterdayand sounded so confused about is that I don't think monetary policycan in and of itself resolve this problem. I don't think monetarypolicy can do it [now] any more than it did in the Great Depression.So, Mr. Chairman, I wanted to revise and extend my remarks torecognize that this event is different. By that I do not mean that ithas to be more severe; I do not mean that the outlook is necessarilyworse than Mr. Prell has it. But I do believe there's a downside riskto the outcome that Mr. Prell has outlined. That is, if the debtcontraction in households and in the business sector is to go on andif households ex ante wish to increase their savings all at the sametime, then the paradox of thrift leads us to somewhat slower consumersector spending than we have projected in front of us. And underthose circumstances our job ought to be viewed somewhat differentlyand that is not that we can fix it but that we can keep it fromgetting worse. That would lead me to a stability orientation. Thankyou for indulging me in that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, governor. Let's now move onto Don Kohn.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]MR. LINDSEY. Thank you. I'm going to be distributing apicture of what President Black and I will be proposing. Mr.Chairman, while that picture is going around the table, I'd like tobegin with an apology. It had been my intent this morning to wear theThomas Jefferson tie that Alan Murray made famous following the lastFOMC meeting. But I got dressed in the dark because I didn't want towake my wife, and it turned out that I pulled out my Adam Smith tieinstead of my Thomas Jefferson tie. I was embarrassed, but Bob Blackhas reassured me that had Smith lived on this side of the Atlantic heno doubt would have chosen Virginia. And he also no doubt would havepreferred the "Tunnel Option." With that aside--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The last time I spoke to him he didn'tindicate that!MR. LINDSEY. It's the "Invisible Tunnel."MR. BLACK. He may have thought you weren't up-to-date on theissues.-29-2/4-5/92MR. LINDSEY. [Statement and charts entitled "The VirginiaPlan"--see Appendix.]MR. BLACK. Shall I go ahead, Mr. Chairman?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Go right ahead.MR. BLACK. I can't do what he said I would do, but actuallyhe's given me a lot more credit for this than he should have. I hadput this on the back burner; I had thought about it many timesearlier. He surfaced the plan and sent it to me and asked for mysuggestions and I made one or two suggestions, which he verygraciously adopted. Then he sent me another version and I made oneminor suggestion on that. So, the thought of giving me the credit forit is really misplaced. Since he has entitled it "The Virginia Plan,"I wish very much that I could have Patrick Henry do the defense!There's little doubt that he and Thomas Jefferson and GeorgeWashington and George Mason would certainly have a favorite rate ofgrowth of the money supply with the use of "tunnels," if anybody hadever brought that up. I do know that they would be a bit worried ifthey knew the "Virginia Plan" was being defended by somebody who wasborn in Kentucky. My only defense there would be that Kentucky wasonce a part of Virginia.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It was then.MR. KELLEY. That's right.MR. BLACK. Yes, it was then, that's right. I wish we couldgo back in time and I could speak at that time; but while I'm aKentuckian by birth I'm a Virginian by choice--maybe that will give mea certain amount of credibility--and I also have two children who arenative Virginians and I married a native Virginian. You kind ofabsorb some of this as you go along.I think Governor Lindsey has already stated quite well thereasons for adopting the multi-year tunnel approach instead of theannual cones and basing this on the level of M2 at the end of 1990originally. Now, we set the data on 1991, but it comes out to thesame thing. Let me make three additional comments on this, mostly byway of elaboration. First, the upside insurance this would give us atthis particular moment is really a compelling reason. The [beauty] ofthis tunnel is that it pretty much guarantees that we would get pricestability over the long run--which I think should be the objective ofmonetary policy to the exclusion of all others--as long as we werewilling to reduce the rate of growth in the money supply until we gotit down to the rate at which the potential output of the economy couldincrease [over time]. Now, everything we know about monetary historytells us that we can stabilize price levels if we get [money supplygrowth] down over time to somewhere in the neighborhood of 3 percentor so. People differ on what the potential growth of the economy is,but I don't think there's any doubt that it would be greater if we hadprice stability than if we didn't. And this is essentially themessage of the P* model, which is one of the finest pieces of work Ithink we've done in the System. I wish I'd had a hand in that, but Icertainly applaud the others of you who did.-30-2/4-5/92I think a continuous unbroken tunnel would be a much moreappropriate and powerful device for controlling the long-run rate ofgrowth in M2 than the current cones because it would eliminate basedrift. And base drift has really been the bane of our existence.Whatever base drift has brought us in the way of short-termflexibility in some years, in practice I think it has made itvirtually impossible for us to control the long-run rate of trendgrowth of M2, with the result that we have [not] known and nobody elsehas known what the price level would be several years down the road.Consequently, I've concluded that no matter how strong our intentionsare to reduce inflation--and for the last several years this group hashad a stronger inclination in that direction than virtually at anytime in the history of the System and I don't think that intention hasever been stronger than it is right now--I don't think we will achievethat goal. Despite our feelings on that and our best efforts, I don'tthink we will ever achieve that goal unless we do something aboutmoving away from our present targeting procedures. And I think thetunnel would address this. Moreover, and I can't emphasize this pointtoo much: I think this move to a tunnel would greatly increase thecredibility of the System. We have said repeatedly that our intentionover time is to bring down the rate of growth in the money supply tononinflationary levels. This would spell that out in a great dealmore detail and yet it would be clear that we would have the necessaryleeway in the short run to do what needs to be done. And if this didincrease our credibility, it would greatly reduce the transitionalcost of moving to price stability.Second--and all of this is relevant to the comments that Donput in the Bluebook under the "tunnel option"--it's certainly true asthe Bluebook suggests that we wouldn't want to adopt the tunnel optionwhen the relationships between M2 and income and prices are going tofluctuate in the future. All we really have to guide us is pastexperience and, historically, we know that there have been variationsin the short run extending sometimes more than a year but that in thelong run there has been stability in that relationship. V2, by thebest statistical measures that we have, has been constant andpredictable over the long run. Consequently, this tunnel approachmakes a great deal of sense to me. But the tunnel needs to be wideenough to accommodate a fair amount of these variations in V2 that wenormally have over periods as long as one to several years. Maybe a4-point spread, as Governor Lindsey suggested, would be the properamount, but it's possible that the width should be greater than that.It's important to note in this regard that even a very wide tunnelwould still constrain the trend growth of M2 over a long period oftime sufficiently to ensure price stability.And finally, the Bluebook may be right in suggesting that asubstantial further easing of policy might be needed to get M2 up tothe midpoint of Governor Lindsey's tunnel. But if we had a tunnelthat extended our long-run trend objectives to 1993, I wouldn't feelcompelled to move M2 up too rapidly from its present position near thebottom of the tunnel to the midpoint by the end of this year if itwere clear that the recovery had resumed. In other words, this is nota ploy for ease. What I'm trying to do here is to suggest a long-runstrategy that would give us the necessary flexibility in the shortrun. So, with regard to the width of the tunnel, it might be that itwould be better for us to have a 5-percentage point tunnel if wewanted to make sure right now that we accommodate what is probably a-31-2/4-5/92good projection on the part of the staff, which is that 3-1/2 percentM2 growth in 1992 would be consistent with a resumption of therecovery. But, again, even a fairly wide tunnel like that would beconcerned with the course and control of M2 over a long period oftime. And that to me is the beauty of the tunnel approach.So, Mr. Chairman, like Governor Lindsey, I hope the Committeewill give the "Virginia Plan" favorable consideration. I did notadmit this to you, Larry, but as you were labeling this "The VirginiaPlan" I thought to myself it really sounds more Hamiltonian thanJeffersonian. And then I thought with your background from New Yorkyou could send a "New York Plan." But in my case, although I spentright much time in New York, the first time I went to New York Icrossed on the Staten Island Ferry prior to shipping overseas at theend of World War II and I didn't even see the Statue of Liberty. Iwas the only one who went out without seeing it and that was the mainthing I was interested in seeing. So, I didn't think I could defend aNew York Plan, but I do think this may be a little more Hamiltonianthan Jeffersonian. And I hope the Committee will honor thesedistinguished forebears of ours who, other than an occasional glass ofwhiskey, probably would have liked nothing better than a slow, steadyrate of growth in the money supply!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well done, gentlemen. Let me raise afew issues on the other side of this. I don't think there's anyquestion that we all hold the basic view that we wish to move towardprice stability as a necessary condition for maximum long-term realgrowth. Also, I think that the monetary policies we set around thistable, and the mechanisms we employ to achieve them, don't rest allthat much on simplistic cones, tunnels, or whatever. Hopefully, we'relooking at the issues in somewhat greater detail to understand therelationship between money and GDP. Having said that, I have been inand out of a position in favor of the "Tunnel Approach" over theyears, and this is the original version of money supply growthnotions. I think the key question we have to ask ourselves is: Towhat extent do we actually use the cones to operate policy?We're obviously acutely aware of what other people see withrespect to these data. And to the extent that the particular conesthat we use--or even if we were to use tunnels--reflect our basic viewof what we wish to be done, then indeed we would follow them. But thecone is a simplified version of P*. Everything that's in the cone isobviously in P* in a somewhat more detailed way. And we do use P* asa guide and indeed have been using it, obviously, for the last severalyears as we try to move our way toward price stability. Indeed, it'sthat sort of process that suggests to us what the path of money supplyshould be. So, I think we have to ask ourselves several questionsabout this. Would our switching from cones to tunnels affect what weactually do here? Or are we trying to alter the perception of themarket and other people? I submit it is the latter, not the former,that is crucial to this. And if that is in fact the case, then Ithink we are confronted with a very difficult problem here, which isthat even though we may perceive the tunnel as being an endeavor tosimplify P* as the long-term goal, as a practical matter we aresignaling a very sharp and immediate reduction in the funds rate tomove M2 growth up [in the cone]. Were we to start something like thiswhen we are at the midpoint of a range, it would be very easy to do.I don't think one can readily argue strenuously--with the exception of2/4-5/92a few minor issues I would raise--between the desirability of a coneand a tunnel. I think every person around this table has been on bothsides of this in their monetary policy discussions. I'm mostconcerned that if we were to do this at this stage, it would look asthough we were merely trying to hide the fact that we really want tomove the money supply up sharply by dropping the funds rate. And inthe context of what is happening on the fiscal side, I must tell youthat I would be quite nervous about that perception being conveyedeven if somebody as formidable as Bob Black, who certainly has noreputation as an inflationist in this country, were to come forwardand defend this particular plan.My basic impression at this stage is that were we to movefrom what we define as the bottom of the range and put the tunnel intoposition, we essentially would be saying that we are going to make amajor push on the money supply and presumably on interest rates. Now,that clearly is not the basic view of either Governor Lindsey orPresident Black. My concern is that there's a degree of skepticismout there, which I find frankly to be very deep-seated. And while Ipersonally would not mind discussing this in some detail--I might evenvote for it if we were starting from the midpoint of the tunnelbecause most of the arguments you make are valid arguments and I thinkthey make a great deal of sense--my concern is where we are at thisparticular point. The difficulty that we have mechanically is that wehave chosen, for better or worse, to rebase on the grounds that thereare structural problems in the relationship between M2 and grossdomestic product that [cause that relationship to] veer off from timeto time for several years. And that shows up in the P* data; it wouldshow up in the tunnel data. What our cones enable us to do is toreset all the past imbalances to square one. As I said to some of mycolleagues, it's like pushing the odometer on the dashboard back tozero so you start from scratch. Now, in today's environment, we knowthere's base drift; we know that money growth is under where weprobably would want it to be. And even though we start from squareone, what we do as a consequence is to adjust to that fact [on thebasis of] our judgments as to where we want it to be. I was alsoconcerned that if we were to move the range up to, say, 3-1/2 to 7-1/2percent or something like that instead of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent toreflect the base drift or even more, that would create the sameproblem that starting at the bottom of the cone suggests.The general [suggestion] that the other "Kohn" raised withrespect to this issue is, namely, to stay where we are but torecognize fully that we have had base drift. And if indeed thedepressing forces on M2 which we presume to be temporary start to easeand M2 starts to move into the upper [portion] of the cone, I don'tthink we should feel pressed to tighten policy to bring it back in;[rather we would] make an ad hoc adjustment in our procedures torecognize that this is not a bad level of M2 at which to be. So, Iwould conclude that I don't see any difference in philosophy betweenmy view of money and that which Governor Lindsey and President Blackexpounded. In fact, were we in a particular range at this stage andchanged to a [tunnel], it would not create the question of "What kindof game are they trying to pull?" I'm concerned about doing that atthis time. I think the benefits that we would get from the tunnel, asGovernor Lindsey outlined it, we could achieve just as readily if weare willing to operate in the upper [portion] of the cone, withoutcreating for ourselves what I would consider to be a rather difficult-33-2/4-5/92public relations problem. As much as we may think that we are doingthings like this as a strictly analytical monetary policy position,I'm fearful that the rest of the world with its [high] degree ofcynicism would not give us the benefit of the doubt. Would anyoneelse like to speak?MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, could I say something in responseto that?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Go ahead.MR. BLACK. I don't hear anything you say that makes anythingbut sense, but my policy position now and I guess for the short run isthat I'm going to argue that we not change the federal funds rate. Idon't see any reason for doing that at this point. If we're concernedthat [adopting the tunnel approach] would look like a tightening, thenI think we could widen this tunnel, make it 5 percentage points, whichwould ensure that we would come within our targets. And on your lastpoint, in a sense I think you're saying that it wouldn't be so bad todisregard the cone if the money supply were to go over it; and Icertainly would want to do that myself if [that began to happen]. ButI think that would be a bit more damaging to our credibility than ifwe had a tunnel [because with a tunnel] we would not be seen asdisregarding our targets. People think that we don't pay a lot ofattention to the targets. That's the only reason, really, why I want[a procedure] that we could live with and have the flexibility we needand not [unintelligible]. And I think with those two changes we coulddo it okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell and then GovernorLindsey.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I really appreciated thisdiscussion. It is exactly the right presentation. I side with youthat the most critical question for us at this point in time isconveying what we are going to do in the short run. So, I agree withyour position. I would, however, like to keep on tap this notion ofthe tunnel as possible for the long run as well as the short run.That is, we sometimes have [viewed] a yearly [target] as if it werethe long run and then our FOMC meeting [decision] as the short run.It does seem to me that once we find ourselves at the middle of thedesired tunnel, it might be good in terms of a track record for us tohave [the tunnels] out there as we [draw] our cones to see whether ornot we have cumulative base drift.Bob, I was a little surprised that you were willing to accepta 4 percent growth path in your tunnel. I would have thought that youwould have insisted on a growth path in the tunnel of either 2 percentor 3 percent, which is consistent with price level stability. Now, Ifind this tunnel arrangement puts us in an expansionist mode; I thinkit does exactly what you suggested, Mr. Chairman. If we had said weshould have fostered growth of the money stock at 4 percent last year,not 4-1/2 percent, and if the tunnel from that should have been 3 not4 percent, then we would have a long-run tracking guide that I thinkgives P* its force but yet maintains a business as usual [approach] inregard to this year's cone.-34-2/4-5/92MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, could I just say one thing inresponse to that, because I think Governor Angell has hit upon a veryimportant point? When this was first done, Larry had it at 4-1/2percent and I suggested that we cut it to 4 percent. That was doneand he carried the 4 percent rate on out into 1993. I would not want4 percent in 1993; I would want to bend it down to 3-1/2 percent orsomething of that sort. There's a sentence in the letter that he sentme in which it appeared, if someone read it carelessly, that he mightbe committing himself to 4 percent forever; I don't think that was hisintention. So, I suggested that we make it appear that we want tobend it down. What surprised you is not the way I had suggested. So,I'm really where you thought I would be; it's just that we didn't endup changing that particular thing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Could I just ask you a quick question?If we were to adopt this and the money supply were way out of theseranges by the end of this year for reasons that are fully technical,would you feel that we would be required to push back into that tunnelover a particular period of time or [would we] stay outside for ayear, or what?MR. BLACK. I would say if [the reason for such growth] ispurely technical, it would be permissible to go outside. I have notbeen as disturbed about the low rate of growth in money we've hadrecently as I would have been had I not felt that there wereexplanations for it. If we have good reasons for why it's growingunusually fast, I think we should state those to the public and usethem as justification for staying outside [the tunnel] but say, thatif we get into a more normal pattern of money growth, we willdefinitely get [money growth] back into the [tunnel].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I understand very much yoursentiments. Let me say that, looking at the picture, I forgot the oldadage that a picture is worth a thousand words. Regrettably, thepicture that I have in front of you, which from my point of view isfor presentation purposes, is in error. It was based upon preadjustedM2. Am I correct in saying that we had 3.1 percent growth last year?MR. KOHN. That's correct.MR. LINDSEY. Actually, therefore, this box should besubstantially closer to the middle of the target range, i.e., 0.6percentage point closer. Further, if we adopt President Black'ssuggestion, with which I agree completely, the tunnel would be widenedto 2-1/2 percentage points on either side and we would be a full 1.1percentage point above the bottom end of the target range. Thatwouldn't be close by any measure. So, the picture as presented--whichby the way is not even to scale but is illustrative--actually shouldshow our starting point as somewhere very close to the middle of thebottom half of the target range. That's the only correction I have inthat presentation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I have a question of clarification. It seems tome that the initial starting point is an important issue and that it-35-2/4-5/92ought to be based upon some concept of a steady state velocity. Didyou choose the fourth quarter of '90 with the thought in mind that wewere in effect in a period when we were at a steady state velocity?Is that why you chose it?MR. LINDSEY. Probably, and I would be happy to be correctedby President Black on this. We were in the middle of this period ofuncertainty. If I were to select a period of more stable velocity, Iprobably would have to go back further; and if I were to go backfurther, I'd be incorporating more base drift in there. I would beincorporating so much base drift that the picture wouldn't look verysensible. So, I will admit to arbitrariness in the selection. I wasbasing it, really, on the statement of this Committee last quarterwhich said it was our [objective] to move back toward the middle ofour 1991 target range. So, five months ago we were willing to saythat we should be where that middle line is.MR. PARRY. I'm not sure how to accomplish this, but it wouldseem to me that if one does see value in P*, which of course usessteady state velocity as an important component, one would want tofigure some way to get a greater symmetry between the two procedures.MR. CORRIGAN. Dick Syron.MR. SYRON. I think it's very difficult because it's veryhard to deny the intellectual consistency of this approach; in fact,it is completely intellectually consistent with what we say we'redoing, which inevitably in discussing it leads one back to pragmatism.My concern is that it may be a little more consistent than theconsistency of velocity allows us to be over time. I admit in makingthat argument a continuing analogy: Hancock and Revere wereconsidered sort of rogues and not the intellectuals that Jefferson andHamilton were, so I'm not going to make their argument. My concern isthat I just don't have confidence in the stability of theserelationships in a multi-year process. That would lead us to havingto have the tunnel be quite wide if we wanted to have any confidencethat we were going to stick with it over time. And if the tunnel hasto be that wide and also if we need to have the possibility of bendingthe tunnel, one comes back to the issue that the Chairman raised ofeither a very wide tunnel or a bent tunnel. Bent tunnels are almostcones in a sense, and that leads us back to this problem of sayingthat people could misinterpret what we're trying to do. Obviouslysome will make a fairly mechanical calculation and see that we reallywould have to drop interest rates--as is implied on page 15 in theBluebook by extension--very, very dramatically if we wanted to comeback to the midpoint without bending the tunnels. So, my own view isthat this [approach] ultimately is tied to the issue of how flexiblewe want to be in the intermediate period. That's what we're talkingabout; all these are subsets of that. Given the concerns that we haveabout velocity's erratic behavior and given the many structuralchanges that people have been talking about, I don't know that this isthe time to make a change. I prefer for the longer term to focus onP*, which I think is another way of doing it and avoids some of theseproblems. But having said all that, I can't deny that intellectuallythis is completely consistent and in that sense would seem to be theway to proceed. I just am afraid that practicalities both inperception and measurement preclude it, in my own view, at this time.-36-2/4-5/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.MR. CORRIGAN. In the past 13 years or so I've been aroundthis track more than once, too. I can't deny the neatness [of thistunnel idea], but I have to ask myself the question: Are we dealinghere with form or substance? And if we're dealing with substance, ithas to follow that the adoption of the tunnels would, in fact, meanthat policy in some sense would be different. If we're dealing withform, we're saying that policy would be the same but somehow or otherthe form would make a difference in terms of perceptions about policy--the so-called credibility effect. I have to say that, despite theneatness, I think it's much more form than it is substance. Forexample--and I can't allow for compounding, so Don Kohn can correct meif I'm wrong--I think it's about correct to say that had the Committeeat the end of 1986 adopted a policy of a five-year cone from then tothe end of 1991, policy wouldn't have been any different than it hasbeen in one sense. I think we would have been within the cone eachand every year. If we put ourselves back to that position--if we hadhad the cone and we were in it every year and M2 growth for the five-year period averaged 4 percent--would we have felt back then that wewould have achieved price stability or have been much closer to itthan we are right now? I think a lot of people would have said "yes"to both of those questions; but I don't think the outcome would havebeen any different either in terms of the execution of policy. I amvery skeptical--I always have been--of this so-called credibilityargument. The people out there setting wages and prices in thetrenches wouldn't know a cone or a tunnel if they were in it. Whatthey react to is demand and supply in the marketplace. And what weare ultimately trying to influence are those considerations. So,while I do think [the tunnel concept] is neat, I don't think there isa great deal of substance, defined the way I did define it--meaningthat the actual execution of policy would have been different thanotherwise.I have a lot of sympathy with the argument that Dick Syronjust made that at this juncture, not only for the reasons the Chairmancited but for the other one that Dick hinted at, this could end up assomewhat of a bear trap. Right now, I'm not even sure I know what thealgebraic sign of the interest elasticity of demand for M2 is. Inother words, I could make a pretty decent argument that if we want toaccelerate M2 growth, we better raise interest rates. Now, you maylaugh, but I don't think you can just reject that out of hand. And ifwe're not even sure what the algebraic sign is, why do we want to getourselves trapped into a more mechanistic approach? In addition,there's the concern that the Chairman raised about what it might implyregardless of how we fine-tune the beginning point. So, like others,I have been around this debate more times than I'd like to count. Ican't deny the neatness, but I would be reluctant to bet the ranch onthe tunnel option at this juncture.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody else?MR. MULLINS. I agree with the Chairman that the best time toswitch is some year in which we end up at the midpoint and then wecould click right into a tunnel approach. One difficultly is that wehaven't hit the midpoint or been close to the midpoint in five years;we've been consistently under the midpoint and we're projected to beunder again this year. Philosophically, I like this approach, and I-37-2/4-5/92agree that a lot of it turns on this issue of credibility. I agreewith Jerry that for UAW and Caterpillar the cone versus the tunnelwill not be a major issue in their negotiations. I do think thecredibility issue is more important in the capital markets, where Ibelieve bond market participants and the like might look at it. Onething that bothers me about continuing with the current approach, eventhough I can understand the arguments for it, is the sense in theBluebook that we're setting a policy based upon our projection of whatwe expect to happen--of what is pretty much achievable based upon ourrigorously accurate forecasting abilities in these areas. We see whatis going to happen and we say: Well, we should set the target there.Whereas I like the idea of forcing us to think about a long-termobjective and then achieving it. Of course, in part this is a littledifferent perspective. Despite the imperfections in M2, as I read itM2 grew a little over 3 percent last year as did nominal GDP. And Itend to think that M2 will come back this year because a lot of thesefactors will open up. As Jerry said yesterday, the banking system andsome of the credit crunch issues are opening up and I think the RTC isnear the end of the road; many of those institutions have already beensqueezed. I think one would expect the bulk of the yield curve effectto come relatively early when the yield curve switches. So, Iwouldn't be surprised to see a catch-up. The way the Bluebook puts itis, on page 18: "The tunnel approach in 1992 would be appropriate iflast year's shortfall in M2 was seen as associated with an undesirableshortfall of income"--and I would define a recession as an undesirableshortfall of income--"or transitory shifts in the demand for money."I have a feeling that we're going to get some catch-up on that. I doagree with the general sentiment that there are advantages toflexibility. Those in decision-making positions always will preferflexibility to being bound. And I do think there is a problem in howpeople would interpret this at the current time. But more generally Iwould agree philosophically with the notion, especially once we getout of this period in which I think we have some temporary problemswith M2, of trying to put us under a bit more pressure and committingto some longer-term ranges.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody else?MR. PARRY. [What about] questions of Don?MR. KOHN. I was hoping you had forgotten me!MR. PARRY. Don, the Bluebook indicates that the growth of M2would be 3-1/2 percent, assuming that there is a downward shift in thedemand for money of similar magnitude to that experienced in 1991. Ifthere were not such a downward shift and we had a continuation of theexperience of 1991, what would be the model's forecast of M2 growth?MR. KOHN. Well, the standard model would have it somethingclose to 6 percent with a 5 percent GDP; that's because it would stillbe getting some push from interest rates early in the year. Our yieldcurve model, however, has been doing a bit better these past fewyears, although it has been missing; it would have [M2] growth more onthe order of 4 percent. So, I would tend to split the difference inthe models and tell you something like 5 percent on M2 to get 5percent GDP.-38-2/4-5/92MR. PARRY. Now, the tough question: At the beginning of1991 you had some feelings about the probabilities of these forcescontinuing in 1991. You obviously in this Bluebook have someconvictions about that as well. How strong are they this time?Governor Mullins indicated he thought that these effects may not be asstrong as you think they are.MR. KOHN. Well, as I indicated in my briefing, I think 3-1/2percent growth is our best shot.MR. PARRY. Right.MR. KOHN. But if there were a risk to this, I think it mightbe that we could get a little more M2 growth or something like theFOMC [members' forecasts of] GDP, which is higher than the GreenbookGDP. And it would be because of the fact, as Governor Mullinsmentioned, that [the effects of] some of the initial shifts in theyield curve may be wearing out and so forth. I guess to some extentwe're perhaps a little gun-shy on this because those are argumentswe've been using for the last six months about why banks in responsewould have higher--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not necessarily.MR. KOHN. It's true that velocity was unchanged in 1991.But it took an incredible decline in short-term interest rates to keepit unchanged. And all our past relationships in models and charts andwhatnot would suggest that that would give you a huge decline invelocity--a lot of M for a little bit of GDP--and we didn't get that.Now, some of that may unwind a bit this year, but our best guess isthat the credit for the expansion in the staff forecast, which I thinkis an entirely credible one, would basically come from outsidedepository institutions. Most of it is going to come through thecapital markets. So, I don't see loan demand picking up at banks orthrifts; they're still on the securitization route. Certainly,marginal banks and thrifts under the new banking law are undertremendous pressure--even more pressure than they were before--todownsize to get their capital up. So, I don't see those creditconditions deteriorating; I also don't see them snapping back a lot.And I think there are still a lot of portfolio shifts coming that wehaven't seen yet. A lot of small time deposits [that depositoryinstitutions] put on a couple of years ago are just maturing.MR. PARRY. This 3-1/2 percent certainly would be somethingthat one could use to support a recommendation of alternative II, ifone had considerable certainty. To the extent that one moved moretoward the kinds of comments that Governor Mullins made, one wouldtend to look more favorably on alternative I or even conceivablyalternative III.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One of the problems that the currentperiod is creating with respect to the money supply is that we aregoing through this extraordinary turmoil with the virtual dissolutionof a big chunk of the savings and loan industry. We have all sorts ofabnormal aspects with respect to holdings of liquidity. It strikes methat our major focus at this stage has to be to understand the veryshort run of where we want to be on money supply, largely because weknow so little about what is going on. The "Virginia Plan" and all2/4-5/92the [other] tunnel-type plans presuppose precisely the opposite: Thatwe are feeling sufficiently comfortable with respect to theserelationships that we can project further out and make available tothe public a plan to which we intend to adhere. I wish we were underthose conditions. Were we in that position, I would feel quitecomfortable about locking in longer-term commitments in a sense tobind us so that we don't get off a particular track.My difficulty, knowing all of the technical problems that areassociated with the relationships between money on the one hand--andliquidity for which it is a proxy--and gross domestic product, is thatour state of knowledge in that sequence at this stage has not been sopoor in many years. Also, I would be very hesitant to lock into atunnel because I'm fearful that we might find that all of a sudden[relationships have gotten] back to some form of normal [at a timewhen] we are outside the tunnel. It would then take us an awfullylong time to work our way back unless we took the whole tunnel andchanged it up or down, which would be the worst of all possibilities.I don't know how we could find our way back, whereas the procedures wehave at the moment at least enable us to start from scratch in earlyFebruary. Despite all of our intellectual, analytical problems, whichmay have been totally unresolvable with respect to policy in theprevious year and created a base drift, at least in a sense we canalways start from scratch and struggle from where we are rather thantry at that stage to work our way back and absorb mistakes that wemade analytically two years earlier or something. It creates majorproblems if we are wrong. Obviously, if we are not and we can staywithin the tunnel, it is very effective. But I ask myself thequestion: What do we do if we're wrong? And I say if we're wrong andwe have cones, we can adjust far more readily than we can if we have atunnel. I would be very hesitant to go to a tunnel unless we feltconfident that [money] were not going to veer substantially outsidethe ranges of a tunnel. And at this stage I frankly can't feel securein that respect, knowing our terrible difficulties in trying toforecast M2 on the basis of all our previous models.MR. PARRY. The trouble is that when we're wrong we aresometimes reluctant to make the change in that new year to compensatefor that wrong.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is a problem and that's theadvantage of this [tunnel concept]. But I should certainly think inthe context of what Jerry Corrigan was saying--namely form versussubstance--that if we have enough understanding to know thedifference, we would make certain our policy is formulated on thebasis of substance and not on the position of where a dot is on someparticular chart that we built.MR. PARRY. We came in with less [growth] in nominal termsthan was expected. We saw real growth that was significantly lessthan forecast in July, but there's probably not going to be muchdiscussion about that history and its implications for what we mightwant to do in 1992.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the question is: Why isn't there?Well, let me put it this way: What is it you want to put on the tablethat the rest of us---40-2/4-5/92MR. PARRY. No, I'm not--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we're all acutely aware of thatwhole episode.MR. PARRY. But again: Does it affect how we constructtargets for 1992?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. That's my view.MR. MULLINS. My view on that is that there's a strongintellectual case for moving the cone up. However, I wouldn't supportthat case because it would send the wrong signal. So, I think the wayto handle it is to do what the Chairman suggests, which is torecognize an intention to be at the upper end of the cone next year.But this is the difficulty; it gives us flexibility but it's more [inthe nature of] hypothetical flexibility.MR. PARRY. In the Bluebook the implications were that we hadto reduce interest rates by a fair amount--did you say 3/4 of apercentage point?--to achieve that. So, that is the issue[unintelligible] discussion that [unintelligible] relying on whathappened last year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's real substance!MR. PARRY. That's real substance!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's real policy!MR. BLACK. But no matter what form we select, we're alwaysgoing to have serious doubts about how much we need to move thefederal funds rate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh, I believe that! [Laughter]MR. BLACK. We're never going to know the answer to that!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Nobody is saying that either one ofthese [approaches] is going to solve that.MR. BLACK. Well, that's the really difficult issue and thereason I wish we could develop some other control mechanism, but I'llbe darned if I know what else we can do. Most of M2 is not reservableand, given the market's proclivity for designing new instruments thatwould avoid any reserve requirements we put on existing instruments--if indeed we did--unless we paid interest rates on the reserves, whichis a political problem.... That would certainly make it legallycontrollable.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I wanted to ask Don a question; are we still inthat mode?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.-41-2/4-5/92MR. MELZER. Don, what M2 growth would you considerconsistent with price stability based on what we think longer-termrelationships are? Is it the 3-1/4 percent in strategy II?MR. KOHN. Right.MR. MELZER. In the out years is that--MR. KOHN. That largely reflects some remaining--questionablein Jerry's terms--interest rate elasticity. That is, nominal interestrates are coming down so that you'd have to get a little extra [moneygrowth]. If you believe the P* model and the assumption of a constantP* and the economy is growing at 2-1/4 percent--our current estimateof what the capacity of the economy is--presumably M2 over a longperiod of time would have to grow something on that order as well.MR. MELZER. Well, what if [unintelligible] will not acceptzero measured inflation?MR. KOHN. That would give you more like 3 or 3-1/4 percent,if you thought 1 percent measured inflation were equivalent to pricestability.MR. MELZER. I have this view that, if we adjust our conesover the years, I don't want to get into a position where we need tomove them back up if we can avoid it. Ideally, in a perfect worldwe'd like to ratchet those things down gradually, getting to a conethat's consistent in the long run with price stability. If we missedour cone, we'd explain why; but I don't envision a world in whichwe're juggling these things around. And I was trying to get some feelfor how much further we have to go; probably we'd have to ratchet itdown another percentage point, maybe a little more.MR. KOHN. Yes, I think you're right about the price leveland the measurement problems. So, I would say a range of about 1 to 5percent would probably do it for you. We used to worry about whatwould happen as we approached price stability and nominal interestrates fell and we'd have this surge into M2 [assets] so that in orderto keep the economy from plummeting at that point we'd have to pump insome more liquidity to meet that demand. But we've had our decline innominal interest rates without a surge in M2, so perhaps this reentryproblem isn't so bad unless long-term rates come down and we end upwith 4 or 5 percent long-term rates with this thing. Then, all of asudden those bond funds won't look so attractive relative to a 2percent OCD or NOW account rate and we could get a surge of funds backinto M2. So, there might be complications as we approach pricestability, but I think your sense of around 3 percent in a steadystate is probably [right].MR. MULLINS. Do we have studies on the drift problem, themeasurement problem, with zero inflation? You mentioned 1 percent.MR. KOHN. There have been studies. I heard Bob Gordon givea paper at the Tokyo Conference--Dick Syron and Ed Boehne were there--and his view was that something between 3/4 and 1-1/4 percent, givenhis sense of distortions, was about right.-42-2/4-5/92MR. MULLINS. At some time it might be useful to explore thatissue in more detail because we are getting within shouting distance.MR. PRELL. Governor Mullins, as you know, we distributed toall of the FOMC members a paper by Dave Stockton and colleagues whichincluded a discussion of that issue, and there's further work beingdone. But we do have something that has gone out to the Committee.MR. CORRIGAN. [Unintelligible] very imperfect. Thetechnical data are interesting both in the context of Dave Mullins'squestion and Tom Melzer's last question. If you look at the actualtargets for M2 going all the way back to '83, once we got out of therecession, they have come down from 6 to 9 percent to 4 to 8 percent,to 3 to 7 percent, and to 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent. But if you look atthe actual growth rates, in the first part of the period we had a basedrift on the high side and in the second part a base drift on the lowside. I think for that period as a whole we probably end up abouthaving washed it all out.MR. ANGELL. You'd end up with an historical tunnel.MR. CORRIGAN. That's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I guess we've proceeded as far as we'regoing to go on questions. It would now be useful to have each memberand other presidents state very simply of these various alternativeswhere they would like us to come out. Who would like to start?MR. FORRESTAL. I would start on the tunnel, Mr. Chairman, byconfessing to Mr. Lindsey and Mr. Black that I have spent very littletime in Virginia. I only pass through occasionally, so I had no biasone way or the other. But I think the Chairman's points were welltaken. The other thing I would add, Mr. Chairman, is something youdidn't mention. It seems to me that to introduce this tunnel proposalat the time of the Humphrey-Hawkins report would raise an awful lot ofpressure and would be counterproductive in the present environment.On the targets themselves, I would be very much in favor ofkeeping the targets that we established last July. To change them ineither direction would send the wrong signal. To bring them down,which has obvious implications for price stability, is desirable in atheoretical sense but would seem to me to lead to the interpretationamong market participants that we intend to moderate growth. And inthis environment that would not be very appropriate. On the otherhand, of course, raising them would give rise to the interpretationthat we've given up on our fight against inflation or at least aremoderating that attack. And that, too, would be the wrong signal tosend. I think stability in the targets is what is called for now, soI would like to keep both M2 and M3 where they were.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Basically, I agree with what Bob Forrestal said.If you just took the staff forecast of M2 and M3, you could make ananalytic case for reducing the ranges, particularly for M3. But Idon't think that would be a very wise development at this time. So,my preference would be to leave the money and debt ranges at thetentative levels that we set in July. I must admit that I would be-43-2/4-5/92interested in talking about this subject of the tunnels again in July,particularly after we've had an opportunity to look at some of themore technical issues like the base, etc. But at present I prefer tostick with the cone.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, the one time I dissented onanything since you've been here was when we established the tentativeranges in July of last year. But we missed so badly because of basedrift, by virtue of this faulty procedure we use, that I think itwould be a mistake to do anything other than alternative I. So, toshow my graciousness, I would argue that we ought to stick withalternative I.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I wasn't aware you'd lost anything,frankly. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Given the circumstances that we have today, Iwould not be in favor of the tunnels. I think what we have now doesgive us the flexibility we need to move toward price stability, andthat's what should be our focus. As for the alternatives here, I amin favor of alternative I for the reasons that have been given. Thatgives us the flexibility we need to continue to move toward pricestability, and to adopt either of the other alternatives I think wouldgive an incorrect signal at this time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Alternative I for all the cogent reasons given.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I prefer alternative I; I could acceptalternative II. First of all, I think alternative I is consistentwith strategy II, which I believe in and I guess [other] people aroundthe table also do. I just wanted to make one other point inconnection with this. I think M2 is probably the best indicator wehave of concurrent economic activity. It gives us some sense of howwe're doing with respect to our goals. I have some problem calling ita target. I don't want to get into a semantic debate and I wouldn'tsuggest we change how we describe it, but in my view a good target isnot only something that relates to our goals but is also directlycontrollable by our actions. As I mentioned yesterday, the component[of M2] we do control is only 25 percent of the total and our abilityto indirectly influence [M2] through our influence on interest ratesis questionable; I think the evidence that we've seen here recentlycalls that into question. This isn't a proposal but I urge people notto lose sight of things like reserves, the base, and narrow money thatwe do directly influence because I think they give us some indicationof the thrust of monetary policy actions, which I don't think M2really gives us. In that connection, I get somewhat troubled when Ihear suggestions that we ought set as our longer-term goal somehowgetting M2 into the upper end of the range that we're setting becauseif that happens under circumstances where we're getting no growth innon-M1 components of M2, we're talking about 25 to 30 percent Mlgrowth. One can scoff at Ml, but I feel very strongly that if we putthat kind of stimulus into the system over a period of 6 to 12 months,-44-2/4-5/92we will have big problems. Now, if we get into the upper end underdifferent circumstances where M1 is much more controlled and some ofthose other components are growing, that's a different story. Anyway,I would urge that we not lose sight of those [measures]; I think weneed to pay attention to them. I wouldn't advocate a target but wemay even be at a point in time when we would want to monitorconsciously or explicitly the behavior of a narrower [measure] thatreflects the thrust of our objectives.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would you and Si be supportive ofproposing reserves across the board on the M2 components?SPEAKER(?). Good question.MR. MELZER. I don't know about the politics of that, Alan,but that's something we ought to think about in terms of the longer-term influence of monetary policy--possibly reducing reserverequirements and spreading them more broadly over broader classes ofdeposits.SPEAKER(?). That's a good idea.MR. KOHN. We have a letter from Chairman Neil on that issueand I'm sure you'll be asked to address it at your Humphrey-Hawkinstestimony.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. First Vice President Hendricks.MR. HENDRICKS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We continue toadvocate a policy to achieve price stability, and the recent slowdownin inflation suggests that we're on track. To continue a gradualapproach to that objective we would expect some downward shift in theM2 band in 1992. But we really don't know how long it will take orhow big it will be. Ideally, in the year ahead we would prefer an M2target range of 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent because that range correspondsmore or less to our desired M2 growth by year-end, if conditionswarrant. The ranges are wide enough to accommodate some makeup fromlast year's shortfall. As a practical matter, we could live with theranges expressed in alternative II. We'd inch down the ranges andremind markets of our [intent] to achieve price stability over areasonable period of time. Recognizing our recent progress inreducing the M2 growth trend, lowering the target range to center on a4 percent midpoint would in our opinion enhance the credibility of ourcommitment to our long-term objective of reducing inflation.With respect to the tunnel approach, we were prepared tocomment on it. As a matter of fact, we prepared an "Ohio Plan"handout. But as I listened to the discussion, I found that all thequestions were answered and all the comments were made, so our planwouldn't add much to the discussion. But we are interested in seeinga different approach at least kept on the table.MR. LINDSEY. You know, Ohio has been part of Virginia, too!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.MR. CORRIGAN. I favor the alternative I tentative rangesfrom last year. I would certainly tolerate growth in the upper half-45-2/4-5/92of the range if it could materialize in a context of developments ininflation and economic activity that are otherwise satisfactory.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. On a long-run basis, alternative II is clearlymy preference. Real GDP between 1991 and 1996 grows at a 2.6 percentpercent average annual rate under alternative II, which is just 0.2percentage point lower than the 2.8 percent path under alternative I.Now, I know we don't have clear insight that these are accurate paths.I guess Don Kohn doesn't claim clear insight that these are accurateout [that far], but I do think this expresses exactly what we know tobe the long-run relationship between monetary policy and economicgrowth. So, if I could end up in 1996 with zero inflation.... Whilewe have 3/4 of a percent in the Bluebook table, clearly that fallswithin my notion of what zero inflation would be; I would guess that3/4 to 1-1/2 percent would probably be real zero inflation if wemeasured properly. So, I have a clear preference for alternative II.I would admit, Mr. Chairman, that politically I think February 1992 isnot a good time for you in your Humphrey-Hawkins report to announcethis. Even though it would be a wonderful economic presentation andeducation, I think it would not be desirable for you to do that. AndI can't imagine your wanting to do that. So, I will accommodatemyself to one more year of begrudgingly voting for and acceptingalternative I. But I do want us to be [where alternative II takesus]. And I do agree with Bill Hendricks and Tom Melzer that we mustkeep our vision on price level stability. Indeed, in thecircumstances that we're in, that clear commitment to price levelstability in the Humphrey-Hawkins report will do more to keep long-term rates down and I believe will give us a better growth path thanwe would get if we appear to be willing to re-inflate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. On the narrow issue, I would favor alternativeI, and I would also favor and support the Vice Chairman's comments onbeing willing to tolerate growth in the upper end of the ranges undersatisfactory economic and inflation circumstances. More generally, Ithink we're moving into new territory where considering these issueswill be different than it was when we had ranges of 6 to 9 percent.We're nearing the end of a long and successful journey of ratchetingdown these ranges and we're approaching a steady state. And I thinkwe need to revisit the issue of how we operate in a steady state andwhat it is. But I support alternative I for next year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just ask President Hoenigsomething. You indicated a preference for alternative I. Would youassociate that with these remarks about tolerating the upper end ofthe range for that?MR. HOENIG. Yes.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I didn't; I would not.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's clear and I did not ask you![Laughter] President Syron.-46-2/4-5/92MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I also would be in favor ofalternative I because, like everyone else, I have no confidence inwhat is going to happen in the future to return M2 growth to its"normal path." Since you asked specifically, I would be much morewilling to be close to the edge at the upper side than the low side.In fact, I think that may be necessary and be consistent with what wehave in the economy. So, given my own guess on what is going tohappen to velocity, I would hope that we're at or toward the upperpart of the range. It is essential that all this be taken in thecontext of continued progress toward price stability. As an add-oncomment, I don't agree with Tom Melzer's enthusiasm for Ml and in thatregard I would be enthusiastic about doing something to impose reserverequirements more broadly across the components of M2.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I, too, favor alternative I. On the question ofwhere M2 ought to be within the range, I'm a little more conservativethan some. M2 growth over the last 5 years has averaged a little over4 percent, if I read those revised data [correctly]. If that's right,it seems to me that we ought to be careful about letting it veer veryfar from that on the up side lest we risk compromising what we havealready put in place in terms of progress [toward] price stability. Idon't think that's going to dissipate very quickly, but I believe weneed to be sensitive to that. Clearly, there are some circumstancesunder which I would find more rapid M2 growth acceptable, but I'murging a bit of caution at this point. Just to state the obvious, wealways, so far as I know, accept a wide range of incoming informationbefore deciding those kinds of questions. And as long as we continueto follow that policy, I guess I won't be troubled.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I would be in favor of alternativeI. For the reasons we've articulated today and in any number of othermeetings it seems to me that the [historical] relationships havebroken down. As a consequence, to make a change would imply a greaterdegree of confidence in the aggregates than we currently have, atleast in an operative sense. Moreover, if we were to make a change,either up or down, it would convey a policy message that I think atthis particular point would be very inappropriate. So, I would be infavor of alternative I.As to where we might end up in the range, it's awfully earlyin the year to try to determine that. It does seem to me that in anoperative sense we are really driving policy off a differentmeasurement anyway. And I'd like to see how the economy seems to bedeveloping as we get further into the year before trying to determinejust where in the range M2 might properly be.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I share President Black's goodgrace, and I concur with the obvious consensus for alternative I.With regard to where we end up in that range. I'd like to avoid anormative statement and make a positive statement. If we do not getthe velocity shock, if the staff forecast of inflation is correct, andif in fact the economy has resumed growth as we think it might have-47-2/4-5/92because of the money in the pipeline, then two meetings from now with2.8 percent real economic growth we will not only be in the upper halfof the target range, we will be at the very top of the target range.And I would be very interested in what the Committee decides in Mayshould that come to pass. Thank you.MR. CORRIGAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have a strong personalpreference for alternative II. I think we have a precious opportunityhere to press the attack on inflation, and the inflationary trendunder alternative II is much more appealing to me than the rather slowprogress under alternative I. I understand the pain in the growthrate [of the economy] and the unemployment figures that are consistentwith that. And I understand the institutional risks that are probablyinherent in making a change of that kind at this point in time. Ibelieve that alternative II gives us enough range and enoughflexibility to pursue an intelligent monetary policy that would notoverly inhibit the growth of the economy. I'm just afraid that if wedon't press the attack now, [inflation] may get away from us in thefinal analysis. Having said all of that, in order to clear myconscience, I am prepared to vote for alternative I. But, likeGovernor Angell, I would be very unhappy if the actual growth in M2were anywhere near the top of the cone.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. I basically agree with Governor LaWare. My realpreference would be for alternative II but, for reasons that GovernorAngell mentioned and those that Governor LaWare called "institutionalrisks," as a practical matter I would opt for alternative I right now.But I, too, would like us to try to stay as close to the middle of thetarget range as we can. I think any inflection point in the growth ofmoney supply is a shock to the system, and I don't see any point ingoing above or below [the midpoint] right now. I think we shouldalways be moving asymptotically, if that is the word, toward themiddle of the range.MR. KELLEY. You didn't learn that last week at A&M did you?MR. BLACK. I guess it's a Boston thing!MR. MCTEER. On the tunnel, I don't know what Sam Houstonwould think of the tunnel, but I have more sympathy for it than mostof the people [who have spoken], especially if it were bent down atthe end of next year to 3-1/2 percent. It would give us a tunnelthat's very much like the tunnel that connects these two buildings,which works very well. It would eliminate base drift, and I don'tbelieve it would be received badly by the financial markets. I thinkit would do two things that would be favored: One, it would indicateour willingness to speed up the rate of growth of money in the shortrun, which I think is needed; and, two, it would cap the rate ofgrowth in the long run, which I think is needed. So, I hope we willrevisit this issue soon.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.-48-2/4-5/92MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I think this discussion hasbracketed the situation very well. The higher ranges are simply anon-starter. The lower ranges are where we want to go but probablyare not desirable now, which leaves us with the same ranges, those ofalternative I. And that's certainly what I would support. As far asgoing into the upper part of the ranges, without enthusiasm I couldsupport that for what I hope would be a fairly brief period of time.But I'm not enthusiastic about it or lusting after that.As for the tunnel versus the cone approach, I have a lot ofsympathy with the tunnel idea. But I concur with your suggestion thatthis probably is not a good time to adopt it. I'd like to see it stayon the table; I'd like to see us watch it closely and look at somedifferent ways to do it and have it be a continuing part of thedialogue.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. As the native Virginian, it seems to me thatelements of the Virginia Plan--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. These two carpetbaggers!MS. PHILLIPS. Right, these carpetbaggers. I do havesympathy for the tunnel plan, and I'd like to see it continue to bediscussed and kept on the table because I think it is better for thelong run. As a person who has not spent as much time on monetarypolicy matters as on other policy matters, I've noticed a tendencythat whenever the time is inappropriate to make a change that's whenit's on the table and is brought forward. If we were at the midpointof the range, it probably would not be as much of an issue. I thinkit's very difficult to make policy changes when you're at the middle;there's just not an incentive to do it. I do understand the politicsof the situation, so, like several others who have spoken, I'd like tosee the tunnel plan remain on the table for discussion, particularlyfor looking at the long-range policy implications.I could support alternative I. Maybe I'm not even asoptimistic as some; I'd like to see us get to the middle of the conebut I certainly could tolerate going to the upper parts of the ranges.If growth does get to the upper part of the range, I'd be willing tobet that there will be a discussion then for tightening. So, it willbe interesting to follow this discussion as we move into the year.SPEAKER(?). I hope so.MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if it might be a goodidea for Governor LaWare to repeat briefly what he said when you wereout of the room.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure.MR. MULLINS. I took notes.but- -CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. He said he preferred alternative II,-49-2/4-5/92MR. LAWARE. I said I personally preferred alternative IIbecause I thought we had a precious opportunity right now to pursuethe attack on inflation. And the [Bluebook] trend line underalternative II in winning that fight against inflation sooner ratherthan later was very appealing to me. I was afraid that if we stuckwith alternative I, the inflation objective might escape us. I'm wellaware of the pain involved with regard to the [economic] growth rateand the unemployment numbers. But it seems to me that the long-termpublic policy interest might better be served by pursuing alternativeII. At the same time, I think there are significant institutionalrisks in making that kind of change at this time, even though theranges [of alternative II] probably give us enough flexibility to dowhatever we want to do with monetary policy. So, I would vote foralternative I, but like Governor Angell, I would prefer to stay towardthe lower part of the range described rather than allow a drift up tothe top.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me make the followingproposal. First of all, there is obviously sufficient interest inpursuing the tunnel proposal to keep it on the table and keep it onthe agenda. We will look at it. That would essentially [address]Governor Phillips' concern, on which I think she is quite right:namely, that when things are easy and normal and you don't thinkthere's a problem, then you don't spend any time on it. But let'smake sure that we do and do that readily by putting it on the agendathe next time this issue comes up, and keep it there until we loseinterest in it or decide to use it. Let's keep it in a context whereit can be an alternative.Secondly, it's clear that we have a large majority of thevoting members in favor of alternative I, with a majority willing toaccept--should it occur as a result of market forces--growth in theupper end of the range. But in our official statements relative tothis, I think it's important that we insert in our [explanation] thatwe do not wish to lose the gains that we have achieved with respect toprice stability and that our actions with respect to monetary policyover the long run will be very sensitive to that particular [issue].What that implies in actual action is that we might accept [growth in]the upper portion of the cone, but with some reluctance, and certainlynot as a permanent phenomenon. So, what I would like to put on thetable for a vote at this point is alternative I with language in theHumphrey-Hawkins report somewhat similar to the way Jerry put it, butincluding immediately thereafter a comment that the gains in pricestability have been extremely valuable to this economy and that it'scertainly our strong desire--or some [wording] even much moreformidable than that--to make certain that those gains not bedissipated. I won't give you exact language but in rough form wouldask if that is acceptable to the Committee to vote on.MR. ANGELL. I have a question, Mr. Chairman. Isn't theresome danger in that? I agree that the majority of the voting memberswould accept the upper part of the range. But if we said that in theHumphrey-Hawkins report, doesn't that then put us in the position ofappearing to have [that as the] actual desired range? Suppose moneygrowth is weaker than we anticipate. Even though we might end up,let's say, cutting the fed funds rate one or two times, we might stillhave weak growth. Would that not then cause our critics in Congress-50-2/4-5/92to say to us: You really acted as if you wanted to be in the upperend and then you didn't [even] get to the middle.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think we would be subject tothat [criticism] no matter what we did. But the language that Don orthe Vice Chairman used I don't think puts us into that position.We're not saying we're going to force [money growth] into the upperpart of the range; but if market forces were to do that, we would notbe acting strenuously to push it down.MR. MELZER. There would be no reason for people to presumethat we would be anyway if growth were in the range. Isn't thatright?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I would hope so, but one doesn'tknow. There's another alternative. We can leave it out of theofficial text and I could use that in the questions and answers--MR. ANGELL. I would prefer that.MR. CORRIGAN. I would, too.SPEAKER(?). Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Why don't we leave it out thenand I will, if the issue surfaces, find appropriate language in theQ&A portion of the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony to put that on thetable.MR. PARRY. In your statement about the ultimate objective ofprice stability or something close to it, would it be well tounderline the fact that in subsequent years this would most likelyrequire further declines in our targets?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If that comes up in the Q&A, I wouldanswer in the affirmative; I have in the past.MR. PARRY. I'm thinking of a conditioning for what mightbecome--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I suspect it has been true of allof us when that issue has come up. We've all indicated that theparticular range we're in at the moment is not necessarily by anymeans our view of [the range that is consistent with] price stability.Okay, could somebody move this?MR. SYRON. So moved.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.MR. BERNARD. The directive would read--I'm reading from page24 of the Bluebook--: "The Federal Open Market Committee seeksmonetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability andpromote sustainable growth in output. In furtherance of theseobjectives, the Committee at this meeting established ranges forgrowth of M2 and M3 of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent and 1 to 5 percent,-51-2/4-5/92respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 1991 to the fourthquarter of 1992. The monitoring range for growth of total domesticnonfinancial debt was set at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for the year.With regard to M3, the Committee anticipated that the ongoingrestructuring of depository institutions would continue to depressgrowth of this aggregate relative to spending and total credit. Thebehavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated inthe light of progress toward price level stability, movements in theirvelocities, and developments in the economy and financial markets."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesFirst Vice President Hendricks NoPresident Hoenig YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Lindsey YesPresident Melzer YesGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Phillips YesPresident Syron YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, I think coffee is outside. Let usadjourn [temporarily].[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bill, you asked for the floor.MR. HENDRICKS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Since the vote andduring the recess, I've been thinking about the presentationaldifficulties that you might have and that, from your view, unanimityon the 1992 targets is the desirable thing. We're willing to supportthe present targets, and I would therefore request that my vote bechanged.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. I think it is important thatwe have unanimity where we can in this particular period, with theturmoil and politics going on and swirling around us. A perceiveddivision within this FOMC is something we should try to avoid if we atall can. This would be helpful and I will declare the vote unanimous.Let's move now to Don Kohn.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Questions for Don?MR. ANGELL. Don, I guess this is a question for Ted Trumanas well as for you. When we look at the real exchange value of thedollar, I presume we do not make any attempts to adjust fordifferences in the measurement of inflation in the United Statesversus that in the other G-7 countries. If most of us tend to believethat we might be as much as 1 percentage point off on our measurement-52-2/4-5/92of inflation, over a period a time that 1 percentage point compoundedcould give us quite a distortion in terms of the real exchange valueof the dollar.MR. TRUMAN. Well, I think there are two factors. One is thequestion as to relative distortion that you want to focus on. I guessa priori my view would be that in some sense the relative distortionwould be larger in the major industrial countries abroad than it ishere. We probably spend more time purifying our CPI than do some ofthe other industrial countries, which biases [their estimates] in theother direction. Moreover, just in the short run, we have aphenomenon because what we use here are consumer price indexes. Thereare cases for using other price indexes. It's like everything else:There's nothing perfect. It depends on what you are trying to prove.Certainly, in the short run, we have had a situation where there havebeen a number of shocks to the consumer price level abroad. These arethe result in the last couple of years of excise tax increases andthings like that: for example, [goods and services] tax in Canada,the [value added] tax in the United Kingdom, etc. So, the foreignprice level, in a truly competitive sense, is probably somewhatinflated relative to the CPI measures. And that goes back for thelast couple of years.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that in places like Japan, byusing rents as the equivalent to owner-occupied homes and then havingrent control, they understate their rate of inflation.MR. TRUMAN. I think that's a possibility. We looked at it acouple of months ago [and] we were not convinced that it was asunderstated as you suspect it may be.MR. ANGELL. All right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I wanted to ask you a question. Doyou think that there is in the market and the Congress a tradeoffbetween what we do and their enthusiasm for fiscal policy?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think there's some. There's a view inthe market that if it is perceived that the Fed is shut down and won'tbe doing anything more, that will induce increased fiscal activity, soto speak, on the Hill. I don't know whether it's true; it's hard tojudge. It's probably true in part. How important it is, I reallydon't know. A number of people believe that in the market; I thinkthat is a fact.MR. PARRY. If rates were cut 50 basis points, would it alterthe dialogue, the momentum, etc?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm not sure. I think there's somethingto it, but I would not want to move policy on the presumption that itmight create a more balanced fiscal policy. I frankly doubt it. Anyfurther questions for Don?Well, why don't I get started. I think the issue of theextent of monetary policy [easing still] in the pipeline can be lookedat in a somewhat different way. And it, too, suggests some effects2/4-5/92but it is by no means complete. If we judge that the major problemconfronting us is the balance sheet strain created by the rise in debtand, in certain instances, by a fall on the asset side of bothhousehold and business balance sheets, the business balance sheetsobviously would have to fall in value in substantial part because of[declines in] real estate. Any decline in values on the asset side ofthe household sector is rather [questionable]. Obviously, there's abelief that residential real estate values have fallen, but that'svery hard to prove. I think it is the case that equities havedeclined some as debt has eaten into the value of real estate, butit's not by any means obvious that it's on the asset side.What I think is essentially the case here is that the debtoverhang is creating a diversion of disposable personal income on theone hand and corporate cash flows on the other more toward repairingbalance sheet relationships rather than consumption and investmentexpenditures. And this may be showing up in some increase in thesaving rate, but that remains to be seen. Obviously, in the month ofDecember the [published] saving rate at 5.8 percent is a very weakstatistic, and the range of error is considerable. Nonetheless, it isconsistent with the employment of disposable income for the reductionof debt and, therefore, an increase in the net equity of households--meaning saving rather than consumption expenditures.This implies, as we've discussed before, that [households andbusinesses] need to repair these balance sheets as a necessarycondition to initiate expansion. The evidence clearly suggests thatthat is underway. We are looking at a very significant amount ofcorporate equity de-leveraging in a number of corporate balancesheets. We are looking at a very high level of corporate debtissuance, in part to refinance high interest debt but also presumablyto pay off short-term liabilities and improve the liquidity positionof the corporate balance sheets. Now, clearly, the decline ininterest rates is showing up in the various [ratios of] interest coststo cash flow both in the business and in the household sectors. Andin that sense the debt burden is moving down. So, one can clearly seethe impact of the combination of Federal Reserve policy on the shortend and decreasing inflation expectations on the long end beginning torepair balance sheets in precisely the way one would presume thatmarkets trying to repair themselves would function. The question is:How far has this gone? I think the answer is that we don't reallyknow; it has gone part way, but there's no evidence that we'reanywhere near the point where a significant easing in [strains on]balance sheets has occurred enough to restore the normal recoveryforces in the economy.At this point, all the evidence suggests that output isessentially flat. The weekly data that we have on industrialproduction suggest that there was a decline in January but probably nofurther follow-through in February. Indeed, it's possible thatFebruary may be moving back. What one can say in general is thatwhile the balance sheets apparently are being repaired, the economy ison hold; and there is no real evidence to suggest that that's about tochange quickly. I think the inflationary forces continue to recede,and I would be not surprised to find that actual price data come inunder the Greenbook [forecast]. I hope that is, in fact, the case. Isuspect that if we have any surprises in that area, that's probablywhere they are going to come out.-54-2/4-5/92This leads me basically to the obvious question of someevidence of improvement in confidence, which a number of you mentionedyesterday. And that strikes me as probably a reflection of previousFederal Reserve actions, because we're not picking it up in any of thegeneral surveys. We're getting it largely from more sophisticatedpeople who would be responding to the type of things we might bedoing. We are seeing evidence--at the moment mainly anecdotal but tosome extent real--in residential housing: in housing sales and instarts and permits. And that appears to be creating some positiveelements. But for the moment we are reaching if in fact we arestipulating that the economy has turned up. There is no evidence ofwhich I am aware that supports that view.Nonetheless, it's my personal view that we probably have doneenough to put the economy on track eventually. But I'm willing toacknowledge that we may not have. Since I think the probability thatwe would want to move interest rates higher or tighten in theintermeeting period approaches zero and that there is at least a non-negative probability that we might want to ease during the period, Iwould conclude--if that's the view of the Committee--that somethinglike alternative B, with normal asymmetric language toward ease isappropriate, without specifying a presumption that any action iscontemplated during the period other than what one would assume underthe normal procedures with asymmetric language. I put that on thetable for your reactions and would be curious to get the judgments ofother members. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I guess my longer-term objectivehere is to have to vote for tighter policy as soon as possible. Andthat has something to do with how we behave in the interim period.I'm inclined to agree that we have put a lot of stimulus in thepipeline and that it's more likely that we're going to see an upturnthan a further slide. But I am concerned about [specifying] anasymmetry of risks or costs [and] being wrong on one side or theother. We [are not sure] about the forecast, anyone's forecast. Thatraises, of course, the issue of risks and insurance and how long onewaits. I think we're going to have to wait a while to see data thatare really conclusive in one direction or the other. I do think, andGovernor Phillips raised this point yesterday, that we may be in asituation--I don't want to use the term "window"--where it's easierfor us to make a change now than it may be later as we come closer toa season that may be seen as more political and also as we get intothe midst of all this fiscal policy business. Those things wouldargue for ease because I think we are in the midst of this long cyclethat we've talked about, and our role is to facilitate lending. Thebest thing we can do to facilitate the long cycle adjustment is tohave a stronger economy.Where all this leaves me at the end of the day is that Iwould favor easing sooner rather than later. But I am aware of thetime in which we operate and I think we are in a period in whichthere's a great deal of concern about confidence in the government asa whole. That point is very well taken. And in that environment,it's nice to see one organization that has some element of stability.So, to tell you the truth, while I would prefer to ease now, short ofthat, which we won't get [consensus on], I prefer strong asymmetry.In this business of nuances, I'd find acceptable what you suggest butwould prefer the other side.-55-2/4-5/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, given the prospect of a moderateupturn at least incorporated in most of our expectations, I wouldprefer alternative B. I do think, though, that the uncertainties areas you indicated, and that would lead me to be very supportive ofasymmetry to provide for significant further ease. Two points withregard to that: It would be my view that if we were to ease, itprobably should be of some significance because public visibility forthe event would probably be desirable; secondly, my own feeling isthat it probably would be desirable for that ease to come soonerrather than later.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think the appropriate coursefor monetary policy at the moment is to stay where we are. As hasbeen indicated several times around this table over the past day ortwo, there is a good deal of stimulus in the pipeline. And as we lookback at our history, we certainly have made the mistake of overdoingit on either side of the equation over time, and I hope we won'trepeat that mistake. I think what we need at this time, as otherpeople have said, is some patience to let our policy feed its waythrough to the economy. So, I would support your recommendation of nochange at the moment and, therefore, I would support alternative B. Imust say that before the meeting I was more inclined toward asymmetric directive but, having reflected on it overnight, I think theuncertainties in the forecast are such that we ought to be in aposition--you ought to be in a position--to move rapidly in the eventthat incoming data indicate that that's the appropriate course ofaction. So, I, too, would support an asymmetric directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think this is a time for patience and watchfulwaiting. On the question of symmetry or asymmetry, if I were voting,I could accept either. I agree with your logic that the chances oftightening are essentially nil and that there is some chance foreasing. So, there is something to be said for asymmetry and I wouldsupport it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. I, too, am inclined to follow yourrecommendation. First of all, I'd start by saying that there is a lot[of stimulus] in the pipeline and we should be patient. However, as Imentioned yesterday, our projections are that the real economy mightactually grow more slowly than what is in the Greenbook forecast, andthat gives me some pause. I also am concerned about the growth of M2,which I think has been erratic and too slow. So, I am inclined to gowith "B" asymmetric toward ease, but I would wait until we have somemore information on the real economy and on M2 before I would chargeforward.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. First Vice President Hendricks.MR. HENDRICKS. We've had several years of moderate growthand our view is that the inflation trend appears to be a decline to 3-56-2/4-5/92percent and that it may be getting down even beyond that. We see thebasic thrust of policy as being consistent with that outlook: thatis, 3 percent inflation in '92 and 2 percent, perhaps, in '93.Therefore, we feel that the FOMC does have some room for furthereasing if the policy action that was adopted in December does notstimulate growth in money and credit. M2 seems to have beenparticularly erratic over the past month or so, making it difficult tojudge just what sort of growth track we're really on. For the yearwe'd like growth in M2 of 3-1/2 percent or so and we would not like tosee any significant shortfall from that path this quarter.Consequently, we would like to see further easing in policy should theincoming data suggest that M2 is weakening from current levels. Ourposition for now, however, is in line with the Greenbook projectionand your suggestion, Mr. Chairman. We would support alternative Bwith asymmetry toward ease.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I would prefer "B" symmetric, but I haveabsolutely no problem with what you recommended. If there were apresumption of another easing step in the asymmetry, I'd have a lot oftrouble with that. I agree with you that I don't think we can doanything with our policy that is going to affect what we get in fiscalpolicy. The politicians are going to have to be seen to be doingsomething, and they can't just stipulate that the Fed has taken careof it and they don't have to do anything. So, I agree with youranalysis on that.The only other thing I would suggest--perhaps this is partlytongue in cheek but not totally--is that we ought to get analternative C back in the Bluebook. We have recognized all along thatwe were probably going to overshoot on the way down here. There's astatement in the Bluebook that was music to my ears aboutunsustainably low real short-term interest rates. Now, they canbecome sustainable, I know, through two courses. But, at any rate, Ithink we ought to get used to looking at an alternative C becausethere could be circumstances where we're going to get some rope back,and it might be better to move on that sooner in small steps ratherthan later and not let too much build up. I have no problem withalternative C not being in there for this meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, my personal preference would havebeen to have symmetric language with "B" for two reasons. First ofall, I have strong reservations about whether further ease in monetarypolicy is going to affect the outcome significantly. And secondly,symmetric language would tend to enforce a posture of patience on usmore rigidly. On the other hand, I accept the argument that we need asafety valve of some kind here that can be used in the event thatcircumstances change dramatically from what they are now.Consequently, I can support your recommendation of "B," asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, to state the obvious, this is avery difficult period to try to assess both the current as well as the-57-2/4-5/92prospective environment. There may have been at least a mini-improvement in the balance from the last meeting but, as I saidyesterday, I still think the risks are very much on the down side atthis point. And the policy directive should reflect that risk. Ithink it's perhaps too soon to ease again; moreover, we don't have acredible basis on which we could make that kind of change. But if theincoming data begin to show further deterioration, I'd move and I'dmove quickly. Therefore, I'd be in favor of your recommendation foralternative B with asymmetric language toward ease.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I would support your recommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. I agree with you, Mr. Chairman. I might pointout that Friday we will get the unemployment report and if we get asurprise on that on the down side you could, of course, schedule aconference call to decide what to do and where to go from there.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. I would support your recommendation, Mr.Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I can certainly support yourrecommendation. But I would like to indicate my strong preference, ifeasing does appear to be appropriate, that we time it with moreforward-looking indicators and avoid creating the impression thatmonetary policy is tied to the real economy. If that [latter]impression is developed, then the bond market will anticipate, rightlyor wrongly, that a rebound in growth means we're going to tighten.Whereas if the monetary aggregates--and I might even mention commodityprices--were to indicate the desirability of having a lower fed fundsrate, it would be clear that any easing that we do would really not beeasing in the sense that money growth was below target and we weretrying to keep monetary policy neutral by not pegging the fed fundsrate high.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.MR. CORRIGAN. "B," asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I am in concurrence with yourview. The one thing we all know is that we don't know. And giventhat the uncertainties are high, we [ought] to go to the normal kindof analysis, which is a loss function. I think the loss function ismuch greater on the down side than on the up side. Secondly, [we needto ask]: "How easily can we correct policy?" Again, it's much easierto correct policy if we are surprised on the up side than if we'resurprised on the down side. So, I think you selected exactly theright course of action.-58-2/4-5/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. I support your recommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I'm clearly for "B." And I willsupport asymmetry as well because if there's a move in this period,very clearly it's going to be on the easing side rather than on thetightening side. But I must say that I don't share the presumptionthat we will ease that seems to be implied in conversationsspeculating on how the timing will work.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I support "B," asymmetric. And if we do getevidence of deterioration or if we don't get some movement prettysoon, I would favor seriously considering moving [toward ease].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. On the table is alternative "B,"asymmetric. Would you read it, please?MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. In the context of the Committee'slong-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economicgrowth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, andmonetary developments, slightly greater reserve restraint might orslightly lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in theintermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expectedto be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period fromDecember through March at annual rates of about 3 and 1-1/2 percent,respectively."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just ask the question herewhether in this context "somewhat" or "slightly" is the appropriateword. I would ask Don to refresh me on this.MR. KOHN. I thought as Norm was reading that the "slightly"did tend to capture the sense that it wasn't an unusually strong--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You said it did?MR. KOHN. It did capture the sense. And perhaps if in yourjudgment, Mr. Chairman, more than one move became necessary over theintermeeting period, which is a long intermeeting period, I believe aconsultation with the rest of the Committee would be appropriate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would certainly think that is correct.I feel comfortable with the word "slightly" frankly, but I wanted tomake sure that that's appropriate.MR. ANGELL. Preferred.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan Yes-59-2/4-5/92Vice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesFirst Vice President Hendricks YesPresident Hoenig YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Lindsey YesPresident Melzer YesGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Phillips YesPresident Syron YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. As been mentioned, our nextmeeting is March 31st, which is--MR. BERNARD. Eight weeks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's outside the March 20th deadline. Idon't know what significance that has! [Laughter]MR. MULLINS. About right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We now adjourn for lunch.MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, may I remind you about the updatesof anyone's forecast?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I thought we did that yesterday.MR. PRELL. Yes, and I wanted to raise the question aboutfiscal policy assumptions. There seems to be some confusion aboutwhat has been asked for.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh yes, my apology. There's aninteresting question about the basic assumptions implicit in theforecasts of the Committee members and other presidents with respectto fiscal policy. I would suggest that we each make our ownassumption. In a sense make it an endogenous calculation, rather thanhave an imposed external presumption, because I'm not sure that's veryhelpful and I'm not sure that we want to have an official position assuch. So, I would assume that each of you is making a forecast in thecontext of how you believe the politics of what is going on may--MR. CORRIGAN. We're allowed to do that!MR. PRELL. We won't anticipate any particular indication ofwhat you are specifically assuming. So it's [unintelligible].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, we'll adjourn for lunch.END OF MEETING-60-