Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 17, 1992A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, November 17, 1992, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice ChairmanMr. AngellMr. HoenigMr. JordanMr. KelleyMr. LaWareMr. LindseyMr. MelzerMr. MullinsMs. PhillipsMr. SyronMessrs. Boehne, Keehn, McTeer, and Stern, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents ofthe Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and EconomistMr. Bernard, Deputy SecretaryMr. Coyne, Assistant SecretaryMr. Gillum, Assistant SecretaryMr. Mattingly, General CounselMr. Patrikis, Deputy General CounselMr. Prell, EconomistMr. Truman, EconomistMessrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis, Ms. Munnell,Messrs. Lindsey, Promisel, Siegman, andStockton. Associate EconomistsMr. McDonough, Manager of the System Open MarketAccountMs. Greene, Deputy Manager for ForeignOperationsMs. Lovett, Deputy Manager for DomesticOperationsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Wiles, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,Board of GovernorsMr. Winn1/ Assistant to the Board, Office of BoardMembers Board of GovernorsMr. Porter,2/ Assistant Director, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMr. Siciliano,1/ Senior Attorney, Legal Division,Board of GovernorsMr. Feinman,2/ Economist. Division of Monetary Affairs,Board of GovernorsMr. Moore,1/ Special Assistant to the Board, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Beebe, Broaddus, Dewald, Lang, Rosenblum,Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond,St. Louis, Philadelphia, Dallas, Chicago, andAtlanta, respectivelyMr. Guentner, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of New YorkMr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal ReserveBank of Minneapolis1. Attended portion of meeting relating to Congressional requestfor more detailed and prompt reports of Committee delibera-tions.2. Attended portion of meeting pertaining to a review of theCommittee's tentative ranges for monetary growth in 1993.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofNovember 17, 1992CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everybody. The first itemof business is the recognition of the fact that this is Bob Black'slast meeting. His first meeting was much closer to the 19th centurythan any of you would know: It was in 1960! That's reallyextraordinary. I wish to implore all of you that we not become undulysloppy in our intellectual procedures with Bob leaving the group. Inany event, we'll see a lot of you in the future, I presume, Bob. Itried to think of a few things to say about you; it's very difficultto add anything other than refer to the extraordinary esteem which allof your colleagues very clearly have shown to you through the years.And while I've heard a lot of nasty things about me and about othermembers of this FOMC, I can tell you that I never once have heardanyone say anything other than positive things about you. It goeswithout saying that we're going to miss you and miss you dearly foryour wisdom and your extraordinary insights and experience. It's notgoing to be easy for us.MR. BLACK. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I'll beperfectly willing to send you a letter if I think you're going astray,and I hope you will heed that letter!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't you fax it!MR. MCTEER. He won't own a fax!MR. BLACK. I don't have a fax machine but I'm thinking aboutgetting one.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The second item on the agenda is animportant announcement from the President of the Federal Reserve Bankof New York.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Most of my colleagues have probablyseen The New York Times this morning. There's an article of enormousconsequence on the front page. For those who haven't seen it, Ithought I should share it with you to make sure that these proceedingsgo forward on a liturgically sound basis. The article reports thatfor the first time in more than four centuries the Roman CatholicChurch today issued a new universal catechism which, among otherthings, identifies a range of new sins that are the product of modern-day society. Among the sins defined in the new catechism are taxevasion, drug abuse, mistreatment of immigrants, abuse of theenvironment, artificial insemination, genetic engineering, andfinancial speculation. I don't know about the rest of you, but I'vegot to get me one of those! I can see it now: When Gretchen and Joanand Bill go to confession they're going to have to make sure that theconfessor understands the difference between hedging and speculation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. With that I'm not sure I can getapproval for the minutes because I'm not sure what we were doing backthen! But I will request it in any event. Would somebody like tomove the minutes of the last meeting?SPEAKER(?). Move it.11/17/92VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Before Gretchen goesto confession she better report to us.MS. GREENE. I'll try my best, Mr. Chairman, not to be tooconfessional. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Gretchen? If not, let'smove on to Bill McDonough.[Secretary's note: Mr. McDonough requested authorization tonegotiate renewal of the System's swap lines for another year.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Bill?MR. JORDAN. How many countries do we have swap lines with?MR. MCDONOUGH. Fourteen and the BIS.MR. JORDAN. So, it's all of the European economies that arelinked to the deutschemark?MR. MCDONOUGH. Japan as well, and we also have a small swapline with Mexico.MR. JORDAN. Well, I recall what we were doing when theseswap lines were [activated] in the 1970s, but it's not clear to methese days when actions really involve the dollar, the deutschemark,and the yen why we would want a swap line with the Dutch for guildersfor instance.MR. MCDONOUGH. The most likely swap lines to be utilized arethose with Japan and Germany. I think there are circumstances when,given the tie-ins of the EMS currencies, there could be a possibility--less likely I agree--of using the swap arrangements with some of theother central banks. You will recall that we owe the Committee adiscussion of the general issues of our currency arrangements and ourreserve holdings. This is part of that picture. I would prefer, andI recommend to the Committee, that we renew the lines and then revisitthe issue when we have that later discussion and after we have a newTreasury team with whom to discuss their views.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions? Would somebodylike to move Bill's recommendation?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I move it.MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Bill, do you want tocontinue with the report of the Domestic Desk?MR. MCDONOUGH. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bill, do you have any evidence fromthose forward federal funds contracts or from short-term money marketinstruments that the near-term firming in federal funds futures, which11/17/92looks to be about 25 basis points, actually tilts over after the firstof the year? Are we close enough yet to draw inferences as to whetherthat in fact is what the markets are saying?MR. MCDONOUGH. Your [inference] is exactly right. We'rejust at the cusp of being able to see whether it's purely a year-endphenomenon or whether it goes past that. The rate structure in themarket and perhaps even more our very active conversations with banksand the Wall Street firms do lead us to the conclusion that it's ayear-end phenomenon.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions for Bill? If not, wouldsomebody like to move to ratify both the previous actions of the Deskand Bill's request for the intermeeting leeway change?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll move them both.MR. SYRON. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Let's now move on toMike Prell.MR. PRELL. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mike? If not, wouldsomebody like to start the Committee go around?MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the SixthDistrict we continue to see signs of improvement in economic activitybut the pace is still very, very slow. We did a recent survey ofmanufacturing plants for October and that showed a leveling off ofactivity from the third quarter, but the respondents were optimisticabout their prospects for the near term at least. In the housingsector, single-family home sales and construction remain fairlyhealthy. Multifamily activity, on the other hand, was still prettypoor but it does seem to have bottomed out during the summer. Thisalso seems to be true for commercial construction, although thevacancy rates in the District are quite high; they are above thenational average and considerably above in some of our key cities.Retail sales have improved and retailers are optimistic about holidaysales. However, because they placed their orders some months ago whenthey were in a more cautious mood, their inventories are quite lean,and it appears that discounts and promotions will probably be less afactor this year than they were in recent years. Output of goods andservices has been expanding but employment growth is low. Theunemployment rate is at its highest level in six years in theDistrict, and major firms continue to announce layoffs. For example,Bell South announced 5,000 layoffs, I think. This, of course, isincreasing uneasiness in the labor market generally. We continue tosee better demand for goods related to housing and constructionmaterials in light of the national level of activity but also becauseof the rebuilding going on as a result of hurricane Andrew. Inconnection with the hurricane I might add that insurance companieshave raised their estimates of losses; and five insurers who representabout 60,000 policyholders in Florida have failed as a result of thehurricane. That's the situation in the District, Mr. Chairman; it'ssomewhat better than last time but still proceeding at a very slowpace.11/17/92With respect to the national outlook, our forecast is verysimilar to the one shown in the Greenbook. The profile over the nextseveral quarters is somewhat different, but we come out in the sameplace. The only other difference is a marginal one in that ourinflation forecast is perhaps a little higher than the Greenbook's.But it's a forecast that we would generally agree with and, especiallywith respect to 1994, I hope we can reach it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, on balance conditions in theDistrict have a somewhat better tone than was the case at the time ofthe last meeting. It is a little hard to back that up withstatistical data. In fact, some of the data have gone the other way;for example, the Chicago purchasing managers survey for October wentbelow 50 percent. Still, the steel business continues to be prettygood. The industry is currently operating at about an 80 percentrate, and that's a rate that will maintain inventories at a fairlystable level. Shipments this year are probably going to come in atabout 82 million tons, which is a pretty good year, though I must saythat pricing continues to be very tough. For 1993 the industryexpects an increase in shipments to about 85 million tons. There is awild card with regard to next year and that relates to the outcome oftrade suits that have been filed. The early outlook on these suits isfavorable and, if they prevail, that should be helpful both to volumeand also to prices.Aided by strong light truck and van sales, the motor vehiclesales levels have improved. Sales this year will probably come in atabout 13 million units and the industry is expecting an increase toabout 13-1/2 million units next year. Based on these higherexpectations, one manufacturer has set first-quarter productionschedules 15 percent over the first quarter of last year. I wastalking to representatives of one major automotive manufacturer lastweek and was trying to convince them that at 13 million units this hasbeen a pretty good year; they didn't buy it a bit. They reminded methat the industry's base year, in their view at least, is 15-1/2million units; and with operating results running very firmly in thered it's very difficult for them to view this as a good year. Theheavy truck business also is better. Sales of the Class 8 units thisyear are about 25 percent over last year and the industry expectscontinued improvement next year--perhaps another 20 percent increase.But I must say that even at these higher levels sales are well underthe very much higher levels that existed in the mid-1980s.Retail sales in the District are showing some improvement. Ithink consumer confidence is back a bit and the early outlook forChristmas is a little more positive than previously expected. But theconsumer continues to be very price conscious and it does take pricediscounts to produce sales. In line with that comment, the price andinflation news in the District continues to be very positive. Pricepressures really just aren't there.Offsetting the good news, the agricultural equipment businessis just terrible, with no signs of improvement. One majormanufacturer just finished its fiscal year and large tractor sales inthat fiscal year were down by some 40 percent from the year before.They are continuing to reduce production schedules and to lay off11/17/92employees. Also disturbing is the continuing drumbeat of layoffnotices in the District. Just in the last few weeks we've had another8 or 10 companies announce layoffs. Some of them are small--180 to200 employees--but others are much larger. And this constantannouncement of layoffs does cast something of a pall over theemployment outlook.We had something of a milestone in Chicago last week. Therewas a large reception commemorating the completion of the last majoroffice building in downtown Chicago. No one has projects underway andwe now have a vacancy rate in the downtown area of about 23 percent.At current absorption levels, it is going to take about 10 years towork through that inventory and there is a gloomy prediction out therethat we won't see another big project until the next century.In a national context, while the outlook may be showing atleast some signs of improvement, the improvement seems to be verymodest. I continue to think that we have a very fragile situation onour hands and that the risks continue to be on the down side. If thestaff forecast is right--and ours is quite close to it so I don'tthink it's worth spending time discussing the differences--the issuereally is whether this is an outlook that will be acceptable andwhether it will produce the kinds of employment gains necessary tosustain the recovery over a reasonable period of time. That to me isthe issue that in a monetary policy context would be the importantquestion. Thank you.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. May I ask: Do you have anyparticular insights you can share with regard to the intermediate-termsituation at General Motors? We are now getting a sense that at leastsome of the financial people are going through a very fundamentalreappraisal of the prospects for General Motors over time. I don'tknow whether there's anything to that other than people just goingthrough the exercise. The other question I wanted to raise is: Doyou see from your vantage point any near-term possibility that GM orGMAC could start to run into problems in terms of rolling over thetremendous amount of commercial paper they have out in themarketplace?MR. KEEHN. Jerry, on the first question, there are franklyquestions of viability about GM; that has been true not just recentlybut going back a few months. I talked tojust feltthat the troubles were much bigger than were fully understood by themarket, and this goes back three or four months. So, everything thathas come out tends to confirm what he was saying. The most recentnumbers [coming out] in the last few days are really very much on theserious side. So, that is certainly an open question. In terms ofyour second question, if in fact this does evolve in a way thatsuggests there are questions as to GM's viability, it's only a matterof time until the market will pick that up and make the rollover ofpaper a very difficult issue. So, this is a very significant concernin more than just a District context.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Between GM and GMAC what do theyhave--something like $20 billion of commercial paper outstanding?11/17/92MR. KEEHN. I don't know if it is that large; it is huge.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, conditions in the Twelfth Districtare little changed from our last meeting, with continued weakness inCalifornia offsetting modest growth in the other District states.District-wide employment in September fell at a 1.1 percent annualrate, led by weakness in California. California employment by itselffell at a 3.8 percent annual rate in September and 2.1 percent inOctober; that brings the state's employment to a new cyclical low. Imight also point out that there's a consensus among forecasters thatthe actual level of employment is 100,000 less than is being reportedin the survey. Last year there was a similar view that employment wasbeing exaggerated, and revised figures certainly confirmed that.Outside of California, District employment expanded at a 3.3percent annual rate in September. The contacts we have in Alaska,Arizona, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon and Utah report fairly favorableconditions. But California is weak; in Washington conditions are flatdue to production cutbacks in aerospace; and Hawaii is affected byslumping tourism. The weakness that we're seeing in Californiacertainly is a concern. Already announced cutbacks in aerospace,defense, and state and local governments, together with an overhang incommercial real estate, have led forecasters to project that we'regoing to see continued job losses in the state of California throughthe end of 1993. This weak projected economic performance threatensCalifornia with yet another state budget shortfall of at least $4billion through the end of the next fiscal year, which is 1993-94.Reflecting this ongoing weakness, lending continued to decline inOctober at large District banks. Commercial, consumer, and realestate loan volumes are down from their year-earlier levels.Turning to the national economy, our outlook is similar tothat of the Greenbook if we assume no change in monetary policythrough the end of that period. The modest 2-1/4 percent growth thatwe anticipate, again assuming no further easing, is down 1/2 percentfrom what we expected at the time of the October meeting. That'smainly a result of the higher value of the dollar and prospects forslower economic growth abroad. Consistent with sluggish growth inoutput, we expect to see only small declines in the unemployment rateover the next year or so and thus continued downward pressure onunderlying inflation. Our view is that the CPI will come in at around2-3/4 percent in '93 and a bit lower than that in '94. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we come out very close to the staffprojections on the real side of the economy, and they in turn aregenerally in line with what most private forecasters are saying inthat they call for a gradual recovery. Our guess is that the risk hasnow shifted to the [up side]. For the first time I think we see somesigns that the economy may really be beginning to move a bit. Forexample, a substantial portion of the latest data, both nonfinancialas well as financial, has been at least somewhat stronger thanexpected. Prospects for consumer spending in particular look muchbetter than I thought they would look; they strike us as really ratherbright when coupled with the apparent upswing in consumer confidence11/17/92as reported in the Michigan Survey for early November. And theapparent acceleration in commercial lending at banks is anotherfavorable financial sign. Also, the anecdotal information that we'vebeen picking up around our District has been considerably more upbeatlately than it had been for a couple of months. Our directors'comments in particular have been better for two successive months thanthey were before that. And their comments for the last couple ofyears have been pretty darn good leading indicators. Somehow or otherthis group we have now has been better able to call the movements inthe economy than almost any group of directors we've had in the past.And this is what they're telling us. Now, we're all aware, of course,that these developments can prove to be pretty transitory. We havehad a lot of fits and starts in this frustrating recovery period thatwe've been through. Nevertheless, I believe [the improvement] may bereal this time.Let me make just one final comment about the inflationprojections that the staff has made. Over the last several years,I've often been accused of being much too optimistic about inflation.A lot of that stems from my deep faith in the wisdom of this Committeeto do what needs to be done. I think our policy has been excellentfor many years now. Now I think we're seeing some evidence that myoptimism about inflation is beginning to be realized. We've madetremendous progress. If you look at the staff projection of 2 percentinflation in the CPI for '94, for example, I think we've gotten veryclose to what really amounts to zero inflation, taking into accountthe errors of measurement in that measure. And I express one partinghope: That the Committee will continue to behave as it has in thepast. If you do, my fellow pensioners and I will forever be gratefulto you for your fine work!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the District, thingsseem to have taken a distinct turn for the better. I say "seem to"because that comment is based mostly on anecdotal reports I've pickedup in the last month or two. Those really have had a very positivetone. I mention that, of course, against a background in which[economic activity in] the District probably has been advancingmodestly throughout this period. Objectively, if you look atemployment, which has continued to grow, and unemployment rates, whichare almost uniformly low in the District, I think the numbers suggesta reasonably decent economic performance. The anecdotes are also forthe most part on the positive side, although I should acknowledge acouple that are not. It looks as if has serious financialproblems; how much longer it's going to stay out of Chapter 11 remainsto be seen. As for nonresidential construction, major projects in theTwin Cities at least are about to come to a halt, I think. But asidefrom that, the reports we get with regard to much of the agriculturein the District, housing starts and sales, retail sales so far, andtourism activity--which apparently is spilling over into Montana atleast with an inrush of Hollywood types and even some Easterners--havebeen pretty healthy. I must say that on Saturday afternoon I heardsomething I didn't expect to hear and haven't heard before--I'm sureyou're all on the edge of your seats--about the latest progress of theMall of America, our so-called mega mall: On the radio on Saturdaythey were basically telling people to stay away because the crowdswere so big!11/17/92MR. LAWARE. Were they buying anything?MR. STERN. Well, I don't know that the mall's developers aremaking any money--that's a different matter--but [sales] apparentlyare running well ahead of expectations. Of course, the developers hadto offer such attractive deals to get the stores in that I suspectthey aren't seeing much of this. But the numbers apparently are verygood, and it's not particularly at the expense of the other majorshopping centers in the Twin Cities, if you believe what you hear.The people at the mall have done a very good job of promoting it;they're bringing groups in from all over, domestic as well asinternational, and that's apparently translating into real spending.Help wanted signs are popping up everywhere; a lot of that isseasonal, of course, but it's not confined just to retailers and fastfood operations where one would expect to see it. And it isconsistent with reports of tight labor market conditions in the TwinCities and in other metropolitan areas in the District. So at leastat the moment, based on the latest anecdotal reports, things seem tobe moving along.With regard to the national outlook, I have no realdisagreement at all with the Greenbook forecast. I don't have thesense at this juncture that the expansion is all that fragile, but Imust say I don't have any particular sense that it's about to take offon the high side either. Coupled with the headwinds discussions thatwe've had in the past and a close look at demographics and relatedfactors, it may just be that this is going to be a prolonged period ofslow growth relative to what we have experienced in most of thepostwar period and perhaps relative to what we had earlier expected.On the margin, I'm not sure there's a lot to be done about it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Eleventh District business conditions andprospects appear to be stronger this time than at the time of our lastmeeting. I base that on discussions with our directors and otherbusiness people in the community, our Beigebook respondents, my ownvisits to local malls, and my inability to get a parking place at theairport yesterday. [Laughter]MR. KELLEY. Everybody's leaving!MR. MCTEER. We had a flat second quarter and the thirdquarter seems much improved. Most of the indicators show that; theleading indicators are even stronger than the coincident indicators.We have a Texas leading index. It was flat in the second quarter andmuch stronger in the third quarter. Texas and New Mexico seem to bedoing better in terms of employment than Louisiana despite some recentimprovement in the natural gas industry. Natural gas prices are about30 percent higher than they were this time last year.I probably should mention something on Eleventh Districtbanking since it has been in the news recently. As you all know,First City expired a couple of weeks ago. That organization had 20banks; they were closed in what was referred to locally as a"Hollywood ambush." That raised the District's bank failures year-to-date from 9 to 29. The First City organization had shrunk down toabout $8.8 billion. It's probably the first major bank and perhaps11/17/92the first bank of any size to require a second assisted resolution;the FDIC assisted it in 1988. It never fully recovered and the personwho took it over made some new errors, so it has been crippled sincethen. It's the largest bank, I believe, to involve a significanthaircut to non-insured depositors. Among the twenty banks, the fourlargest took a 20 percent haircut on their uninsured deposits. Thosewere in Houston, Dallas, San Antonio, and Austin. The feeling in thecommunity over this development is one of sadness because First Citywas making a valiant effort to deal with the problems on its own. Andthere's a great deal of resentment toward the regulators first for thetiming, which was the weekend before the election in the President'shome town, and for the feeling that bank management was misled intothinking they had the support of the regulators in the bank's effortsto deal with the problem and effect a resolution without help.Incidentally, none of the First City banks was borrowing at thediscount window and they all expired with positive reserve balances.I guess the economic implications of this are that it takes a longtime to recover from a banking collapse. As you know, we've lostlocal control of 9 of the 10 largest banks in Texas. But as someonesaid yesterday, the pig is now through the python. That was the lastmajor problem bank left in the Eleventh District. Measures of bankinghealth are now good in Texas and in the Eleventh District. Banksstill are not making net new loans; there remain too many incentivesagainst lending as opposed to investing in Treasury securities.On the national economy, I read the same newspapers andGreenbook as the rest of you and I don't really have any new insightsto add. I have noticed that the press seems less eager to put anegative spin on the good news than before. So, one gets theimpression from listening to the news that the economy and theprospects for the economy are now better than they've been in quite awhile and considerably more positive than at the time of our lastmeeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob, I noticed that there are reports ofimproved drilling rig activity. How significant is that and what doyou make of it?MR. MCTEER. Well, they were at all time lows and withhurricane Andrew natural gas prices went up; the price for natural gasis about 30 percent above what it was before. So there has been somerenewed activity there. It's helpful, but the long-term prospects arevery negative, I think.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you really sense any carry-throughoff the rebound of the gas prices?MR. MCTEER. I don't think so, although the feeling is thatoil prices also will rise in the coming few months, especially if wehave a cold winter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And especially if we don't, we are notgoing to get it.MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, I might note that I heard an oilcompany economist last week cite figures that ran something like this:About a year ago, there was a mix of oil rigs in the mid-400s and gasrigs in the mid-300s; now that has flipped. So it's about the same11/17/92overall level but the mix has shifted toward gas with those firmerprices.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Economic activity in the mid-Atlantic statescontinues to be slow and uneven. There is modest growth in retailsales and, while retailers are not overly optimistic, there is somehopeful sentiment about the holiday season. Manufacturing appears tohave picked up some during the past month after a couple months ofdownturn. There is some growth in residential construction. Thenonresidential side is weak. Loan data, when you cut through them,show some hint of better loan demand but the hard numbers grosslyoverstate the improvement. Looking at our District loan growth, itshows an increase in C&I loans. That's really because one bank inDelaware decided to book some loans in the District rather thansomeplace else. If we factor that out, we really see a continuationof declining loan demand. However, anecdotally one does get thefeeling that loan officers feel a little better. The real weakness isin the labor market. For example, we've just done a survey of ourmanufacturers and, while it shows a pickup in activity, it continuesto indicate that manufacturers are cutting their payrolls. That seemsto be true even in areas where we're seeing some improvement [inactivity].On the national side, I sense a better tone from the samedata that other people read. The issue is one of sustainability: Isit for real or is it another false start? Basically, we don't know.I think it's one of those times when we have to watch the data andkeep an ear to the ground anecdotally.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Well, Mr. Chairman, there have not been greatchanges in the New England region since the last meeting, contrary tosome of the stories around here. There does seem to be some slightfeeling of improvement, at least in mood, since the last meeting.However, and this is consistent with what Ed Boehne just said, onething that I'm rather struck by is that when we call around and talkto manufacturers--for example, which is seeingimprovement in some lines--they tell us that they are still planningon continued restructuring in employment. There just is no onetalking about anticipating increases in hiring, including those in thehealth care sector. The manufacturing sector has become slightly morepessimistic because of the export side, with many of our high-techcompanies seeing a slowdown in their sales both to Asia and to Europe.Retailers are somewhat more optimistic; it has to do with where theystarted out, I think. But there is also a lot of discussion aboutadditional sale days before Christmas this year. Consistent with thequestion that Jerry Corrigan raised on the auto side, autos have seensome general improvement, but in talking to inNew England heexpressed real concern. He had seen a lull in sales since all thisnews about GM came out. He said they did have people coming into theshow room now expressing concern about where they were going to beable to get car service in the future, that sort of thing. As for thereal estate market, on the residential side prices do seem to havebottomed out now; on the commercial side they're still softening but-10-11/17/92probably are fairly close to a bottom. Banks see very little goodloan demand. We still get a lot of complaints about the creditcrunch.On the national scene, I don't have any real disagreementwith the Greenbook based on its assumptions, and I think it makesassumptions that it has to make in terms of fiscal policy because wehave to consider what we're doing ourselves. The only issue I wouldraise--and I guess we'll hear about this later--is on the export side:That issue is whether there's any reason, given the furtherstrengthening of the dollar and the weakness that we've seen inforecasts for Europe and Japan, to expect some further decline there.My main concern, as in the past, is that we have had somewhat of aserial optimism in our forecasts over time. I'm not quite so surethat's true this time. But even if one looked at this as being abalanced forecast in terms of risks, which is about what I think itis, we have a fair amount of room given the excess capacity in theeconomy [regarding] which direction we might want to make a mistake.I also think that at this stage we can't be overly influenced by whatwe think fiscal policy is going to be because there are too manyunknowns; we just don't know what it will be or when it is going tocome into effect. I think things do look a little better but asalways there is a concern about whether this is just another false[start] or something that is going be self-sustaining.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, our District continues to showsome modest improvement and considerably more optimism lookingforward. Our agricultural sector is really trading off betweenimprovement in our livestock business and some deterioration in ourgrain business, so that overall we have flat prospects for that sectorthis year and into next year. The manufacturing sector is a bitmixed. Our aircraft manufacturers are still weak. The auto sector ismixed because production at our GM plant is still very slow whereasFord is going to be investing significantly in its plant in KansasCity, which I think will bring in some jobs. Other than that,activity in our nondurable goods area is "decent," as they say,looking forward. The rise in natural gas prices has spurred drillingactivity in the District; the third quarter was up over 20 percentfrom the second quarter, although that doesn't bring it back toanywhere near what it was a little more than a year ago. But we areseeing some pretty robust [growth in] activity there right now. Ourconstruction area is still doing pretty well. That is particularly soin the Denver region where economic activity is coming back ratherstrongly right now. In fact, for the region construction activity isup fairly dramatically over a year ago, well over 10 percent. Ouremployment levels are up over last year--our estimate is about 0.6percent--and the anecdotal reports we're getting from our directorsare uniformly positive in terms of their reading of the environmentand their own attitudes. The banking industry in our region, with acouple of notable exceptions, is really quite strong; earnings arestrong across the region, and I think there's a little more of anattitude of making an effort to get into the lending business again,although [bankers] are keeping the lessons of their past experienceclose [to mind]. Overall, I see some general improvement in ourregion.-11-11/17/92As far as the national outlook, as we look over two quartersahead our view is very similar to the Greenbook on average althoughour timing is somewhat different, which I don't think is significant.We're looking for inflation to be in the 3 percent range. So, we arefairly comfortable with the Greenbook projections as we look at thenational economy. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I saw a good advertisement lastnight; unfortunately it was [unintelligible] and I don't know whatcompany it was for. But I do remember the scene. It was somethingabout predicting the future. In walked two scruffy characters wholooked like Attila the Hun and the witch doctor. They dumped a bunchof bones on the table out of their bag and made some appropriategrunts. I must say, having seen the economic indicators go up alittle and go down a little, I feel a bit like one of those twogentlemen.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Which one? [Laughter]MR. LINDSEY. The good-looking one! I share very much theattitudes that have been expressed in that I think the tone of thedata looks a little better than last time. But what has reallychanged are attitudes; attitudes are much better. Here is where I getnervous because of the old saying "once burned, twice shy;" this mightbe the third time we've been burned. The first time was the SaddamHussein defeat when we had a big boost in attitudes. The second timewas after our rate cut last December when there was a big improvementin attitudes. And now we have a new President and a big improvementin attitudes. I don't know whether attitudes are going to translateinto real changes. If I have a disagreement with the staff forecast,it has to do with what I expect to occur in the early part of nextyear, particularly with regard to fiscal policy. I remember the 1981tax cut from being inside [the Administration]. I think what is beingproposed today is not that dissimilar. Essentially, the big proposalearlier was an acceleration of depreciation deductions rather than anincrease in the investment tax credit. The present value of the taxincentive, though, is roughly the same. Three events resulted fromthat [earlier tax cut] that we should keep in mind. The first is thatthe first relative price change you induce when you impose an ITC isthat you lower the price of old capital relative to new capital, i.e.the stock market declines. The second factor to remember is thatthere is a delay before investment picks up. There was a verysubstantial delay in 1982; we waited almost 12 months to see aninvestment pickup after the new depreciation deductions came intoplay. I think that's very consistent with the econometric evidence.But the expectations in the market are that the investment will happenalmost immediately and therefore we will see a rise in near-term andintermediate-term interest rates well before investment picks up. Andthe third factor to keep in mind is that tax bills never get throughquickly even when it looks as if the President has a mandate as he didin 1980 and as he does this time. Everyone promises that things aregoing to be speedy. It's worth remembering that the 1981 bill almostpassed and then got bogged down; it actually got new impetus onlyafter the President was shot and, therefore, a "second honeymoon"occurred. I don't expect that to happen this time but, again, it-12-11/17/92takes a major, major amount of movement to change tax legislation;that shouldn't be underestimated.There are, in fact, two worse situations this time withregard to what is likely to happen. The first is that we do not havesafe harbor leasing in the current proposal. The safe harbor leasingallowed loss-making or non tax-paying firms to be able to get taxadvantages. That will not be the case this time. Secondly, we have amuch tougher minimum tax in place which, in fact, is proposed to beincreased under "putting people first." Those companies paying theminimum tax are essentially investment intensive firms. Therefore,that's a further complication. Where I think that would play out isnot in what will happen after the bill is passed but in delaying thepassage of the bill. The Chairman of the House Ways and MeansCommittee has particular industries he is concerned about; the variouspower players have particular industries; and right now every BigEight accounting firm is doing very good business with clients tocalculate exactly what the changes in the tax law have to be in orderto encourage investment in that firm. I would say: Don't expectanything quickly.So, I'm more pessimistic about the start of the year. Ithink what we're going to see is a stock market decline, a rise inintermediate-term interest rates, and no fiscal stimulus. I thinkthat's going to lead to a sense of disappointment. We're going to seethe continuing layoffs that people mentioned. GM is on the line.And, Jerry, I would ask the same question about IBM. I notice [itsstock price] is now down to 65; the last time I looked it was at 85.We're going to see continuing weakness abroad. We have thepossibility of collapse in Russia this winter. And we always have theMiddle East. So, to [abuse] a phrase, maybe what we're seeing is"deja voodoo," in line with Attila the Hun and the witch doctor.We've been here twice before and I would not be overly optimisticsince all we're seeing, really, is an improvement in attitudes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. On a District basis I don't have anything new toreport. The statistics or anecdotal information we have suggest thatthe Eighth District is growing modestly more rapidly than the rest ofthe country, but there are no really dramatic changes.On the national front, I would have two brief comments. Oneis--and I think Mike Prell allowed for this in commenting on theforecast--that I personally wouldn't be nearly as sanguine about thelong-run inflation outlook as the forecast is with an assumption of anunchanged funds rate. I'm talking about looking out a couple ofyears. I have trouble with that working out that way. Secondly--andthis is by no means a criticism of the staff's efforts to forecastbecause I think the staff is among the best in terms of that job, butit's a very difficult job--the third quarter served as a reminder tome of the questionability, if you will, of short-run fine-tuningmonetary policy based on economic forecasts. As good as that processmay be, it's a very, very difficult thing to do. We essentially arelooking at a rate of growth in GDP that is probably twice what wethought a couple of FOMC meetings ago. If you look back over time, Ithink that pattern repeats itself. So, I was reminded of that andthought I'd share that.-13-11/17/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Well, to follow on Tom's line of thought, thesmoke has cleared. We have three quarters in the books and theaverage growth for the first three quarters of 1992 is a shade under2-1/2 percent. And we've learned that the third quarter may berevised up to 3 percent, which would put us right at 2-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Or more.MR. MULLINS. Or more. I would submit that this is betterthan most economists expected at the beginning of the year. It'scertainly in line with our Humphrey-Hawkins forecasts and exceeds myHumphrey-Hawkins forecast. It's also certainly better than the recentperformance of other G-7 countries that are going through thisadjustment period. Indeed, 2-1/2 percent growth is even marginallybetter than potential. It may be very depressing to the electorate tothink about 2-1/2 percent growth, but over the long term perhaps wecan raise the potential. But [we can] point out that at least it's atthat level. Unemployment is down about 1/2 percentage point, althoughthat has been pretty flaky and, of course, the performance is moribundcompared with a traditional recovery. I think it's because theunderlying structural dynamics are far different and it's notespecially valid to compare it to a traditional cyclical episode andinventory cycle. This is simply a slower balance sheet adjustmentprocess. We've made measurable progress, as we've talked about, onthat adjustment process but it's probably not yet completed. As aresult, I would agree that the immediate outlook is for slow growth.We've had this lurching pattern between 1-1/2 percent and 3 percentquarterly growth. Several weeks ago I would have thought the nextlurching would be down toward the lower end of that range--at about1-1/2 percent. The data we've talked about here--the wide rangingdata from retail sales to confidence numbers to industrial production--all suggest a bit more near-term strength than I would have expecteda few weeks ago. There's also this notion of a post-election upturnin confidence. I would agree with Governor Lindsey in that I'm notconfident that that's going to have much of an effect. We saw in theUK that even with their post-election euphoria, which did lift themarkets, consumers found they couldn't pay down their excess debt withconfidence. So, in general, I wouldn't argue with the Greenbookforecast of 2 percent for the fourth quarter, although I think it maybe a bit stronger if anything. Despite this ratcheting pattern, Ithink we are gradually, painstakingly, building a base of highergrowth and are slowly emerging from this economic lethargy.The financial data in my view are consistent with thisconclusion. The firming of credit demands one can only call marginal,but at least it's there. Consumer installment credit increased forthe first time in my recent short memory. And domestic nonfinancialdebt, excluding the U.S. government, has accelerated from growth under2 percent a month on an annual basis to a bit over 3 percent. That'snothing to write home about. Short- and intermediate-term businesscredit has shown some strength as well. That is in keeping with thisslow, gradual pattern. And M2 growth continues its gradualstrengthening. In the last three months it has grown at a rate above4 percent; for the year its growth is only marginally below the lowend of the range. If one were to adjust it for the yield curve effectof flows to bond funds, it would be within the range; but then I11/17/92wouldn't know exactly what that would mean. One could say thevelocity increase is better established now and I'm equally confusedabout what that means. Of course, we have no shortage of liquidity.Ml growth has been 20 percent the past two months and 14 percent forthe year. I think both the economy and M2 may take another swoonespecially with long rates up 30 to 50 basis points since September,the dollar higher, and the outlook for foreign economies much weakerthan it was several months ago. Of course, then there's theuncertainty associated with the fiscal stimulus. This is likely tomean higher interest rates in the near term and maybe a slowing of theadjustment process and then, followed with a considerable lag, thefiscal stimulus. Still, I think the prospects remain favorable forgradual improvement even in this uneven pattern.I thought it might be useful to look at where we are oninflation because I'm a bit concerned that we're likely to hear a lotabout the drag on the economy that comes from the shift to a lowinflation environment or low inflation regime. I hear a lot of thisin international discussions as well. Despite last month'sdisappointing CPI, we've made very notable progress. Core CPI hasdecelerated from 5-1/2 percent in the late '90 to early '91 perioddown to about 3 percent. We've have commensurate reductions in thePPI and ECI; commodity prices are soft. And if there's measurementbias in the CPI, actual inflation could well be in the 2 percentrange. So, on actual measured inflation, we seem to be relativelyclose to closing in on price stability. The prospects for continuedprogress also look good on all measures, whether you talk about slackor money growth.Unfortunately, the Chairman has defined price stability forus as a condition in which inflation is not an important factor ineconomic decisions, and I think that's a correct definition. But ineconomic decisions it's not always actual measured inflation that isimportant; it's inflationary expectations that feed into investmentdecisions, into the long rate, into labor negotiations and the like.How have we done on inflationary expectations? Not well. In theMichigan Consumer Survey, consumer inflation expectations for 5- to10-year horizons have held steady like a rock at roughly 5 percentduring this period. Not only has it not come down appreciably but thelevel is probably double the level of recently measured inflation.The resiliency of inflationary expectations also is apparent from thestill relatively high level of long rates, which includes a premiumthat I think is above recently measured inflation and the outlook forfuture inflation. I think this is understandable. We've had 4 to 5percent inflation since 1983; it's deeply imbedded in expectations; itwill probably take more than a few good quarters to get it out ofthere. So, despite the progress in reducing inflation, we haven'tmade much progress on inflationary expectations yet and that'snecessary to achieve the benefits. Moreover, I believe the dissonancebetween actual inflation and expectations creates difficulties ofadjustment which affect the real economy. I was at Tom's boardmeeting and one of the business people said--he put together a coupleof comments--in effect that the employees base wage demands oninflationary expectations and he didn't feel he could pass [the higherwages] through [to prices]. Businesses have to pay higher long-termrates. Consumers, watching their home prices fall and their net worthfall with them, are not enamored of disinflation which they may viewas deflation.-15-11/17/92So, the frictions associated with adjustment to the lowinflation regime are in part responsible for the recent increase incriticism of price stability as the appropriate goal of monetarypolicy. It was very popular in the 1980s when the economy was growingand after [the rapid inflation of] the '70s. Now, we hear a lot oftalk that a little inflation is not only not bad but beneficial. Ihear this talk around town from noted economists looking for jobs!We've seen recent articles questioning price stability in BusinessWeek and the Economist, and I noticed in today's New York Times anarticle talking about the evils of deflation. It's also apparent thatit's under some threat. Inherent in the gravitational pull ofexpectations is the risk of reverting to the 4 percent inflation thatwe've experienced for almost a decade. That would be unfortunatesince we've paid much of the price to get inflation down and many ofthe benefits are ahead of us, secured only with inflationaryexpectations. In my view we're facing the critical period here withan improving economy, the prospect of fiscal stimulus, and very rapidgrowth in Ml which could turn into rapid growth in M2 and credit. AndI think we're entering a period of tension, a battle between actualinflation and expectations, with pressure to revert to 4 to 5 percentinflation and fulfill those expectations.So, near term I think it's important to be vigilant and guardagainst another swoon in M2 growth. But we also need to be wary ofthe risks on the other side. When this does turn around, it couldturn around quickly and we could risk losing the hard-won gains we'veachieved and we could be back at ground zero very quickly. Inparticular, in terms of the upside risks, one can posit a scenariowith the economy gradually improving to the 3 percent level next year,with the headwinds diminishing, with years of pent-up demand cominginto play, and with a large fiscal stimulus that I think thisAdministration was elected to do. I think the stimulus package willbe augmented by pent-up demand in Congress. That's likely to hit inlate 1993 on top of an economy at 3 percent growth with credit demandspicking up, turning narrow money into broad money and credit growth.And it's not inconceivable to me that in late 1993 into 1994 we couldhave an unsustainably strong upturn that could pretty quickly eat awayour sense of slack. I view that as the medium-term problem, not thenear-term problem. I still would acknowledge in the higher longrates, the higher dollar, and the weakened world economy the downsiderisks in the current environment. But we may soon be moving into theposition where the upside risks could become paramount. It doesconcern me that the new Administration and Congress still view thiseconomy as one that is in recession, as if we had negative GDP growth.It is important for us to keep in mind that we're at a 2-1/2 percentgrowth level and I think that argues for caution at this juncture.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. From the District perspective, things arecontinuing to move forward in a general way. We have some pockets ofconsiderable strength. There is an area called the golden triangledown around Cincinnati to Lexington and over into Tom's Melzer'sDistrict in Louisville that is very strong, with very lowunemployment. They talk about labor shortages and attracting peoplefrom other areas. Around Columbus, Ohio, business conditions are verystrong. Even in the areas where we still have notable layoffs--300people, 500 people--we still see some [overall] growth in employment.-16-11/17/92There are other non-notable increases, the non-headline catching kindof things, that are producing jobs to offset the contractions we arecontinuing to see at big firms.In talking with small business people around the District, Ihave noted a general improvement in their tone. Their exports aredoing well and they feel their order books are solid. When I ask themabout inflation expectations, that group consistently tells me thatthey see no inflation in their businesses, and that's reflected intheir wage packages. They're talking about 2 and 3 percent increasesin [total] compensation, matched they hope by productivity becausethere is no price increase factored in. When I talk to the bankingcommunity, though, the talk is consistently about pay increases in the4 to 5 percent range, reflecting their view that inflation is going tostay in the 4 to 5 percent range. And I think the difference betweenthe inflation rate people are basing their actions on and what we areseeing in the numbers is the critical challenge for the period ahead.We're getting pretty good retail sales numbers not only inthe District but from all those major companies headquartered in theDistrict; the latter reported very strong numbers in October as we nowsee in the national statistics. They also report improving optimismabout Christmas. There was a recent slump in retail sales, though.In the first 10 days of November there was a surprisingly strong anduniform drop in retail sales; no one has much confidence in sayingwhether it was a temporary thing or something more serious. We arecontinuing to get pretty good housing activity around the District.So, overall, the tone has generally been pretty good.Turning to the national side, I'm not sure I have anything tosay about the future because I'm still struggling to understand thepast--the last year and a half or so at least--both in terms of whatis perceived in the economics profession and especially by theincoming Administration and the new Congress about what the role offiscal policy has been and what the role of monetary policy has beenand, therefore, the conclusions they come to on what policy should bein the future. The discussion about fiscal drag has been interesting,that is, the deficit problem and how it has retarded economic activitythrough various channels that have affected overall aggregate demandand maybe certain sectors or regions. Now, the idea is that there'sgoing to be some type of fiscal stimulus. Especially if it's viewedas aggregate demand--increasing total spending in the economy ratherthan affecting a specific region or sector or target industry, whichit certainly could do--I'm not sure in my own mind how that will comeout and [what its implications are for] monetary policy.The monetary [side] is much more intriguing for us in thatsince the ending of the Gulf War there seem to have been two majorrival conjectures about what the economy otherwise would have done andwhat the role of monetary policy has been. One of them is that theeconomy was poised for a cyclical recovery and a normal kind ofexpansion after the Gulf War and was held back, especially by amonetary policy that was not sufficiently accommodative. That is the[conjecture of] people who had the view that a broad measure of money--M2, M3, or something--retarded total spending. The alternativeconjecture is that the economy was subjected to a number of very majordepressing forces, including possibly fiscal policy--the unwinding ofthe defense buildup of the '80s--the winding down of commercial-17-11/17/92construction employment on the two coasts in particular, and thebalance sheet adjustments going on in business and households alike.In that view monetary policy was actually quite expansionary toprevent an even more severe contraction [which would have occurred]had monetary policy not been cushioning these down-draft effects.That suggests either that monetary policy is best summarized simply byhow far short-term interest rates have dropped or by how rapid growthin the narrower measures of money growth has been. If this latterview is correct, then the critical thing for us is to ascertain whenthese depressing forces are starting to attenuate so that we know whenis the right time to pull back on this massive amount of monetarystimulus that that hypothesis implies. Whereas if the former [view iscorrect]--that the broader measures best summarize the thrust ofmonetary policy actions in regard to the retarded economic activity--then the challenge still is to get within our target range so thatwe're not a negative force affecting the economy. Some think thatthose are [ir]reconcilable, but I think our challenge now is toreconcile them and to set our objectives for '93 in some clearfashion, based on which of those views we believe.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't have a lot to add to whathas been said around the table. I think things do feel a littlebetter, as most have observed. I would side with those who also haveobserved that it's probably a little premature to declare victory.But certainly both the performance [of the economy] and the outlookare better than many had expected a couple of months ago. There are,as Governor Mullins and others have noted, some scattered signs ofpickup in commercial loan demand, which is something we haven't seenfor a long, long time. Going back to the Ninth Federal ReserveDistrict, I can confirm that there will be at least one housing startin Montana in November because I caused it. All in all, myobservations and sentiments are pretty much in line with what has beensaid around the table.The point that Dave [Mullins] was making regarding attitudesabout inflation and price stability having changed is veryinteresting. We had our academic panel into the Bank a couple ofweeks ago. This is a pretty good group of people and a good crosssection in terms of philosophies and ideologies. There was just nosympathy at all from any of those people for doing anything to try todrive the core inflation rate down from a 3 percent level. Thatdidn't surprise me coming from some of the fellows in Mr. Syron's neckof the woods, but there were among this group a couple of real oldline, very conservative monetarists--people like Phil Cagan forexample--and even he didn't want to hear it. And that is a change inattitude. Now, fortunately, these people aren't the only arbiters inthis area, but it is interesting, given where we are today, that theperceptions about the costs of trying to engineer further reductionsin the core inflation rate are clearly viewed a little differentlytoday than they were several years ago.The only other thing I wanted to mention, Mr. Chairman--andmaybe Ted Truman could help me out here--is that my assessment of theoutlook in Germany and Japan over the next three to six quarters isreally pretty grim. It's not at all inconceivable to me thatperformance in both of those countries could be distinctly south of-18-11/17/92the current IMF or OECD forecasts. That possibility has obviousimplications for our economy in terms of the outlook for both exportsand imports, but it also seems to me to raise some second-leveldangers, including those on the financial side and perhaps especiallyon the trade side. Ted, I wonder if you would share with me and theothers your sense as to whether that admittedly quite pessimisticpossibility is something that we should be worried about.MR. TRUMAN. Well, I don't think one can exclude it. Ouroutlook has been decidedly less optimistic than the IMF's or theOECD's for that matter. Certainly in the case of Japan we seeessentially no growth--a bit above zero--through the middle of nextyear. For Germany we are a little more optimistic than some of theforecasts we now see coming out of Germany itself, though it may bethat we have assumed that the Bundesbank might do a bit more in themeantime. But I think [the possibility] is difficult to dismiss; aone standard deviation in the negative direction gives you a quitegloomy outlook in this situation. We obviously don't have a lot ofpositive information suggesting that a turn is coming, and I thinkyou're absolutely right that the feedback effects of a period ofEuropean stagnation on top of what they've just gone through in termsof trade relations and so forth could be quite disruptive not directlyto economic activity but to the [economic] environment and, therefore,real activity. Japan, of course, continues to be a question mark.The Nikkei came down below 16,000 though it's back into that range,which makes things a little dicey. They seem not to be making muchprogress.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, when David Mullins was speakingjust a minute ago he was referring to several noted economists whothink that maybe a little inflation wouldn't be such a bad idea afterall. It occurred to me when he said that that maybe a definition of anoted economist is one who abhors [monetarism]. I have been thinkinga bit like Jerry Jordan, reflecting on the flow of events of the lastcouple years. Someone wrote that history is a river; it flows out ofthe past and into the present and on to the future.Last meeting and before then I guess, Mr. Chairman, you saidthat you saw us as being poised between one of two models of theeconomy: Either it is in a process of refreshing and rebuilding orelse it is going to seize up. I have to say I am becoming moreoptimistic all the time. It seems to me that if the economy weregoing to seize up, it certainly has had every chance to do it. Themost amazing thing is that it has not seized up, given what ishappening; I think it indicates an underlying strength in the economythat is just remarkable. If you'll forgive me for running this litanythat you're all familiar with, just consider the things that havehappened in the last several years and are still happening. None ofthese things has gone away; all of the drags [on economic activity]are still in place and are still playing through: the de-leveragingphenomenon [goes] all the way through the different layers of theeconomy; the restructuring [continues], with the attendant heavy joblosses and the heavy burden that has been on confidence[unintelligible]; and absolute depression [persists] in theconstruction and real estate business--a very big industry--with allthe implications there. One of the throw-offs has been consumer-19-11/17/92confidence, a decline in confidence through the wealth effect on homevalues. We have been through a banking trauma which in an earlier erawould have caused what would have been described as a "crash," I'msure, and we'd still be deep into it just on that alone. We're goingthrough a defense slowdown, another big industry; that industry isabsolutely in decline but even more than that its composition isshifting with various displacements going on which I think in theshort term are every bit as much of a drag as the actual decrease involume. A newer factor, of course, is this world economic slowdownthat is going on, weakening our exports which had been helping us inearlier years. Now, that's a lot of stress on an economy. And everyone of those factors is still there; they are still dragging on theeconomy and they've all been at work for a long time except that lastone, which may be just coming into its own.So, where are we? What has in fact been happening? Well, inthe last nine quarters the first three of them were negative on GDPand the last six have been positive. Two of the last three quarterswere +2.9 percent and we have what now may be 3 percent or more GDPgrowth in the most recent quarter. We're probably going to have 2.3percent or more growth in GDP for the year, and that's not too shabby.We are now on new high ground; we're not in a recovery anymore, we'renearing an expansion as of the numbers of the third quarter. Ourfinancial structure as a nation is strengthening in both the financialand the nonfinancial sectors as a result of the hesitancy in thebanking industry and the de-leveraging. I think one would have to saythat our competitiveness and our productivity are going up largelythrough this restructuring process. The banking system has certainlybeen battered but it's in place and hopefully wiser; it's certainlymore fully regulated, heaven knows! And it is earning record profitsright now. Inflation is coming down and it's into the range wherewe're beginning to talk about having achieved price level stability.On balance most of us here around the table this morning consider thelatest news to be upbeat. I'm sure the economy could still seize up;I don't want to suggest that there's no reason for concern. But thelonger we have the kind of results we're seeing, the less likely thatis and the more it seems that we are indeed in a refreshing [stage of]rebuilding that I think displays an amazing underlying strength inthis economy and one we can depend on as we look into the future.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me increasinglyevident that the economy continues to be moving in a positivedirection, albeit at a very moderate pace, which looks to beconsistent with further progress toward price stability. Myimpression is that the election has probably had a favorable effect onconsumer confidence due in part to the intense media attention toexpected stimulative actions on the part of the new Administration andan almost magical disappearance of the media's former obsession withunemployment and layoff announcements. Nonetheless, corporaterestructuring, and particularly debt reduction and administrativestaff reductions, will continue. I believe that spells out the [basisfor] longer-range improvement in U.S. competitiveness. Many of theindicators are on a more favorable trend line. Corporate profits,while spotty, are generally better. The banking system is in bettershape as measured both by its balance sheet values and by bankingprofits, which are probably at the best levels in more than two11/17/92decades. Having said that, we certainly have not yet seen the fullimpact of the slowdown in California reflected in the banks that havea heavy stake there. The general tone of the financial markets Ibelieve is resilient, and those markets have weathered a lot of thethings that Mike Kelley was just talking about. To be sure, higherdollar exchange rates and softer economies among our major tradingpartners don't indicate a major boom for the export sector. It seemsto me that the Greenbook forecast is on the money, if that's not animproper usage [of that expression]--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Hardly a venial sin! [Laughter]MR. LAWARE. --and consistent with my own analysis and theanecdotal input that I've been hearing. However, consistent with thesuggestion of Don Kohn's recent memo, I will not further telegraph my[policy] views!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. We have had a rather sustained six quarters ofdoom and gloom and yet the economy has continued to move along at anaverage rate of 2-1/4 percent over that six quarters. In spite of allthe talk about forward and back and double dip or triple dip, wereally have not had as much variability in real GDP as normallyoccurs. So, the economy in some sense is doing pretty well giventhese conditions. As for the downside risk, I share the view thatJerry Corrigan has mentioned. It does seem to me that the pace ofdevelopments--not only monetary policy but other policies and outcomes--in the United States is somewhat out of step compared todevelopments in Europe and Japan. While commodity prices seem to bevery subdued in dollar terms--in fact to some extent one might saythey are still on a very slight downward trend, with a decline ofmaybe 1-1/2 percent at an annual rate over the last four years--nevertheless, wholesale prices in the United States are not respondingnearly as well as one would expect under those conditions. That is,the rate of change in our finished goods wholesale prices year-over-year has been stuck in the 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent range for some time.In contrast, even though they have much higher wage and priceinflexibility, the year-over-year rate of change in wholesale pricesin Germany is -1.6 percent and in Japan -1.3 percent. And theBundesbank is very upset about a 3-1/2 percent inflation rate asmeasured by their year-over-year CPI. Yet, somehow or other, we areat 3.2 percent and maybe that's [viewed as] okay.I'm wondering with this GATT round--and we all seem todispute where it [stands]--how much danger we're in with regard to acontinuing rollback of trade openness. With this kind of slow growththat the world is experiencing--and I think that's reflected incommodity prices--I'm wondering whether or not we really are on a muchmore dismal path toward protectionism than we may believe. I'mwondering if Europe and Japan may be closer to zero in their realgrowth. I'm wondering what that means for world capital markets ifthe United States is able to achieve 3 or 3-1/2 or possibly 4 percentreal GDP growth. It seems to me rather unlikely that we could get upto that level of GDP growth with [the economies of] Europe and Japanas slow as they are. But I think there is considerable risk that thecapital markets, and indeed politicians here, may not be willing toaccept a rising trade deficit for the United States. If under those-21-11/17/92circumstances we have a restrained U.S. trade position, and if theGATT round does not get done in the next two or three weeks, we couldbe in a very, very difficult [situation]. I also wonder about worldcompetitiveness under conditions in which many countries continue tohave an industrial policy. And there are those in the United Stateswho I think are somewhat more inclined in that direction. Whathappens to capital markets and what happens to profit margins when wehave these kinds of competitive conditions worldwide? Do we findother industries falling [to] the same world profitability level thatwe've seen at times in steel and coal and ore? Are our airlineprofitability rates in significant danger of being repeated [in]automobiles? How long can we go on with Boeing and McConnell Douglasand other aircraft manufacturers being in somewhat of an up stagewhile we're watching these airlines and the major leasing firms havetheir difficulties? So, I'm not worried as much about a double dip ortriple dip as I am about an expansion in the United States that is insome sense unsustainable given world conditions. It seems to me wemight have to ask questions about a true recovery, a true expansion,but one that is not sustainable in a world undergoing severe traderestraint. So, I continue to find things to worry about.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. Well, perhaps echoing a lot of the commentsthat have been made around the table, I think we're certainly enteringwhat I call a crucial time to assess a potential shift in direction.We've all been very cheered by some of the recent positive, althoughtentative, reports. I think many of these positive reports are due tothe accommodative monetary stance that we have been in over the lastseveral years. Some of that is beginning to pay off, certainly in theGDP; and we're starting to see life in M2 and even some loan activity,although some of that is anecdotal at this point. Consumer confidenceappears to have turned around and certainly the inflationary situationat least [in terms of] current inflation is much improved, although,as David notes, this dichotomy between inflation expectations andcurrent inflation continues to be troubling.In spite of this generally improved atmosphere in tone,there's still considerable room for caution. I continue to betroubled by the labor market situation. Although we've seen someimprovement in the unemployment rate, we are still seeing declines inaggregate employment. We are still seeing major restructuring in anumber of industries, with permanent job losses which are beingreflected to some extent in real disposable personal income. Althoughwe've seen improvement recently in industrial production, it has notimproved in the aggregate over the last few months. While the bankingsituation has improved--maybe somewhere between "somewhat" and"considerably"--there is still some fragility to the bankingsituation, and we are going to have to watch that very carefully.It's not clear when this restructuring process that we've all talkedabout is going to wind down. There is still considerable room forrestructuring in the defense industry and in some of the major, BlueChip companies. We mentioned GM around the table today but othermajor corporations are going through restructuring, and that probablyis going to continue to hit the headlines.The export situation is also a source of potential concern.Japan and Germany have been mentioned and the German question could-22-11/17/92probably be broadened to more of Europe. While our export situationmay not have been saved, it has not been as bad as it otherwise wouldhave been because of the improvement in some of the underdevelopedcountries. It's not clear how much more some of those underdevelopedcountries can continue to expand. In summary, while I'm cheered bythe improvement, I think we have to question whether it is asustainable start or whether we are heading for another potentialswoon. I do think we will have a fiscal package; it's only a questionof size and shape, but it is coming. If the economy is continuing toimprove, I would think the new President is going to want to get outahead of that and be able to take some credit for it. So, we'relikely to see a stronger situation in the medium term. The shortterm, though, I think still remains at question.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, Governor. Coffee isavailable for us.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unless somebody has an objection, [Iassume] it is acceptable to continue on and complete the short-termissues before we go to the ranges for 1993. So, I would conclude thatunless I hear an objection.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I think the issues are linked.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They are, but the question is which doyou want to do first?MR. LINDSEY. Can they be discussed simultaneously?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you want to say something, [Don]?MR. KOHN. I couldn't hear what Governor Lindsey said.MR. LINDSEY. It is my view that the issue of the ranges fornext year and the short-term decision with regard to fed funds arelinked issues. I was wondering if it were possible to discuss themsimultaneously.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the answer is yes we can, but ifwe're going to do that, I think it would be appropriate to stay withthe schedule that we have here and basically to deal now with theranges or at least the [briefing by] Don Kohn. I'm a little concernedabout all this since there is a technical problem about trying tomerge these into a single discussion. I'm not sure that it will work.I'm willing to try, but I'm not convinced it's a good idea. Why don'twe try it your way and go forward. We may find that it will requireus at some point--I reserve the right as Chairman--to alter theprocedure in mid-course if it will speed up the work.MR. LINDSEY. Okay.MR. KOHN. We're going to start with the long run, then?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, why don't you start with the longrun and raise the issues. Then we'll try to integrate them [and] see-23-11/17/92if we can conclude the short term and then go to the long term for afinal decision.MR. KOHN. I actually have two briefings here on this. Onepossibility, Mr. Chairman--if the Committee has the patience, since itwill take about 15, 16, 17 minutes combined--is that I could read themboth.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would suggest that that's the idealprocedure.MR. KOHN. Okay, hang on. Here we go. [Laughter] Everyonehas had coffee, so we may be able to make it through! I'll start withthe long-run ranges. [Statements--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'll try to cover both aspects myself; Ifrankly don't tie the short-term decision and the long-run rangestogether, but some of you may. In that respect we'll see how thingsmaterialize.I must say that my impression with respect to the ranges is[along the lines of] what we suspected we might have to do back inJuly but we were not sufficiently cognizant of the forces that weredriving money at that time, which we are today. If one looks at theold opportunity cost relationships and the sharp divergences that haveoccurred between velocity and our old opportunity costs, it's fairlyobvious from the patterns that have emerged in the most recent periodthat had we known back in July what we know now we would implicitlyhave factored in a significant rise in velocity and, accordingly, wewould have had a much lower range of M2 consistent with the nominalGDP numbers that in fact have pretty much materialized as expected.So, the question of whether we should revise our ranges down in myjudgment is not really a choice between whether we should or shouldn'tbut by how much and when. I myself am inclined to be a little morecautious than the projected alternative II of 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percenton M2; I'd much prefer 2 to 6 percent myself, but it's obviously not abig deal one way or the other. I think the more interesting anddifficult decision is when.Obviously, if we do it now, we can phrase it for what it is:namely, a technical adjustment we should have made back in July. Butas we said then, we felt we needed more information and we said wewould respond at a later time. Indeed, we could do that now. Thedisadvantage of doing it now is that it is [more] difficult to get themessage out that this is really a technical adjustment than it is ifwe do it in Congressional testimony in February under the usualprocedures. If I were sure that we could get the message out now in aform that I think is necessary, I frankly would be inclined to do itnow. But I'm not sure that that's feasible, and I'd be most curiousto get everyone else's view with respect to this question. But I dothink it would be difficult not to lower the ranges after the Feinmanand Porter study and after what we indicated was the nature of ourdiscussions in July and the considerations that we had. Myrecollection is that what we stipulated back in July almost requiresus to lower the ranges at this stage, granted the type of velocitychanges that we were contemplating at the time. But I don't tie whatwe will do with respect to the ranges in any way to what I think ourshort-term considerations are today with respect to policy because I-24-11/17/92don't think it's a monetary policy question. I believe it's strictlya technical question, and I myself would like to handle it in that wayif we could.With respect to short-term policy, you may recall that wecame out of the last meeting with [a directive that incorporated] hardasymmetry toward ease, with the basic presumption that the Desk wouldease in the intermeeting period unless the economy showed significantimprovement. I mentioned at the time certain key developments.Specifically, as I recall, the one that had been worrying me the mostat the time of the last meeting was initial claims, which had beenmoving up and suggesting that the economy was in fact beginning to gointo a cumulative erosion. If that were occurring, we would haveexpected claims to move up to the area of 500,000 weekly, adjusted foremergency unemployment claims, and perhaps penetrating above that. Inthe event and almost immediately, initial claims turned in exactly theopposite direction--and I might say in a rather credible form in thesense that the level came down successively week-by-week and it wasmatched by levels of insured unemployment that also were exhibitingthat same phenomenon. We were also looking in the same context atother elements underneath those data which certainly were indicativeof apparent changes in the labor market, as reflected in the incomeand product accounts and in [other] broad measures of economicactivity that we generally watch. It was fairly apparent that themotor vehicle sales numbers were impressive. The retail salesfigures--granted they could very readily get revised again and again--were capturing a [more positive] tone. And, unless we are readinginto our various District reports the actual biases coming from thenational retail sales figures, I must say the reports we heard todayfrom the Districts are quite consistent with the data that we'reseeing on the national level; there does not appear to be aninconsistency. And the evidence of shortfalls in inventories in theretail area prior to the Christmas season is giving a general tone ofmuch lower levels of discounts than we saw last year. That is as gooda measure as one can get about the tone of the Christmas sellingseason.The general short-term outlook strikes me as clearly[pointing to] a modest upward momentum. I don't think we have seenany evidence of this economy seizing up, as Governor Kelley indicated.I'm not saying that it is moving forward at an accelerating pace, butit seems to be gathering modest domestic support. I would point outthat there are several characteristics of this [situation] that docreate risks on the up side. The first is the old, classic inventorylead-time relationship. Remember that lead times on deliveries ofmaterials are very short and that backlogs as a percent of shipmentshave been coming down; this is increasingly a just-in-time type ofeconomy. If we get any pressure on that system, it means that minorbottlenecks begin to occur. That very easily can happen in the UnitedStates where the travel distances are so great as distinct from Japanwhere just-in-time means people just throw it over the wall becauseeverything is close together. That's not true here. It is notinconceivable that with all the computer technology we could still getmodest pressures, which would start to move lead times out. Once leadtimes start to lengthen, purchasing managers start to order further inadvance and that's the old classic inventory cycle which opens upprofit margins, engenders increased capital investment, and createsthe type of environment which historically always looks after the fact-25-11/17/92as if it were unforeseeable. In other words, we sit here now and saythat nothing is really moving except a little in housing and a littlein retail sales, but [the improvement] is offset by weakness inexports. I've been through many of those cycles; in fact a lot of youhere whose hair is as grey as mine--and maybe some of you have more ofit--have lived through the same phenomenon. It's very difficult tosee that phenomenon in advance. It comes on fairly quickly and it isnot easily foreseeable.Superimposed on that is the virtual inevitability of aninvestment tax credit. The Clinton people have committed themselvesto it not as a short-term device, but as a permanent long-termvehicle. I forget who mentioned this earlier, but once tax hearingsstart things begin to get very interesting. I don't think we fullyunderstand the extent to which there are pent-up constituencypressures in the budget process which are really going to be unleashedonce the Congress is [in session] and everything is in play. Thebelief that President Clinton is going to be able to constrain thatphenomenon is not well based in history. [Laughter] And the issue ofeffectively putting President Clinton in a position where he may wellend up vetoing everything in sight for a period of time is not ascenario we can just discard because he is going to have to imposehimself on that process or it is "deuces wild" as we used to say, andthings could really begin to move. That clearly is not something weall are looking at with any degree of benevolence.Having said that, there nonetheless are quite significantnegatives in the world economy. No disinflation is occurring outthere, but we see the makings of a world economy being on the edge ofdeflation. As Jerry pointed out, the Japanese and German economiesare in much less viable shape than is suggested by the conventionalwisdom. There are very significant downside risks if for no otherreason than that [the existence of those risks] is not theconventional wisdom in those countries and I don't think they are incontrol of how they would react psychologically if everything began tocome up short. There's unquestionably a convergence of the[unintelligible] process in the European Community that is involved,and it is important to recognize that the endeavor to converge the EC[economies] has all the aspects of constraints of one form or another,which can have a major impact over there. The spillover effects intothe United States are very difficult to [ascertain], but we are seeingclear evidences, mainly in the last several weeks, that theEuropean/Japanese [unintelligible] system is really weakening. Iwould only [point to] two specific indicators, which we don't[usually] look at all that much: the commodity price trends,specifically in metals in the last number of weeks, and the price ofgold, which we very rarely take into consideration. But when weremember that gold is and probably always will be a true measure ofthe sense of people's view of paper currencies, then we get goldprices under pressure at the same time that commodity prices aremoving. Granted, it is less in non-dollar terms [but] it issuggestive of the fact that there's a psychology that is consistentwith an EC convergence. And the restrained attitudes in Japan aboutexpanding are rather graphic. When Ted Truman and I were over there awhile back, I was impressed by the extent of the optimism thatpervaded in spite of all the awful numbers we were seeing. I must saythat made me uncomfortable because there were no countervailing forcesout there. It's always dangerous to have optimism if it doesn't work.-26-11/17/92The issue I find the most difficult to deal with is the one that Davidraised: namely, the question of short-term non-inflation but longer-term inflationary expectations still embodied [in interest rates].One would think we could arbitrage this in some way, but it doesn'twork. We've seen that in the past. Remember how long it took in 1979when inflationary pressures were really roaring away and the rates onlong-term U.S. Treasuries just kept sitting close to the 6 percentarea?MR. ANGELL. 9 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I'm talking about earlier on.MR. ANGELL. 1979?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. ANGELL. I think they were pretty well stuck at 9 percentin '79.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, maybe I'm thinking of slightlyearlier.MR. MULLINS. In the mid-'70s. For 10 years they hadunderestimated inflation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, and then all of a sudden--I thinkit was from mid-1979 for the next six or eight months--long-termyields went up 400 basis points or something like that.SPEAKER(?). That's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What that told us is that these thingsdon't happen slowly; they break. I have a suspicion that what we havehere is the reverse: namely, that at some point if short-terminflationary pressures stay down, this is going to break and hopefullyit could break in a positive direction. But as a consequence of allof this, we have a very unusual situation where the United Stateseconomy does seem to be crippled in the short term; I don't believe wehave the characteristics of a double or triple dip; I don't thinkwe're seeing that. While we saw shortfalls in growth before, that wasin a context of very severe debt repayment and debt pressures; whilethey're still going on, I think they're going on to a lesser extent.And the stirrings in the bank loan markets are suggestive of thisparticular process. Clearly, while we have great qualms about themoney supply data indicating very much of anything, they arenonetheless suggesting, if not clearly, that the balance sheet[adjustment] processes are reasonably completed at banks.In summary, as I indicated before, I would look at the rangesindependently. I would prefer, although I don't feel strongly aboutit, going with 2 to 6 percent [for M2] and I would be slightlyinclined to wait until February rather than to try to do somethingnow, but I don't feel strongly about that either. Looking at theshort-term outlook and listening to the general discussion, I wouldsay that we should hold policy steady. I would be somewhere betweenasymmetric--not the hard asymmetric that we were on last time--and-27-11/17/92symmetric, but I think the range here probably isn't very wide. I'dbe somewhere in that particular area. President Parry.MR. PARRY. What precisely do we owe the Banking Committee?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We don't owe them. The reason we arediscussing this today is that it was part of an agreement reachedwithin this Committee.MR. PARRY. But didn't you tell them that?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We said "we might."MR. KOHN. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We didn't promise.MR. KOHN. The particular wording in the testimony was "nolater than next February."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We suggested that we might review itbefore but we never made a particular promise. The only promise wemade was to ourselves to review.MR. PARRY. Okay.MR. KOHN. And Chairman Greenspan sent the Feinman-Porterstudy to the Committee chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman on my preference for the short-runspecifications, I agree not only with your analysis but also with yourpolicy, although for me it's a preference for "B" symmetric under theconditions that you outlined. As you described the risks, it seems tome that the risks are pretty balanced. So, I think symmetric languagereally is more apt to describe where we are.In regard to the ranges for 1993, I agree with you that thetechnical conditions have changed. Unfortunately, we stopped thepolicy of [making yearly] 1/2 point declines in the ranges that we hadbeen doing a while back. I would prefer that we go all the way to1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent. Let me tell you why. It seems to me that,when we have a forecast calling for 2 percent M2 growth for 1993,starting in with a forecast right [near] the bottom of the rangedoesn't give us much [room] for errors. V2 could be slightly strongerthan we expect as well as slightly weaker. Under those circumstancesI'd hate for us to run the risk of being below the target range whenthe economy might be performing in such a manner that we believe we'reon target in regard to the economic performance, including price levelstability. The second reason I would favor the 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percentrange is that I don't think it's going to be easy for us any time tomake downward changes in the ranges. So it seems to me that whenwe're making a downward change, we might as well make it what we needto make it at the time rather than be faced with having to do it lateron. The third reason that I prefer the 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent rangeis that it gives us a midpoint of 3 percent. And if Mike Prell'sforecast on inflation is correct, then that 3 percent midpoint might-28-11/17/92blend in to a long-term stable condition that would be conducive tothis alteration of expectations. I agree with you that a break inexpectations that would get long-term rates to move down--think aboutwhat the 30-year bond at 6-1/2 or 6 or even possibly 5-1/2 percentwould do for us in regard to growth--is very, very important. Thefourth reason that I favor 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent is that what yousaid about inventories is certainly very applicable. If we get aninvestment tax credit, if we get inventories moving, and the economyturns out to be a little stronger than it needs to be, and we have V2where we think V2 will be, then we might find ourselves in theposition of needing to tighten. And I don't think that would be agood idea. I would prefer when we need to tighten to have apossibility of [M2 growth] being at least in the upper half of therange. So, the 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent range gives us that advantage.As for timing, with a new Administration coming in I thinkthere's a real advantage to them in regard to their planning processto know what we know: On the basis of this study that we now haveavailable, we do not think of this as a monetary policy [issue] asmuch as we think of it as a technical adjustment to the changing waythat M2 works and responds to short-run opportunity costs that wecontrol. So, I think it's very important that we provide theinformation when we know it and give ample time. I agree that there'sa slight disadvantage in not having the testimony immediately. [But]the members of the Banking Committees and their staffs will have goodmemories and will give you ample opportunity to be heard on thisquestion come February. When I envision your answering theirquestions at that time, I see it as easier for you to be answeringthem saying: "Well, this is what we told you as soon as we had thestudy in on what we knew and this is what we told you as soon as weknew about the third-quarter GDP and third-quarter V2." So, to me,it's easier if we do it now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. First, I thought the Feinman-Porter study wasvery, very good. It serves the Committee very well, giving us goodinput. Also, in terms of the broader discussion, I am very happy youare making the study public because a lot of the issues [of concern]in the profession will be helped along by having it available, andthat's very constructive. I'd like to ask a couple of questions.Have you tried to simulate the Greenbook expectations about longer-term interest rates and what it would imply for monetary growth?MR. KOHN. Yes, we have. I think it was indicated in afootnote in the cover memo, although I guess that was for the lastGreenbook. Under the current Greenbook assumptions of nominal GDP andshort- and long-term interest rates, depending on whether we use thenarrow or the broad model, we get about 2-1/4 percent M2 growth for1993; [it's] 2-3/4 percent M2 growth under all the Greenbookassumptions using the Feinman-Porter model.MR. JORDAN. So, you get 1/2 or 3/4 of a percentage point--MR. KOHN. I'd say an average of 1/2 point. But one reasonwe [projected M2 growth] below that was because that model does nottake into account some things coming into play like the FDICIA-29-11/17/92[provisions] and the RTC and whatnot. So we put in a slightly[larger] velocity increase for 1993.MR. JORDAN. I'd like to ask Bill McDonough about views inthe markets. At the time of the last meeting longer-term rates werewell along the way in the direction of moving down as the Greenbookhas been suggesting, consistent with the idea that inflationexpectations were coming down with observed lower inflation rates.Since then we've had some backing up in rates explained as fiscalfears which somehow feed into bond markets. That's one version of theexplanation. I'd be very curious as to what you think the people outthere dealing in the markets are thinking. One version is that thefiscal package per se is somehow inflationary so people build thatinto bond yields. Another is that the fiscal environment causesmonetary policy to be more expansionary and more inflationary and thatgets built into the bond market. Another version--a few people havebeen commenting in this vein--is that longer-term prospects for realgrowth are improved, so with increasing real incomes and realproductive capital there will actually be an increase in real rates,in which case we shouldn't expect to see them coming back down.Finally, there is the "tomato" theory of the bond market: that theincreased supply of the new crop of bonds coming with bigger deficitswill depress prices, and because this bigger deficit has to be fundedwe will have higher interest rates. Would you comment on which amongthose [explanations] you think dominates?MR. MCDONOUGH. I think the mass of market opinion issomewhere between your possibilities one and two or a combination ofthose. The single greatest driver to the backup in rates across theyield curve was initially the view that, whoever won the election,there would be a fiscal package early in 1993. I don't think themarkets have the benefit of Governor Lindsey's memory of the fact thatit [usually] takes a while. They think it will happen like that.There is, I'd say, a [less prominent] view in the market that theFederal Reserve would go along and monetize this increase in fiscalspending. I do think that's [held by] a rather definite minority;most bond market participants feel that the Fed is dedicated to thenotion of working toward greater price stability. I think some of thearticles you're reading are meant to throw hand grenades in our pathso that the Committee will be tempted to think that continuing thedrive toward a reduction in inflation will involve too high a price.That's in a way a compliment; [it supports] the view that theCommittee, left to its own devices, will continue its anti-inflationary efforts. These articles are trying to increase thepolitical, psychological--or whatever the right adjective is--[cost ofdisinflation]. There's very little market [support for] your thirdpossibility and some for the "tomato" theory, your fourth one. Butmainly the view is that a fiscal package is likely and that the fiscalpackage will automatically be inflationary.MR. JORDAN. Given that view, then, the only thing that canhelp bring those expectations down is first to see the fiscal packageand then to see that inflation doesn't pick up, which means we can dovery little but wait for it. I imagine if there were immediate actionby the Committee on rates right now, it would be a surprise to themarket and have a subtle effect of some type.MR. MCDONOUGH. Yes.11/17/92MR. JORDAN. On the other hand and separately, if there werea decision by the Committee to lower the target ranges for next year,by itself that might have very little, if any, positive effect andmaybe none at all. If the two were coupled, would that tend to haveany kind of neutralizing effect? Would the potential negative effectof lowering the target range, with perceptions of more restrictivepolicy, [be offset by] the "lump of sugar" of near-term easing actionand make [action to lower the targets] more acceptable in the Street?MR. MCDONOUGH. I think the near-term easing action would getabout 95 percent of the Street's attention. And there could be arather unkind view of why you coupled the two, i.e. that you weretrying to fly the anti-inflationary flag and to couple it with thedecrease in order to--going back to the theological discussion earlyin the meeting--have sin and virtue combined.MR. JORDAN. Well, I think the range should be lowered to1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent for next year but I think the center should be3-1/2 percent instead of Wayne's 3 percent.MR. ANGELL. Well, I'm certainly agreeable to that!MR. JORDAN. But a large part of [my reasoning] is that Ithink that's where the range should have been this year and that wewould have been subjected to at least somewhat less criticism becauseM2 growth would have fallen within that range on the low end. I wouldlike very, very much to see us within our announced target range nextyear, so we should choose a range for next year that we think M2 isgoing to be within. Clearly from what we've heard so far, it's alittle more certain that we'd be within a 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent rangethan within a 2 to 6 or 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent range. Yet, on theshorter-term policy, I'm still partial to the idea of trying to[achieve] the target for this year to show that we have the resolve tostay within the upper and lower bounds of our ranges. And since we'rebelow the target range for 1992, that justifies immediate action bythe Committee coupled with lowering the range for next year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. With regard to the long-run target ranges, Ithought in July that it would be best to lower the [M2] range and Ifeel that way this time as well. It seems to me that the additionalinformation we got from the study suggests that a cut in the rangewould be appropriate. And the staff projection of 2 percent certainlywould support that as well. So, to me it would make some sense to cutit, and I don't see any harm in doing it now. I disagree withsomething a few people have said, particularly what Governor Angellsaid if I interpreted him correctly, that we could get some additionalbenefit as far as inflationary expectations are concerned by takingaction now. I would say that would only happen if we didn't explainthat it was based on technical adjustments. If we did say it wasbased on technical adjustments and people believed that, then we wouldnot get any impact on inflationary expectations. So, my counsel wouldbe to change it and not say a heck of a lot about it if we really wantto get some effect as far as inflationary expectations are concerned.MR. ANGELL. I don't disagree with that.-31-11/17/92MR. PARRY. On the short-term policy, this has been anothervery interesting meeting. We've seen a dramatic change; there aremany more people who now see a pickup or at least somewhat improvedprospects in their Districts. Another thing I find very interestingis that very few people said they have changed their nationwideforecast. In fact, many went on to say that things have picked up butthat their forecast is very similar to that in the Greenbook, with thenotable exception, I think, of the Chairman who seemed to imply thathe was a little more optimistic based upon his fiscal assumptions. Ifthe forecast that most people agree upon is that of the Greenbook orclose to it, which is not very much different in terms of real growthfrom what it was the last time and has been characterized in the pastas being sluggish, perhaps too sluggish, what has changed? Unlesswe're going to make policy decisions on the basis of what happened tothe economy in the last three or four weeks--if we're going to lookinstead at the longer term--what has changed? If nothing has changed,it seems to me that the case some of us made for a slight easing atthe previous meeting is just as strong today as it was before.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. With respect to the long-term ranges, giventhe forecast for M2 and velocity that we have, I think there probablyis a good case to be made for lowering the ranges. My preferencewould be not to be so dramatic as to go a full percentage point butrather a half point [on the M2 range]; that would mean a lower boundof 2 percent. The timing issue is of much greater moment to me. Iagree with you, Mr. Chairman, that it is a technical matter; in fact,I would add that it's probably as much a political matter as atechnical one. And I think it would be very difficult at this time toget the market to understand what the technical issue is. Moreover,in my judgment, it would be sending a signal that the Federal Reserveis going to be tolerant of monetary growth insufficient to supportcontinued momentum in the economy. Now, the offset to that, ofcourse, is that we might attempt to lower inflationary expectations.I really don't find the case very persuasive to deviate from ournormal procedure, and [I'd] wait until February. The other advantageof [waiting] is that we wouldn't be sending a signal at this point.We're still in a period of uncertainty with respect to the economy.And even with the Feinman-Porter study, there is the chance that wemight learn more about the monetary aggregates over the next two orthree months. So, I think we would be better served by waiting andtaking action at that time.With respect to short-term policy, I think [economicconditions] have improved. Certainly, I see it in my District; andlistening to the comments around the table, there is a much moreoptimistic view than before. But in my judgment, notwithstanding thefact that I haven't changed my forecast or I don't deviate very muchfrom the Greenbook's forecast, the risks are on the down side. I saythat primarily because of the international situation--the risks thatyou and others have pointed to with respect to the situation in Europeand Japan, which is fraught with some danger for us. For that reason,I would like to suggest that there be no change in policy at thispoint but that we have an asymmetric directive so that we can move incase that becomes necessary for international reasons or perhaps fordomestic reasons as well, because I'm not convinced that what we've-32-11/17/92seen recently is sufficient to cause us to claim that we're on theroad to complete recovery.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to associate myself withall the comments of my colleague, Mr. Angell, with one exception. Inother words, I favor "B" symmetric and 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent on therange for 1993, but if I were in your shoes I would feel morecomfortable with the February explication of that move rather thandropping it in here in the middle of an interregnum between oneAdministration and another.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I have a strong preference forlowering the ranges by a full percentage point, although I don't thinkyour suggestion of 2 to 6 percent would be all that bad. I don'tthink this is a purely technical issue, though. I think this[affects] our credibility. Governor Angell and I arguedunsuccessfully for such a move back in 1991. In 1992 I did not arguefor it because I thought we were clearly in a recession and it wouldlook bad at that point. But I do think we would have done better ifwe had moved it back at that time. Now, the technical case is verystrong. Don and his colleagues, Messrs. Feinman and Porter, have donea great job in showing that 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent is technically avery good place for the range to be. But that gives us just a littlebit of margin. We would be just above the 1-1/2 percent lower limitif they're right in their assumption that 2 percent growth in M2 iswhat we would get and that velocity would behave as they suspect. Butthe 5-1/2 percent on the up side gives us a lot of room for movementin case the economy turns out to be stronger than they have assumed,and I believe that is one of the more likely outcomes. As far as thetiming is concerned, it would look unnecessarily provocative if we didthis now unless we were also to ease our short-term [policy] just alittle and couple the two actions. I would prefer to wait untilFebruary to do it. I think we would experience less political flak ifwe did that.So, I feel pretty strongly that we ought to go with "B," andI would like to see the directive made symmetric. If we do decide,though, to change the federal funds rate today and lower it a little,then I think we ought to go ahead and couple that with a lowered long-term range. I'm not as skeptical as Bill McDonough is about how themarkets would accept this. I think there are a lot of people outthere who would find that somewhat acceptable. But if we lower thefederal funds rate, I think we definitely should lower that longer-runrange or else we'll be perceived as having thrown in the towel oninflation. I guess I end up about where Governor LaWare and GovernorAngell did on that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. I'd like to start with the interest rate issue.I wasn't going to originally, but I was interested in Bill McDonough'scomments and I don't mean to dispute them. The entire yield curvebottomed out on the day of the last FOMC meeting. Since then three-month bill rates are up 30 basis points; one-year rates are up 51-33-11/17/92points; three-year rates are up 73 points; five-year rates are up 65basis points; and ten-year rates are up 56 basis points. The headlinein The Wall Street Journal, Section C, on October 7th said: "Treasuryprices fall sharply on failure of Fed to cut rates and worries aboutnew supply." On October 8th the headline was: "Treasury prices plungeon continued failure of Fed to ease, hedging of unsold corporates."Then we got a little rally on the 8th and the headline on the 9th was:"Bond prices finished higher on stronger dollar and renewed hopes forFed interest rate cut." Then October 13th, that fine weekend that weall remember, started with Friday's headline about your talk inVirginia, Mr. Chairman: "Treasuries climb as Greenspan leaves dooropen for pre-auction easing." On the 15th it said: "Treasuries aremixed amid disappointment over economic reports and lack of Fed move."Now, as a Republican, I'd love to blame it all on Bill Clinton, but Ican't. I have five headlines that tell me the opposite. Now, maybethey don't know what they're talking about but--MR. MULLINS. Media bias.MR. LINDSEY. Media bias in this case, okay. My firstthought is about the direction of what the market is expecting. Iwill give a copy of the articles to those who want them. My mind wason headlines. So, Mr. Chairman, when you were making your proposal, Ijotted down a few headlines [that might be used] if we were to cut theranges and not cut the fed funds rate. I started first thinking aboutJohn Berry's piece--I don't know where he got it--about "The Fed givesClinton the green light." Well, since The Washington Post is alwaysright, they would have to change it to "Fed changes signal from greento red." For the Daily News, in honor of New York, I had a moreprovocative headline--I don't think Mort Zuckerman's ownership willchange things--"Fed gives Clinton the finger." Then, in Section C ofThe Wall Street Journal the headline of these stories would be "Fedchanges range to match policy miss" and the first sentence would be"Having failed to achieve its monetary policy targets during arecession year, the Federal Reserve today announced that it wouldchange its targets rather than change its policy." I could imaginehow the rest of the story would go.I am very persuaded that the right thing to do here is tosend the right long-term signal and send the right short-term signalas well. The story I would like to see is the green light. We shouldaccommodate what the Administration wants to do and that is to givethe economy a kick to get going. But that should be followed with"but we will not let it get out of hand." And that is exactly what acut in the funds rate coupled with a cut in the target range signals.The final issue is whether to do it now or in February. Ihear the comments about it being less politically risky to do it inFebruary when Congress is back. Frankly, that doesn't make a lot ofsense to me. If we were to announce a cut in the target range inFebruary just after President Clinton has made his speech to Congressor perhaps just after one of the houses of Congress has passed afiscal stimulus package, I think The Washington Post might even pickup the Daily News headline. I think it would be that provocative.So, if we're going to do anything, I would do it now. What I would dois give the markets the right long-term signal and coat it with alittle sugar to give the Administration the right short-term signal.-34-11/17/92MR. ANGELL. You favor 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent? I didn'thear.MR. LINDSEY. I'm for a cut in the range.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But to 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent?MR. LINDSEY. I'm willing to be persuaded either way.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. I half agree with Governor Angell, but I want totell you which half I agree with: It's not the short run. I listenedto Mike Kelley's list and I must say it was an ample and fairlycomplete list; but there are a whole lot of negatives out there. Onereaction I have is that it is a bit like what is going on in NewEngland: It's amazing that anyone is still standing! It shows theresilience the economy has, but it still tells me that there are a lotof factors imposing a drag. We have seen some movement forward in thelast month. But coming back to what Bob Parry talked about withrespect to the forecast in the Greenbook--I know it does not assumeanything on fiscal policy and I think we have to act on that basisbecause we don't know when it's going to come and we should do what'sright for monetary policy instead of trying to game that--I don'tconsider the Greenbook outcome an adequate one. Particularly, I don'tthink we're going to see any sustainable, comfortable momentum in theeconomy going forward until we see some improvement in employment.That's as much because of people's concerns about their employmentprospects and the insecurity that casts over many people as it is thedata themselves. Beyond that, with this Greenbook [forecast], eventhe period going out as long as seven quarters is not reallysatisfactory. A lot of concerns have been raised here about theoverseas situation. That is one new piece of information that came upat this meeting. I must say--and this may be where some of theseissues come together--that in this particular case given the[unintelligible] I am somewhat attracted to Jerry Jordan's suggestionof making a rate cut now. I prefer it on the basis of the realeconomy alone. But a cut now also [may help us] get M2 growth withinits range; after all, we've said that we're going to try to [have M2growth] come within that range. To announce a cut now in the rangeswithout having done something to try to bring growth up into the rangethis year would look as if we were just making an excuse for why wedidn't do that. I think we are going to have to cut the range and Iwould favor a cut of a full point. Though it's strictly a judgmentalissue, my feeling is that it's probably better to do it in Februaryfor two reasons. One is that we're going to have more of anopportunity to explain it fully at that time. The other is that if wereally believe the general tone of the meeting, which is that theeconomy is going to be a fair bit better in February than it is rightnow, it's better to make [the reduction in the range] in that context.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I mostly agree with where Governor Angell comesout on both these issues. Looking back, there was a good case foreasing [last] time but I think that time has passed for now. To easeinto a better tone of statistics would be counterproductive. I think-35-11/17/92the risks are more symmetrical than they have been for several months.So, my preference for the short run is "B" symmetrical.On the long-term ranges, Wayne's logic was especiallypersuasive. First of all, I really don't think we have a choice; weneed to cut the range. And we ought to be very careful to underscorethe fact that this is a technical cut. So, if we are going to do it,I would do a whole point rather than a half point. It would give ussome additional margin for error. It's difficult enough to do andit's not going to cost much more to reduce it a whole point ratherthan a half point. But I think it is important to emphasize thetechnical part.As to now versus February, I can't believe that a Februaryclimate would be better. If you just want to look at it from apolitical point of view, we will have a new Administration with a new[fiscal] proposal, a new Congress, and lots of energy. I think inthat context it would be more difficult to do. We've done a study, wehave some good reasons, and we can explain our action in a letter. Inthe letter I would emphasize the technical aspects; I would say webelieve that this is a technical adjustment and that the 1-1/2 to5-1/2 percent range is consistent with growth without giving up on theinflation [goals]. There is no foolproof way to do this; there arerisks in doing it. But I suspect that the political fallout would beless if we did it now rather than wait.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. With regard to the short run, I favor alternativeB with a symmetric directive. I don't see a case for a change inpolicy immediately or for biasing the directive one way or the other.That still gives us lots of flexibility if the evidence comes in onone side or the other and a decision is made to move. But to me thecircumstances we currently confront suggest no immediate change.With regard to the long-run ranges, I have a slightlydifferent take on that. It's really the upper end of the M2 rangethat concerns me. It concerns me because, given what we think we knowabout the outlook for nominal GDP and about the velocity of M2 overthe next couple of years, that upper end of the range is clearly toohigh. So, I would favor a new range of something like 2-1/2 to 5-1/2percent. I don't see any real need to reduce the lower end. In fact,longer-run considerations, with trend growth in the economy of maybe 2or 3 percent and assuming that M2 velocity ultimately returns to itsstable, trendless state and price stability--whether inflation isactually zero or something above that given measurement problems andso forth or given what it takes to get expectations of inflation outof people's decisionmaking thoughts--suggest to me that we don't needto change the lower end of the range. On the other hand, the upperend is too high, especially in an environment where I think we want toconsolidate the gains we have made in bringing down the core rate ofinflation and perhaps send a signal that that's our intent along theway here.With regard to timing, it's not an overwhelming preference,but I would agree with those who would prefer to do it now. InFebruary, as many have observed, there will be a lot of proposals outthere and a lot of things on the agenda and we really could look like-36-11/17/92we were snubbing, or worse, all sorts of proposals by deciding tolower the range at that point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, with regard to the long-term rangesI would prefer not to take any action at this time. My impression wasthat our discussion basically related to your commitment to Congressto study this and report back, and it does seem to me that the paperand the discussion deal with that commitment. The paper does add alot of knowledge to this question. It seems to me that there isenough uncertainty remaining that to make a change implies some degreeof precision that I just don't have the confidence is really there.Therefore, I wouldn't to make a change, particularly at this time whenthere is a signal effect that I find a bit awkward. As a technicalpoint, I assume if we were to make a change in the ranges asprovisionally set, that we are not talking about making final changesto the ranges for next year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We still can do that in February.MR. KEEHN. So, if we make a change now, it is a provisionalrange and we will leave it as a subject for next February and we wouldso state that?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, that's correct.MR. KEEHN. Separately and apart from that, I'd prefer not tomake a change. With regard to the short-term policy, I must say thatat the time of the last meeting I would have favored a change. I wasdisappointed that it did not evolve. Therefore, I came to thismeeting in favor of either alternative A or alternative B with hardasymmetric language. I must say I'm very surprised by the change inthe tone of the reports. It's the most significant shift between twomeetings that I can remember. While the data are a bit more positive,I have a feeling that the [anecdotal] reports are a little ahead ofthat. It may be that good news is slow to reach our part of theMidwest. Nevertheless, at this point I'd be in favor of alternative Bwith at least some bias or asymmetry toward ease.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, as far as the short-term policygoes, it seems to me that the outlook is stronger both in terms of thedata that we're receiving and also the tone, particularly [asreported] here this morning. We probably would all agree that it'svery likely that we're going to get some type of [fiscal policy]program from the new President; he almost has to do that. Takingthese two factors together leads me to a strong preference for "B"symmetrical.As far as the ranges go, I would certainly concur that theyneed to come down. I'm open as to exactly where. I suppose that putsme in the alternative II case. As far as the timing goes, if we wereto ease today, then I would agree with Governor Lindsey that we shouldlower the ranges today in order to get those signals straight. I hopethat we are not going to do that. And if we're not, then I wouldprefer to see us wait for a couple of reasons. First of all, it's-37-11/17/92clearly a technical matter and [unintelligible]. And, obviously, ifwe did it today, it would be very out of sequence with the usualpattern that people expect from the Federal Reserve. We're in thisinterregnum period right now and we're in somewhat of a news vacuumwhere the media is just [looking] for anything they can talk about.There will be an awful lot of punditry if we move now and go publicwith it. They are almost certain to get it wrong; they'll make toomuch of it and they'll make the wrong [inferences]. It's very likelythat they would opine that we've gone back to reemphasizing M2 wellbeyond the true posture of this Committee. If they see that we dothat based on this study, which is superb, they will think that we aresaying "Eureka! We've found it. This is the answer and we're goingto settle down right here on the basis of this new information." Thatcould cause some out-of-focus speculation in the marketplace and someout-of-focus perceptions of what [is important to] the FOMC. So, Iwould prefer to stay in sequence and treat [the decision] as businessas usual, as a calm and normal considered judgment when the Februarytimeframe arrives.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. I agree with Governor Kelley on all thosepoints. On the question of headlines, currently markets are no longerexpecting an easing as they were at the time of our last meeting. Andrather than mixing sin and virtue or sugar and vinegar, I'd suggestthat we avoid either right now. I'd take a "B" symmetric directiveand wait until later to decide how much to lower the ranges, and I'dwait until February to go public with it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. On the ranges, I would prefer a cut [in the M2range] to 2 to 6 percent, with a 4 percent midpoint. I don't viewthat as the ending point in this long process. I view it as where weare in the process now. With a midpoint of 4 percent I'm thinking ofinflation in the 1-1/2 to 2 percent range and real potential in the 2to 2-1/2 percent range. A midpoint of 4 percent looks appropriate,given where we are in this process of moving toward price stability.I know we may have a little trouble hitting it, but I think we shouldmanage policy to try to hit the range rather than vice versa and Ithink we'd be pushing it a little if we went beyond that. I like theorderly process.In terms of when to cut, I think the appropriate time to cutwas last July. That was the routine time. The Fed cut [the M2 range]for the following year in the summer of '88 and in the summer of '90;and the summer of '92 was the time to cut it again. We didn't cut itbecause of uncertainty about M2. It seems to me that [M2] is betterunderstood now; I feel more comfortable with a decision to cut. Idon't think we're going to learn anything more. I view it as morethan technical. The disinflation trend is much better established nowthan it was in July in my view, despite the recent CPI; and I thinkit's time to confirm that disinflation trend, secure it, and lock itin. I do think it would add to our credibility if we were to gothrough another period of faltering M2 and cut rates if the economyshould deteriorate. There are a lot of political judgments withregard to the timing. Some might view it as a bit sneaky to do itafter the election with Congress out of town. It might be more-38-11/17/92orderly to do it in February. If we do it in February, it will comein the face of the new Administration and its proposals on fiscalpolicy and might be viewed as a signal that we plan to offset those.But my overall view is that this is a long-term range and a long-termstrategy and it ought to be done above the fray; I like the strictrationale we used last July that then was the time to cut except forthe uncertainty about M2. I view this as cleaning up old business, soI would have some preference for doing it now.As for the near term, the coordinated cut has some appeal,although it's not clear to me that the assessment of the economy I'veheard around here gives a consensus for a reduction in the federalfunds rate. Still, I would prefer the asymmetric language. The near-term negatives in my view are still quite pronounced and I think weought to hold steady. When we went to symmetric language in thespring of this year, I don't think we looked very good when second-quarter growth was decelerating from 2.9 to 1.5 percent. I don't likethe sense of flip-flopping, and it seems to me the upside risksfurther down the road have increased. We've been through thisincrease in long rates and have seen the impact a number of timesbefore and I think the very near-term risks, moving into the firsthalf of next year, suggest that we not flip-flop at this time. So,I'm for 2 to 6 percent and "B" asymmetric.There is an argument on the width of the range that GaryStern raised. My view is that we've had trouble enough with this andthat there may be an argument for widening the range.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I agree with Gary and could argue forwidening the range myself. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. Let me do the ranges first. I thought thatthe Feinman-Porter study was immensely helpful and added to ourunderstanding of what was going on. Having said that, I was on thebus that wanted to lower the ranges in July, so it'll come as nosurprise that I continue to want to lower the ranges. I don't see itas just a technical matter. I think the study did identify somesubstantive, real kinds of effects. It also seems to me that loweringthe ranges now is consistent with the testimony that was given in Julythat we were continuing to study it and would be back when we knewsomething. It's certainly a consistent story, so I'd prefer to lowerthe ranges now. I will say that with respect to the amount, I couldgo with either one half or a full percentage point reduction because Ithink the message of continuing to want to move toward price stabilityis the important thing.With respect to the short-term directive, I'm also persuadedby the argument for an immediate coupling. I'd prefer to go with animmediate easing because I think there's still considerable room forimprovement in this economy. I do think we're going to have some kindof fiscal stimulus package, and I'd prefer to see a more balancedapproach to a fiscal package when the time comes for that debate.Having said that, I could live with "B" asymmetric toward ease but I'dprefer to ease.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.-39-11/17/92MR. MELZER. I would favor reducing the ranges now and Ithink a range of 2 to 6 percent is probably right. I could live with1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent. A case can be made for either one. Withrespect to the timing, I feel the case is there now and we ought to goahead and get it done. As a lot of people said, we don't know in whatclimate we would be trying to do this some months down the road. Iwould go somewhat beyond making the argument just a technical onebecause I think we're trying in some sense to consolidate the progresswe've already made toward price stability. In terms of impactingexpectations, that could be a part of it without implying that we'rerattling the saber; it would have to be done artfully. The otherthing to think about, which you mentioned, is the communicationsproblem. I guess there really isn't an opportunity to arrange somesort of forum. Congress is not going to be in session for the balanceof the year, is that right?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's correct. They will conveneJanuary 3, but then they may technically adjourn again.MR. MELZER. You might want to consider ways to take theinitiative here--in a speech or something--so that you could get themessage out with your spin on it rather than responding to, say, Mr.Gonzalez, or somebody in the press teeing off on it. If we were goingto do it now, we'd have to think about ways to communicate it to thepublic on our terms, not in response to somebody else's.With respect to short-term policy, I strongly favor "B"symmetric. There's a possibility I might even be leaning toward anonexistent "C." The way I feel about this is that we've had arelatively smooth adjustment in financial markets to a significantchange in perceptions about the thrust of monetary policy. I don'tbelieve for one minute that what we've seen in intermediate-term ratesis a response to what our economy needs. I think it reflects a lot ofother factors with respect to expectations about inflation and thereal economy. So, if we were to ease now, I don't think those rateswould retrace their runup; I don't know to what extent they'd evencome down. I realize every cycle is different, but in general I thinkthis is the time when the Fed typically makes mistakes because we sithere and we're uncertain about the speed of the recovery. We allprobably know, or I at least feel, that we're pegging short-term ratesat a level that is not sustainable in an economy with any kind ofupward momentum. I think we have to be very sensitive to a situationwhere short-term market rates move up as we peg the funds rate tofixed levels. This is obviously not a new concept; we've talked aboutit before. But the net result is that to keep that administered ratewhere it is we have to provide reserves at a very rapid rate, andwe're doing that. There are certainly some technical factors one canpoint to in that regard, but I suspect there may be more to it thanthat. So, I think we have to be very sensitive to not overstaying[ease]. Finally, I think a symmetrical directive gives us plenty offlexibility to respond in either direction.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Let me talk about the short-term issues first.The economy is showing strength--more strength than I saw last time--and I think it is real. There is a fair amount of liquidity in thesystem to accommodate future growth should that continue, so I don't-40-11/17/92think we would be hurting things by staying where we are. So, I aminclined towards alternative B. As for asymmetry or symmetry, I'minclined at this stage to go with symmetrical language partly becausewe meet again fairly soon and partly because I think the economy isfundamentally stronger. Even though I recognize the downside risksfrom the trade situation and all these other factors that we havetalked about, I think we do have a fundamentally better economy.As for the long-term ranges, I think they should be lowered,and my preference is for 2 to 6 percent [for M2]. I believe that'sorderly and consistent with what we may see going forward. As to whento announce it, I don't have a strong preference. It's something thattakes explanation, though, and if we try to put it in a letter wewon't have the opportunity to explain it, which is so important. Weneed to weigh that against what may be bad timing next February. Butwe have to do something next February, and that is the normal timing.So, I guess I lean toward doing it later in the [usual] form.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. With regard to current policy, mypreference is for "B" symmetric, but I think something has changed.Over the summer months, getting back to my own example, I was fearfulthat we were looking at a 1-1/2 percent or worse economy and now Ifeel a good deal more comfortable that we're looking at a 2-1/2percent economy. But I've always felt in this transition period thatthat was acceptable. Now, having said that, I prefer "B" symmetric; Icould live with asymmetric because of my own anxieties about theinternational side. There is an extra margin of vulnerability there,and for that reason alone I could live with an asymmetric "B."The long-run ranges present a much more difficult problem.There's a logical conundrum here: If one took the position that thisis totally or largely a technical phenomenon, then I don't think itmatters a whole lot whether we cut the ranges now or in February. Andif it's technical, it's technical. Some members are essentiallyarguing that it is technical; others are arguing that it's quasi-technical; and still others are arguing that it's substantive. Thatis the logical dilemma. I think an awful lot depends, Mr. Chairman,upon how you feel as Chairman you want to play this.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I personally feel very strongly thatit's best politically and otherwise to [view] it as technical.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I tend to agree with that.And if one agrees with that, then it follows almost as a matter oflogical necessity that it's probably better to do it in February.That is in part because of Mike Kelley's argument that if we do itbefore February, nobody--the markets, the press, or anybody else--isgoing to get it right. And then we would have lost our moment. Inaddition, I did find persuasive a number of comments that members madeabout the way this plays into the setting of a new Administration, anew fiscal program, and all the rest of it. But again, if youfundamentally view it as technical, it seems to me that the weight ofthat argument is dissipated as well. Finally, apropos Bob Parry'scomment, if you fundamentally view it as technical, don't kidyourself, you're not going to buy anything in terms of inflationaryexpectations or anything else. You can't have it both ways. But-41-11/17/92because I do view it perhaps not quite exclusively but largely astechnical, I would lean toward doing it in February. As far as theamount is concerned, I can't get excited about 1/2 points one way orthe other on this. I certainly could live with 2 to 6 percent but Icould also live with 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent; I'm not sufficientlycomfortable with my knowledge to be able to get excited one way oranother about that half point [difference]. Again, from a logicalpoint of view, the issue is whether it is technical or substantive.If it's technical, then, I think the February timing falls out [aslogical].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It has been a very interestingdiscussion, and I think Governor Lindsey was right. This coordinatedapproach [in our discussion] has certainly helped to bring out issueswhich wouldn't have been brought out otherwise.MR. SYRON. Could I just ask a question? It's along thelines of something that Tom Melzer mentioned and it has to do with thetiming, though I favor February myself. Are there opportunitiesbetween now and then to send the study--the study that was released--up to the Congress with letters to the staff, and beyond that to makestatements yourself to begin to educate people to the technicalaspects of this so that it doesn't become as much of an event? Ithink it is very much technical, and it's something that we'd like todo and not have anyone really notice.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's in fact what my suggestionwas essentially going to be. We're going to have to send a detailedletter up to the Hill with the Feinman-Porter study. I would suggestthat as part of the letter it would be useful to do precisely as yousuggest: To indicate that if anything, as David has said, our nominalGDP has been doing better. And since we have been getting the nominalGDP that we were presuming we'd get with the current ranges, in thatsense we have a very strong case to say that we have succeeded. Themistake was not on the GDP side; the mistake was on the indicator,which is the money supply. And I think that can be done.Frankly, I think Mike Kelley made a very important point whenhe raised the issue of this period being a media vacuum. He probablydidn't emphasize that enough. The ridiculous stories that are comingout about the Federal Reserve tilting toward Clinton, not doing this,or doing that, are all absolute fluff. The one thing I'm pleasedabout is that it essentially has been all soft stuff. There was astory in this morning's Wall Street Journal which has us as a groupopposed to Paul Volcker as Secretary of the Treasury! Now, howbizarre can they get? I frankly agree with Mike, but I had notthought about it in those terms until he mentioned it, that therereally is a very significant danger [of media invention], which is areason for proceeding the way Dick Syron suggested and thenessentially burying [the decision] in the February testimony with alot of technical discussion. That will work if the economy is up. Ifthe economy is up, this issue is absolutely irrelevant. The questionof M2 as a problem is gone; it becomes [unintelligible] for a few ofour friends. If the economy is in the soup, this issue is not goingto be our major problem. I must say that I came into this meeting notquite sure where I stood but, having heard all of the discussion, I'mpretty well convinced that the approach we ought to take is the one-42-11/17/92that Dick was [suggesting]. We have not released this study yet, isthat right?MR. KOHN. Well, we have, Mr. Chairman, assuming you signedthe letters last week.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh, yes.MR. KOHN. The study has gone up to the Hill.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We've sent it up to the Hill but wehaven't--MR. COYNE. It has been released to three reporters, one ofwhom used it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is that right?MR. COYNE. Market News Service used it last week; we had afew requests--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, it's so complex that unless we doit--MR. KOHN. There is another opportunity. We have a letter inthe house from Mr. Gonzalez.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's what I was thinking.MR. KOHN. And we could use that as a vehicle. He asks whywe let M2 growth fall below the range. Assuming we get to 4-1/2percent GDP growth this year, I think the question--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I was thinking of that.MR. KOHN. We could use that as an opportunity.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I also think we probably would be betteroff with a range of 2 to 6 percent if for no other reason than it's asmaller change, although I think the points that Governor Angell madeare certainly [relevant]. My only problem with Governor Angell's[position] is not his insight but his confidence in the forecast ofM2, which I don't share.MR. ANGELL. I agree it could very well be off 2 percentagepoints or 4 percentage points either way!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's exactly the reason why.MR. ANGELL. But I would prefer to have [the projected rateof growth] closer to the middle [of the range].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't disagree with that as a generalview. Let me go on to say further that, after listening to the[discussion], once we take one of the votes--however we vote--I'd liketo go around [the table] again on the other because there are viewsthat could conceivably change.-43-11/17/92MR. MELZER. I don't mean to interrupt, but if we're notgoing to do anything now--if there's a sense of the meeting not to doanything--do we really have to vote on it?MR. MULLINS. We shouldn't vote it down.MR. MELZER. If we're just leaving the ranges the same--MR. KOHN. If you're postponing your decision on that second[vote]--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the answer is that we would onlyvote if we came to a conclusion that we were going to do somethingnow.MR. MULLINS. We could vote to consider it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vote to consider it? What does thatmean?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We could have an understanding amongthe Committee members.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. [We could agree] that in response tothe Gonzalez letter the study would be sent up to the Hill with a verystrong suggestion in [our cover] letter to the effect that the rangesfor 1993 will be cut in February by some unspecified amount.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I must say I would frankly prefer that.From the point of view of the political sensitivities that we're goingthrough now, that strikes me as the way to [do this] with the leastfallout. If it weren't for the media vacuum, I would opt to do itright now and get it out of the way. I'm not sure we have thatcapability. I'm not sure we can do it, and I think the risks ofmissing are too large.MR. ANGELL. Saying that we expect to make a cut in Februaryis really a good two-stage approach to that--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I'm much more comfortable withthat.MR. ANGELL. --because, after all, we're only dealing with atentative choice now anyway.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's correct.MR. ANGELL. We still have to make the choice in February.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is that something that we could accept?Would everyone be willing to do that?MR. ANGELL. So, there's a consensus, then.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.-44-11/17/92MR. ANGELL. The minutes would read that there was aconsensus?MS. PHILLIPS. You are going to say that we're going to cutthe ranges in February?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We would say that there are technicalreasons that are coming out of the Feinman-Porter study which clearlysuggest [that the ranges should be cut]. I would even say that weought to indicate that our hypotheses of last July are in fact beingconfirmed by later studies. That would be the general thrust of ourapproach. We would put it in a technical context as a two-stageactivity. Then, when [the time comes for] the Humphrey-Hawkinstestimony in February, [we will cut the ranges], assuming the economyis doing as we expect. And if the economy does something different,it's even better this way.MR. ANGELL. And the Gonzalez letter is the vehicle for doingit?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I know you prefer to explain it asa technical move, but do you think it's purely technical?MR. ANGELL. Sure.MR. BLACK. I don't.MR. ANGELL. It's purely technical. It would be a policymove for us not to make the technical move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's correct.MR. SYRON. That's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it to you this way. If youask whether we are confirming our view to contain the success thatwe've had to date on inflation, the answer is "yes." I think thatpolicy is implicit among the members of this Committee, and thespecific instruments that we may be using or not using are really aquite secondary question. As I read it, there is no debate withinthis Committee to abandon our view that a non-inflationary environmentis best for this country over the longer term. Everything else, oncewe've said that, becomes technical questions. I would say in thatcontext that on the basis of the studies, we have seen that to drivenominal GDP, let's assume at 4-1/2 percent, in our old philosophy wewould have said that [requires] a 4-1/2 percent growth in M2. Intoday's analysis, we would say it's significantly less than that. I'mbasically arguing that we are really in a sense using [unintelligible]a nominal GDP goal of which the money supply relationships aretechnical mechanisms to achieve that. And I don't see any change inour view.MR. BLACK. Well, the technical argument is very strong, butI think there are some people who still entertain doubts about howserious we are about achieving price stability, and I think they will-45-11/17/92take this as a concrete sign that we may be more serious than theythought before.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That we're not serious? I'd say at thisstage that we have achieved a very substantial amount of credibility.MR. BLACK. More than we've ever had; I wouldn't argue that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I sense no evidence that any member ofthis Committee has indicated second thoughts on that question nor hasanyone gone public with second thoughts or indicated any fundamentalchange in their individual philosophies. Bob, I'm not reallyconcerned about that.MR. BLACK. I agree that that's exactly the position ofeverybody in this room, but I'm not sure that the public is completelyconvinced at this point. But I don't want to let this--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That may be. They will be convincedonly after a period of time; and we will know they are convinced whenwe see the 30-year Treasury at 5-1/2 percent.MR. BLACK. That's right. And since that yield sits up therewhere it does, I think that is some evidence.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. When you look at the decomposition ofthe [30-year] coupon into its short-term cohorts, say, one-yearmaturities of futures, it's very clear that the substantial part ofthe inflationary expectations is five years out and forward.MR. BLACK. That's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't think that is a monetary policyresponse. I think that's a fiscal policy, global/American economicpolicy response and does not reflect on the Federal Reserve.MR. BLACK. I don't think it reflects entirely, but some partof it--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, it's conceivable that part of thatis an accommodation of the markets on our part. But we're going tochange that only with time; we're not going to change it throughplaying around with words or charts or ranges. It's going to comeonly from what we actually do. Anyway, can I then assume that we willproceed in that direction and hopefully be able to pull it off with aminimum of problems?Listening to the comments on the short term, especially if we[include] the three members of the Committee who are significantlydesirous of easing now, it's fairly clear that we have a centraltendency toward asymmetry. I would describe it as normal or evenslightly soft rather than the hard asymmetry that we used last time.So, even though I am aware that one can't mix this in the way in whichI'm trying to mix it without breaking some crockery here, as I read itwe would be close the average [view] of this Committee if we voted "B"asymmetric toward ease, and I would propose that to the Committee.-46-11/17/92MR. ANGELL. How do we make it soft asymmetric? I countedsix who preferred symmetric and then you said either way.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, that's not the way I got it.MR. ANGELL. I've got Corrigan--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Corrigan is either way.MR. ANGELL. He said symmetric but he could accept.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would accept asymmetric because ofmy concern about the international side.MR. ANGELL. Right, you said symmetric but could acceptasymmetric.MR. KELLEY. You might take a poll.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the simple way. Why don't wejust poll the members?MR. SYRON. Go around.MR. ANGELL. Sure.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just say what I have. I've gotCorrigan either way.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What I specifically said was that mypreference was symmetric, but in view of my own concerns about theweight of the international side I would accept asymmetric.MR. ANGELL. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, I took that as a Corriganesque--MR. BLACK. You think you have an ally and so does GovernorAngell!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Angell I have as symmetric; Hoenig assymmetric but could accept asymmetric.MR. HOENIG. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I have: Jordan ease; Kelley symmetric;LaWare symmetric; Lindsey ease; Melzer symmetric; Mullins asymmetric;Phillips prefer ease but could accept asymmetric; and Syron ease.MR. SYRON. No, I'm ease, but could accept asymmetric.MR. ANGELL. I would admit that it's 6 to 6. I think theChairman can decide!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the particular choice of wordsis really far less important than what it is we would do under variousconditions. [The wording] almost doesn't matter. Clearly, if theeconomy continues to show the signs [of improvement] that it has been-47-11/17/92showing--remembering that our next meeting is only five weeks away--wewill probably sit tight. It would require a really important,surprising turnaround in a relatively short period of time to initiateaction under this type of directive. The only reason I would arguemyself for asymmetric is that I don't like switching back and forth.If the next trend is toward expansion, if we wait until December to goto symmetric or do something else, I don't think that matters much.If, however, we switch prematurely, it will look a little unstable. Imust say I am personally somewhat inclined in that direction notbecause I think it's a major policy issue but because I think it's a--MR. ANGELL. Well, it really is a moot point; when the fedfunds rate is on top of the discount rate it is a moot point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Especially when it's five weeks untilthe next meeting.MR. ANGELL. So, I'm not going to vote "no" either way--MR. KELLEY. I'm going with you.MR. ANGELL. --because it's not that big a deal.MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. In the context of the Committee'slong-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economicgrowth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, andmonetary developments, slightly greater reserve restraint might orslightly lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in theintermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expectedto be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period fromSeptember through December at annual rates of about 3-1/2 and 1percent, respectively."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Hoenig YesPresident Jordan NoGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare NoGovernor Lindsey YesPresident Melzer NoGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Phillips YesPresident Syron YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, I think we ought to take a shortluncheon break and then proceed to our next agenda topic.[Lunch recess]-48-11/17/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Our meeting went into recess and we arenow back in the official meeting for our final topic on which Irequest Don Kohn to edify us.MR. KOHN. Edify you? [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Winn.MR. WINN. [Unintelligible] only from Mr. Gonzalez and onlyfrom his staff or Mr. Auerbach. We don't know what the newsubcommittee chairman's agenda may be. A footnote: Steve Neal isstill trying to keep [the chairmanship of] both the financialinstitutions and the monetary policy [subcommittees]. But whetherthat will work out or not remains to be seen. I would note that backin 1977--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have a fundamental problem. Theproblem essentially is that we are a public institution and thatunless we have reasons to withhold, we really are obligated to makeavailable whatever information we have on what we do. So, thequestion that we have to [consider involves] the efficiency of thediscussion and the deliberative process and the elements thatcontribute to that. There isn't any question, at least in my mind,that if we were to have television cameras parked all over the placeand this meeting were "live," we would have a wholly differentdiscussion. I must tell you about experiences that I have had underthe Sunshine Act. For example, when I was Chairman of the SocialSecurity Commission, which was subject to the Act, it turns out thatthe lawyers indicated that we did not have to have publicrepresentation at lunch and dinner. And lo and behold, all of thepoliticians--and these were the senior members of the Senate and thesenior members of the House of both parties--negotiated like mad atlunch and dinner and the public sessions were absolutely sterile;nothing happened at them. On the Financial Economic Commission, whichwas a bipartisan commission also loaded with members of Congress onboth sides of the aisle, I understand from a statement publicly madeby Bob Strauss, the co-chairman, that in order to come to conclusionsthey had to go off in the corner and negotiate.The problem essentially is that there is a presumption thatsomehow we can be a deliberative body in the Sunshine on verysensitive issues. But the Congress, when it gets involved in thatkind of situation, knows better; they're trying to repeal human natureand it doesn't seem to work. I think we have to try to remember thatwe're obligated not to start with the proposition that everything issecret unless we want to let it out. We have to start in the otherdirection. We're obligated when we seriously believe that theefficiency of our deliberations would be sufficiently undercut byvarious forms of disclosure to define why and to make that notionavailable to the Congress either through testimony, or writtenmaterial, or through responses that we would make to Mr. Gonzalez'squestions. But it is important that we define what it is we're doing.The trouble, unfortunately, is that there is a large element ofhypocrisy involved, which is very difficult to deal with. In otherwords, we can't give examples to the people who are telling us to goin the open [showing that] when they are [deliberating] they don't [doit in the open]. Regrettably, that's not the appropriate response tothis. And it is very difficult to communicate to people because Mr.-49-11/17/92Gonzalez has said publicly that he thinks our meetings would becomefar more productive if conducted in the open. Now, the chances ofthat are zero. I don't mean 1 percent or 2 percent; I said zero. AndI'd use a lower number if they would let me! But we have to be ableto define a rational position because we do have the very difficultproblem of being a central bank in a democratic society. That's notan easy job. If it weren't for the hypocrisies involved in a lot ofthis, it would be relatively easy to do. So, what I'm really askingof you in this meeting is: (1) your views as to what you as a groupwould feel comfortable disclosing and at what particular time; and (2)where you think we have to be very careful. There is a tradeoff herebasically between the efficiency of our deliberative process, which isvery crucial to the country, and the public's need to know. They dohave a need to know and they have a right to know. Vice ChairmanCorrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me start with either thetelevision or the literal verbatim transcript. It does seem to methat--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I just ask: Do we have people whoare transcribing this and taking this down?MR. BERNARD. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is going to be a meeting from whichwe will try to obtain the best set of arguments and the bestconclusions that will apply, so I want to make sure that we will havea record of what is said.MR. BERNARD. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry. Go ahead.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Speaking first to the issue of livetelevision and verbatim transcripts: It seems to me that we can makea very, very compelling case that in the normal course of thisCommittee's deliberations there are frequent occasions on whichmatters pertaining to individual companies--say, General Motors orIBM--come up in discussion in a way that, if it were on television,would be very damaging. The result, of course, would be that theywouldn't come up. Much more importantly, there are often discussionsabout individual financial institutions; but still more importantly,there are often discussions centering around information that isprovided to one or more of us by central bank governors and othergovernmental officials abroad, and those people would be absolutelyenraged if that kind of information were part of any publicdiscussion. So, it does seem to me that just on those grounds alonewe can make a very powerful, entirely credible argument against livetelevision or verbatim minutes. My guess is that if we could get thatoff the table, then it might be a little easier for the Committee towrestle with the question of some kind of [record such as the oldmemoranda of discussion]. I might add--I don't know if you knew this,Ted--just looking at these memoranda of discussion for 1974, thesepublished minutes include the write-ups of the Basle governorsmeetings. They include write-ups of visits of individual Boardmembers to other countries and other central banks. People might haveagreed to that in 1974, but today, no way.11/17/92MR. TRUMAN. They included some of those, but in the publicversions some parts of those reports were edited down.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There's some pretty lively stuff inhere, though, from those BIS meetings.MR. TRUMAN. Well, the Secretary of the FOMC made us hew to a[strict] standard about what we left in and what we left out. Butyou're right, there was still some lively material.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I think there are two issueshere. One is the deliberative process and the other is timeliness. Ithink the deliberative process has to be preserved at all cost becauseotherwise there's just no way we're going to come to a candiddecision. Looking at other situations, I think the public mood isthat people like timeliness of information. For example, theBundesbank holds a public hearing right after their meeting. Or whena Congressman comes to meet the President in the Oval Office or theCabinet Room, the press is there at the very start and everyone issitting around joking. The press leaves; they do their deliberations;and then afterwards they hold a press conference. That way the publichas the sense that they have timely information on what was decidedbut the deliberative process isn't compromised. So, in reaching ourdecision right now maybe we have a problem in that we're providing nodeliberativeness and no timeliness. We are somewhat subject tocriticism on timeliness because our decision "dribbles out" andcreates the appearance that there are unfair advantages. Maybe whatwe should do is move to the timeliness option.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. I don't disagree with what Don Winn said aboutthe role of a dedicated staff person, but I think that at most is anecessary and not a sufficient condition for what we see going on. Ithink these things need to be cyclically adjusted. The differencebetween our situation and that of the Bundesbank is that they enjoyvery wide general public support as well as political support fortheir objectives. So there's not the same degree of interest orcuriosity in the method by which they achieve them. Whenever the Hillor the media or others are dissatisfied with the results, however muchthey understand the forces at work, they're going to be moreinterested in knowing what the inputs were rather than being satisfiedwith the output. Our focus still needs to be on the results and theobjectives and to get their attention off the process. I did notdisagree with what Jerry Corrigan was saying about the negatives; Icertainly agree with what he said about the way it would change themeeting in ways that, in effect, would destroy the process. But Idon't like to play defense. I'm always in the mood whenever possibleto play offense because I think that is a good defense; so I'd move inthe direction of turning the discussion to the objectives of monetarypolicy and away from the process by which we get there. Theirinterest should not be in our discussions but in our decisions. Andif we have more complete and timely release of information about ourdecisions, then I think we can take the focus away from thediscussions that went into producing those decisions.-51-11/17/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. In terms of what Mr. Gonzalez is asking for--andthat is a detailed record of some kind as well as timeliness--as Jerrysaid, to have cameras in here or to have an immediate release of adetailed transcript or memorandum of discussion would inhibit theprocess under all these circumstances. Going back to your issue thatthe public has a right to know at some point, I think we have had inthe past, as I've read this material, a position that says, yes, wewould be willing to accommodate them with a detailed memorandum ofdiscussion again if we could have some assurances that there wouldn'tbe premature release of that material to the public through a FOIrequest. That issue still stands and we can be consistent withprotecting the deliberative process and making [a detailed transcript]available if they're willing to protect that over time. And, as weapparently did in the past, we can make some compromise in terms ofwhat others are talking about here--releasing the results in a moretimely way than we do now, which is waiting until after the nextmeeting. That may be of more value in essence to the public thanhaving the TV cameras in here.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. I'm in general agreement with what the last threepeople have said on this. I was also going to ask Don Winn a questionabout how wide the interest was in the memoranda of discussion ascompared to early release of the directive. I think the Chairman'spoint is absolutely right. We have to assume that things are going tobe released unless we can make a strong case not to release them. Andunless we show that there's damage to the deliberative process, whichis Larry's Lindsey's point, I think we would get early release of theentire discussion. Pretty clearly, we all agree to that. But unlesswe can show that there's that kind of damage, we have a very, verythin reed to lean on. So, I just wonder if we went more in thedirection of an earlier release of the directive in a broad formwhether we could reduce a lot of the interest there is in this.MR. WINN. Dick, if I go back to this survey that Steve Nealdid in 1976. I'm afraid I don't have a very good answer for youbecause he didn't put the question in those terms. Although therewere a number of respondents who in reacting and addressing the issueof verbatim transcripts or memoranda of discussion said such things as"but I also favor an immediate release of the policy directive," thatwasn't really the issue on the table. Obviously, immediate release ofFOMC decisions is the issue in the Hamilton-Dorgan Bill. Clearly,there are some members of Congress who are interested in that, but wedon't know how many. That has not moved along in the Congress, butobviously some members are interested in that.MR. SYRON. I'm going to make an unfair request in terms ofasking you to make a guess. Think of the members of both Committees,the Senate Committee and the House Committee; if you were to ask themwhether they would rather have a complete release of a memorandum ofdiscussion with some significant lag or early release of thedirective, what do you think the response would be?MR. WINN. Well, I would guess that the members of Congressare more interested in knowing the results and knowing the results-52-11/17/92quickly than in having a detailed record that comes out in three tofive years. So, if you put it to a vote, it would probably go thatway. On these public disclosure issues--the Freedom of Informationand Government in the Sunshine Acts--the record of Congress is thatwhenever those kinds of bills are put before them, it is very hard notto vote for them. So, if you put the issue on the floor of the Housethis minute "Is the House of Representatives in favor of immediatedisclosure or not?" there's a political bias toward immediate releaseof information. On the other hand, the fact that legislation likethat hasn't really moved along in the Congress makes one question howmuch real interest there is in the subject. I don't know if that'sresponsive to your question, but that's the best I can do.MR. SYRON. But the fact that legislation might pass veryquickly might argue for our doing something ourselves before somethingelse comes along and is a fait accompli.MR. WINN. We cannot deal with this long-term disclosure ofverbatim minutes ourselves because of the Freedom of Information Actproblem. The only thing that we have any control over is release ofthe policy directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. One of the things we ought to focus on also isthis issue of accountability and the assertion that individually we'renot accountable. I don't agree with that. I'm not an expert on theSupreme Court by any means, but there may be a helpful precedent therein terms of the concept of a majority opinion and then minorityopinions. I'm not sure, for example, what discussions andnegotiations go on in the Supreme Court to get the majority to signoff on a majority opinion. But I suspect that such discussions don'ttake place in the Sunshine. And I think the same principle probablyapplies here. An important starting point for this is asserting thatwe are accountable and--this may sound strange coming from me--thatthis is a consensus oriented body. When one ultimately signs off onthe policy record, one has implicitly bought into the view that isstated [in that document] or if one has dissented, the record stateswhy. Through that vehicle, for starters. I think everybody isaccountable. I can appreciate what a benefit a more detailed recordmight be to historians and others later, but the problem I have isthat it comes at considerable administrative cost. Let's say we didthe memoranda of discussion; I suspect that participants would come into the meeting and say "I have my written statement that I'm going tocome in and read." There would be more of that rather than peoplereacting to the discussion at hand or a combination of each of uspresenting [views] that we had in mind coming into the meeting andreacting to the discussion that goes on. We'd have to get advice fromthe lawyers on this, but I worry about going down that path. If ineffect we say we're willing to do this--to create a memorandum ofdiscussion if Congress gives us this protection--it would be very easyto lose whatever protection we need under FOI, yet we'd be stuck interms of saying it would acceptable to us to do this. I think the endresult would be, first of all, that we'd have a much more cumbersomeprocess and secondly, that we'd very likely end up releasing thememoranda a lot sooner than we'd like to.-53-11/17/92The final point I would make is this: I've been intriguedwith this idea of whether we can cut the legs out from under some ofthis argument by releasing more promptly something very simple aftereach meeting regarding the decision that was made. Did the Committeedecide to tighten, ease, or maintain the same degree of reserverestraint? But to the extent that we go down that path--a number ofpeople have mentioned this--we really have to think about that verycarefully in that it starts to raise questions of whether we includethe asymmetry of the [directive] language in [what we release]. Thinkabout what the markets would have done after the last meeting if wehad released the directive with asymmetry toward ease and then neveracted. And what do we do about decisions in between meetings? Arethose disclosed on a real-time basis or are those disclosed at thenext meeting? I suspect that we could get trapped into what more andmore would become a very complicated web. It's seductive in a waybecause I think all of us probably believe that the information on ouractions is in the market right away; generally speaking, the problemis not that the markets do not know where the Fed is at a point intime. But there's this perception of secrecy. So, it's veryseductive to think we can cut the legs out from under that. But if wego down that path, we really have to think through all theramifications.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think you raise an important issueregarding the distinction between actions we have taken and arehistorically ended at that point [and those that are not]. Let ussay, for example, that we eased today. We did something; it's a fact.That's differentiated from indicating our intentions of what we mightdo, which would induce the markets to discount that, in part. Andthen it would whipsaw the markets.MR. MELZER. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And we would lose freedom of actionbecause if we get caught in a situation where the markets have assumedwe're going to act in a certain way, it's very difficult for us topull back. It's the disclosure of the potential alternate policymoves of the Committee between meetings that is the sensitive issuebecause [disclosure of that information] creates market changes whichmake it more difficult for us to take an intermeeting action that weperceive we need to take. I personally see no problem in announcingdecisions after the fact. We cut the discount rate, we announce it;we move the funds rate, we announce it. That frankly doesn't botherme very much. What does bother me is putting on the table and in thepublic our deliberations about potential future [actions] and ourinclinations and the conditions that would drive [such actions]. Thatwould then, by interacting with the market, alter our decisionmakingprocess and create a significant loss of flexibility in the actionsthat we might have undertaken.MR. MELZER. When I go full circle on this issue, where Icome out is that if it's defensible, what we're doing right now isprobably about right, subject to thinking about something along thelines that you just described.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.-54-11/17/92MR. PARRY. We really have two requests from Mr. Gonzalez,isn't that correct? The one that came to you mentioned the memorandaof discussion and videotaping. The one that came to the presidentswas a bit different. I interpreted the question that came to thepresidents, although Mr. Gonzalez used the word "minutes," asreferring to the record of policy actions. Is it possible that wepresidents could answer that question--and maybe we should even havethe presidents provide a group answer--and not even refer to memorandaof discussion or videotaping? What could be given up in terms of therecord of policy actions is that conceivably it could be providedsooner than 6 to 8 weeks--maybe a month or whatever time it takes fordrafting and reviewing and revising those minutes. Would that buy usanything? Would he find that acceptable?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Frankly, if you want my impression,nothing will buy us anything. We have to decide what we think is theright thing to do, acknowledging that we are a public institution andthat we have an obligation to make available anything other than thatwhich inhibits due deliberation on our part. If we try to playoffense or defense, as Jerry says, that's fine if they let us carrythe ball. But they own the ball, and they're not going to lend it tous. If we do something thinking it will change how they behave, I'mnot sure in which direction it would be. We have to make a decisionbased on what we think is the right thing to do, give our explanationto Congress and the new Administration to an extent, and if some legalauthorities decide we have to do it in a different way, that's theirresponsibility. I don't think we can buy a bushel of corn. That'sprobably the wrong analogy. Ed Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think the distinction between the deliberativeprocess and the timeliness is a useful distinction. What we need topreserve is the deliberative process. If we go to detailed minutes orvideotapes or that sort of thing, we will basically destroy or greatlyundermine the process that we have. Timeliness, however, is an areaon which I think we are on the weakest ground. And there is acarryover affecting this issue of accountability. For example, howmany times has the Board of Governors been asked for detailed minutesof discount rate decisions? How many times have you had a request fora videotape of discount rate deliberations? That [doesn't happen]because you basically have a free discussion and you issue a statementand that's the end of it. Those statements don't talk about thefuture; they simply talk about what decision has been made. My senseis that if we could somehow speed up the process of releasing theinformation, we would convey a greater sense of openness andaccountability; and doing so would enable us to make a stronger casefor protecting the deliberative side of it. Where I come out, bottomline, is that we really ought to fight and resist anything that cutsaway or undermines the deliberative process. But I for one am willingto talk about how we might improve the timeliness because I'd ratherdo that ourselves than have it forced upon us and in the processcompromise the deliberative process.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I agree with what Ed just said, and I mightelaborate a little. It seems to me that there may be an organizingprinciple or continuum here; I don't know how far it gets us. I-55-11/17/92personally don't see any problem with a memorandum of discussion--after all, these meetings are being held--and we used to do it. But Ido think there's a critical issue with regard to the process and howsoon the memoranda are released. Putting aside questions about whatkind of protection we can get because of the Freedom of InformationAct, it seems to me that we ought to be willing to releaseincreasingly greater amounts of information with a longer lag. Thereason is, of course, that some things that are very sensitive at themoment may be considerably less sensitive or without consequence two,three, or more years down the road. So, I personally don't see anyproblem with that. If we go in the other direction, [looking at] thethings we could release immediately, I think we do have to be moreconcerned about what's there. Given that I feel an obligation to beforthcoming when we can be, I guess we should look at other ways--interms of timeliness, in terms of content, or in terms of completeness--to enhance what we're doing to deal with some of the issues that arecoming at us from the Congress.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I agree completely with that. Whatwe have to try to do is to protect the deliberative process.Forgetting about which letter has to be responded to, it seems to methat there are four broad alternatives on the table. One is toacquiesce to the television and verbatim minutes. That to me is anon-starter. I think that destroys the deliberative process and ontop of that has the other problem that I mentioned before aboutconfidentiality and all the rest. The second alternative is somethinglike the memoranda of discussion with a lag of a year or two or three.My own hunch is that we could probably live with that, but it's ahelluva lot of work.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Huge. Imagine circulating this documentto get an okay from all the people around here!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But in an edited version with a longenough lag, I think it probably isn't fatal to the deliberativeprocess. The third alternative is Mr. Melzer's and that is just tosay that what we're doing is the best arrangement, which is where Iwould actually come out. The fourth alternative is the one severalhave suggested and that is to try to speed up some part of the releaseprocess. I could probably associate myself with the kind of thingthat you suggested where in addition to what we now release right awaywe would make [any action we take] official; Mr. Coyne would put out astatement when Mr. McDonough lowers the federal funds rate confirmingthat it has been done and maybe even put in a sentence or twoexplaining why it was done. But from my point of view releasingsomething like the current policy directive at any stretch in anintermeeting period--whether it's two weeks, four weeks or the dayafter the meeting--I think is going to compromise the deliberativeprocess irreparably. I'd much rather do this.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is the problem I mentioned.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, that's the killer.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Markets would respond and affect how wefunction.-56-11/17/92VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What would happen because of that isthat all these Solomon-like decisions we make about asymmetry,symmetry, and the ability for the Chairman to act in intermeetingintervals would be shot. We would be sitting here until midnight atevery meeting trying to figure out how to get a true consensus. So,one way or another, it would damage the process. Either the processwould stop working as it now works or we would get market whiplasheffects. Either way, it's a loser. I just don't see how we can trulypreserve the deliberative process as we know it in a context in whichwe would release the policy record as we now do it at any point in anintermeeting interval. I'd rather do a memorandum of discussion thanthat. But I could associate myself with the suggestion that you made.I'm inclined to think--Don Winn would know better than most of us--that that might in fact be seen as a significant gesture on our part.MR. WINN. Jerry, I'm not sure that I heard all you said.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What I'm saying is that to releasethe policy record as it now exists at any point in an intermeetinginterval--it doesn't matter whether it's a day, a week, two weeks,three weeks [after a meeting]--will in my judgment compromise theprocess.MR. WINN. Right, but what were you proposing? You wereasking me--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The Chairman made the proposal.What I think I heard him say was that as things stand now: When theBoard cuts the discount rate, it [announces] it; when it changesreserve requirements, it [announces] it. If the Chairman or theCommittee made a decision between meetings to lower the funds rate, wewould put out a statement that morning saying the Federal Reservetoday eased reserve conditions and as a consequence of this thefederal funds rate went down.MR. MULLINS. What is the benefit from that?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No, that's the wrong question. Thequestion ought to be: What is the cost?MR. SYRON. It has no cost.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's the issue. There's a benefittoo, Dave. The benefit is that it takes away this perception thatit's the Wall Street insiders who benefit from their Fed watchingactivities to the exclusion of other segments of society. That's thebenefit.MR. BOEHNE. Suppose the Committee decided--it would be arare, shocking event--to move the funds rate at a meeting. Would weannounce it that day or when would that be announced?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would do the same thing--the nextmorning, though.MR. KOHN. So, all you're doing basically is speeding up theannouncement process by two or three hours. Right now it comes out at11:30 a.m. the next day, and you want to do it at 9:00 a.m.-57-11/17/92VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's not always clear.MR. MCDONOUGH. It doesn't in fact come out. We let themarket assume that we've eased. I think there would be an additionalbenefit because sometimes it isn't altogether clear how much we'veeased and it takes us a day or two of fiddling around with repos andmatched-sales in order to convince the market what exactly was done.To the degree that there's a benefit in not confusing markets, I thinkwe would actually get a plus from this approach.MR. PARRY. And there have been periods when it has beenmisinterpreted.MR. MCDONOUGH. Yes.MR. MELZER. I'm not sure we'd want to disclose it so soon.MR. BOEHNE. You go into the market at something like 11:30a.m., don't you?MR. MCDONOUGH. Yes.MR. BOEHNE. So, it would work something like this: When yougo into the market, essentially simultaneously there would be anannouncement made by the Fed that the Desk has now eased or tightenedreserve conditions and we expect the federal funds rate to trade at acertain level. That's the proposal?MR. MCDONOUGH. As I understand it, yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It doesn't have to be at the same time.Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I don't view the idea of protecting individualconfidentiality in a discussion as being uniquely different for theFederal Reserve than for other groups. I do believe we have a basisthat we can argue is unique to the Federal Reserve, and that is thatit's really group confidentiality we're trying to protect, notindividual confidentiality. It seems to me that we have todistinguish very carefully between the discount rate, which does havea clear announcement, and open market operations, which underdifferent procedures really are perceived quite differently. That is,it's important for us to preserve the flexibility for open marketoperations [in cases where] we're not pursuing fed funds targeting.For us to say once and for all that fed funds targeting is the realway to [conduct] open market operations ignores the possibility thatat some future date some monetary aggregate or some reserve measure,borrowed or nonborrowed, might behave in such a way that we wouldfollow that; and we would once again be in a period in which marketforces would be moving the fed funds rate rather than our doing itdeliberately as a part of our policy. So, I believe we ought not tomake announcements about fed funds rate movements; to me that wouldtake away the emphasis of the announcement effect of a discount rate[change]. I agree that maybe we ought to move the discount rate moreoften and thereby make more announcements. We could try to lean moretoward doing that and not go the long periods as we sometimes dobecause of our hesitancy to [move] the discount rate.-58-11/17/92I also believe there's another important point in theGonzalez letter to the Reserve Bank Presidents that needs to beaddressed. His request that the position of nonvoting presidents beascertained and recorded is one that we ought to resist with emphasis.The reason we ought to resist it is that recording the position of thenonvoting members then could have us in the confusing position ofannouncing that the majority of the members voted one way and themajority of the 19 participants voted another way. By doing that wewould in effect be overriding the Congressional intent when [theBanking] Act of 1935 [established] a Federal Open Market Committeemade up of the seven members of the Board of Governors and fivepresidents. We ought not to fall into that trap of those [nonmembers]being recorded.Now, I do agree with Ed Boehne and others who think that weought to ask ourselves whether all the delays are necessary. I wonderwhether or not the delay in the release of the [policy record] for theFederal Open Market Committee meeting until three days after the nextmeeting could be [shortened to] four weeks after the meeting; ifthere's a tilt on policy and we haven't moved in the direction of thetilt, then it seems to me there's not much revelation after three orfour weeks. I don't know how much we really gain by waiting throughthe last part of the [intermeeting] period. I would not want to takeaway the flexibility that exists by making an earlier announcementthan that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I frankly think that would get usnothing.MR. ANGELL. But the question is not for us to try to buysomething; the question is for us to ask if we are doing what we'redoing in such a way that we can defend it. I don't know how we canparticularly defend waiting quite as long as we wait on the release ofthose FOMC policy directives.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. May I ask on what basis we close the meetingsnow?MR. KOHN. Speculation in the market and things like that.MS. PHILLIPS. Is there something in the Federal Reserve Actthat allows us to close monetary--MR. MATTINGLY. This Committee is not subject to the SunshineAct.MS. PHILLIPS. We're not subject to it at all?MR. MATTINGLY. Not subject to it at all.MS. PHILLIPS. Why not?MR. MATTINGLY. There are exemptions. The FOMC is exempt.MS. PHILLIPS. It's just exempt completely from the SunshineAct?-59-11/17/92MR. MATTINGLY. Yes.MS. PHILLIPS. What about the Board of Governors?MR. MATTINGLY. The Board of Governors is subject to theSunshine Act; therefore, we have an obligation to open the meetings tothe public unless we find some exemption.MS. PHILLIPS. But discount rate meetings aren't open.MR. MATTINGLY. The discount rate is the responsibility ofthe Board of Governors and we have to go through the procedures ofGovernment in the Sunshine, but we close the meeting.MS. PHILLIPS. On what basis?MR. MATTINGLY. Financial speculation.MS. PHILLIPS. Financial speculation!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that our General Counsel oughtto write an op-ed piece in which he quotes both sources of informationtoday and then asks the obvious questions!MR. BLACK. What you really want to ask is how we were ableto exclude this before we found out it was a sin!MS. PHILLIPS. Right, right! Having found that out, the onething that does seem unique in the FOMC compared to other regulatorybodies that do come under Government in the Sunshine is that we have asituation where 12 presidents come in from all over the country andthe first part of the meeting is truly deliberative; and a lot ofviews aren't set until we go through that discussion process. I thinkthat's the uniqueness of the Federal Reserve that we need somehow totry to preserve, if that can be separated out.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would you take the first part of thepolicy record, which is an evaluation of what is going on, and releasethat more promptly?MS. PHILLIPS. I think they're separable. When you come downto the vote time under normal Government in the Sunshine procedures,that's the kind of thing that you'd have to record.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The only thing that we really have toprotect is our tilts [in the directive] and our contingencies andanything that relates to actions we have not taken but might take.That's where the real issue arises.MS. PHILLIPS. Well, if we go to some kind of fairly quickdisclosure, there's not going to be any more asymmetric anything.We're just going to have to go to a straight vote, announce it, andthat's it.MR. ANGELL. Why? We have tilts on which we don't act and wehave tilts on which we do act.MR. MELZER. We can just disclose actions taken.-60-11/17/92MS. PHILLIPS. That's right.MR. KELLEY. That's the key.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. After the fact.MS. PHILLIPS. Right.MR. MELZER. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, why do you say that we have to doit the way you suggest?MS. PHILLIPS. Well, if we announce that a vote has beentaken and that it's going to be asymmetric--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh, I agree with that.MS. PHILLIPS. I think that would be limiting. In myunderstanding of Government in the Sunshine, though, there are ways toprotect deliberative processes. That seems to me something that couldbe pursued because I think other government agencies do differentiatebetween staff papers and a deliberative process leading up to a vote.It's the final decision that has to be made public.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Did the CFTC deliberate in closed--?MS. PHILLIPS. Yes, we had closed meetings. The basis onwhich we could close them included market-specific information, firminformation, the IBM kind of information. There are clear bases onwhich to close meetings. And generally, unless you're subpoenaed, youcan protect the deliberative process.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. I think we've got to preserve thedeliberative nature of this body and if Governor Phillips issuggesting that we open the question of [our being subject to the]Government in the Sunshine Act, I would certainly not support that. Iwould not be opposed to a memorandum of discussion [released] with alag of three or four years, or something like that. Nor would I beopposed to a more timely release even of the directive and the policyrecord. But there's a more fundamental issue here that we need to becareful about. We're having this discussion, it seems to me, becauseof one Congressman. Mr. Gonzalez has precipitated this in a letter tothe presidents and a letter to the Chairman about videotaping. Now, Irealize that we have Messrs. Hamilton and Dorgan and people like that[also interested in these issues] but I think we have to be verycareful that we don't change the institutional nature of this bodysimply to accommodate a Congressman. He represents San Antonio; hedoesn't represent [all the] people of the United States. I don'tthink whatever we do [in response to] Mr. Gonzalez is going to satisfyhim, whether we say we're going to give him a memorandum of discussionor an earlier release of the policy record. He wants to politicizethe Federal Reserve. And I'm glad we're not on videotape at thismoment when I'm saying that! So, I think we really ought to resistresponding to him. Now, I realize he's the chairman of the committeeand if it looks as if he's gaining support, then of course we have to-61-11/17/92try to be more offensive--in both senses of that term!--and try tofashion any legislation that we think might come along. But if hedoesn't have support.... We don't know what is going to happen in thenew Congress. Is he going to have this kind of support?Also, I happen to think that we are accountable. We probablydisclose more than other central banks, and I think we can defend whatwe're doing right now. I don't think we ought to be in a position atthis moment of taking some kind of preemptive strike just to getsomething from Mr. Gonzalez. If the Congress wants to passlegislation, that's fine; but I don't think we ought to change on thebasis of one Congressman. And I might just add that I think it goesbeyond this issue; it goes to other issues as well.MR. SYRON. Bob, I agree with you on this point, but we can'tafford to bury our heads in the sand either.MR. FORRESTAL. No, I'm not suggesting that.MR. SYRON. There are sensible things that have been talkedabout that could be done here that would really be an improvement. Wetalked about announcing what we're doing so there isn't this confusionof "did they or didn't they?" in the market. And people seem to thinkthat's an advantage. If there are things we can do that improvecommunications and we're not doing them strictly to respond to thisbut [also because] they have the ancillary benefit to which we areresponding as well, I think we ought to do those things. I don'tthink we ought to stand up and, for lack of a better word, try to beoverly "macho" or independent and just say because [Mr. Gonzalez has]raised it we're not going to do it. I am afraid this is a perilousyear for us, and we could get into a situation of this escalatingfurther and further.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Bob Forrestal already made the point that I wasgoing to make. I certainly agree with those who have said that anyfurther specific detail or attribution of individual comments would bevery destructive of the [deliberative] process. But this is aquestion, frankly, that I don't think Mr. Gonzalez wrote; some curiousstaffer way down the line wrote it. And for us to respond by making achange at this point would be a very big mistake. I think we ought togo back and say that we thought about it carefully and that theprocess we're currently using seems appropriate to us. We're alwaysopen to thinking about it further, but we don't see any reason to makea change at this time. I think they're just fishing and if we givethem something now, that's just going to encourage them to try to getmore.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I agree with Bob Forrestal. Ithink that Mr. Gonzalez's purpose really is to politicize the FederalReserve, and he hopes to do that by exposing our deliberations. So, Ithink he's not really asking for [earlier release of] our actions. Heknows those fairly soon, although one could argue that we could makethem available a little sooner. What he wants to know is thedeliberations. I was around here when we gave up the memoranda of-62-11/17/92discussion; I hated to see it [discontinued], although I understoodthe reason why the Committee did it. I chatted with Chairman Burnsabout it at the time and he said he too hated to see them go becausethey do have valuable information for scholars--admittedly only a few[of them are interested]--but the memoranda do have some validinformation for those inside and outside the System. I think we wouldbe wise to resume preparing them. I doubt that would inhibit ourdiscussions and deliberations at all if they were released, say, threeyears or even two years later. And we would be responding to a pointyou made which I think is very real: That maybe we do have aresponsibility for making available to the public something more thanwe are now doing. And I don't think that would inhibit ourdiscussions. For example, would you mind tomorrow if someone toldpeople what you had said two years ago at an FOMC meeting? My view is"no."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The problem, unfortunately, is thatunder the Freedom of Information Act, we need a statute to protect us.In other words, if we were to start to make [detailed] minutes rightnow, they would be subject to a Freedom of Information suit.MR. PARRY. That's what they would try.MR. LAWARE. I thought we were exempt.MS. PHILLIPS. From Sunshine, [not FOIA].SPEAKER(?). That's why we gave it up in 1976.MR. BLACK. Well, you mean they would get out sooner than thelag we would set?SPEAKER(?). Yes.MR. BLACK. Well, it takes a while to write them! It's oneheck of a job. Norm will tell you that. And I may have lost afriend!MR. ANGELL. But I presume we have some exposure in regard tothe tapes; it's just that we think we reduce the time scale of danger,isn't it? Aren't the tapes subject to a FOIA request?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't know. General Counsel, what isthe--MR. MATTINGLY. I think the tape of this meeting is destroyedas soon as the--MR. BERNARD. That's right. The Committee has had a policysince the early '70s that once the policy record is released to thepublic, the tape is erased.MR. MATTINGLY. Legally if someone asked for the tape beforeit's destroyed, we'd have to go through the tape and we could deletethe recommendations and opinions. We'd have to turn over thesegregable facts.-63-11/17/92MR. ANGELL. Yes, but I'm saying we do have a period ofvulnerability in regard to the tape.MR. MATTINGLY. No question.MR. ANGELL. I think we have to keep that in mind.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Well, I'm pretty much opposed to everything!In my opinion, it ain't broke, so I agree with Tom and Si and Bob. Ithink the memorandum of discussion would be a good idea, but I don'tsee how we could keep it from FOIA or keep it from Congress ifCongress requested it. We somehow can't resist giving [bank] examdata or anything else. So, even if they said it was going to be[released with a lag of] five years, I wouldn't believe them. I dothink it's an attempt to politicize the process--to identify and holdresponsible those who have "politically incorrect" views.There is this notion of openness and the public's right toknow. There is this bias and voyeurism, which is becoming a constantin popular culture by a self-serving media as well as Congress. Butthe notion of protecting the deliberative process is in the SunshineAct; it's in FOIA. When I was at Treasury, deliberative papers wereexempt from the process. When the President meets with his advisorson foreign policy or on economic policy, those deliberations are donein private. And as you pointed out, Congress [conducts] its caucusesand negotiations [in private]. I think one can see the difference inopen versus closed Board meetings. The quality of discussion anddecisionmaking, because of the sensitivity of issues and marketsensitivity, is far different when we have an open meeting versus aclosed meeting. So, I think this is entirely defensible underexisting concepts, again against their bias.On the issue of early release, first, I'm also very skepticalof the notion that this would blunt political criticism. We have anew Congress and a new Administration, and I don't like sending thesignal that we're in the mood for change and that we're malleable. Ithink we're in a pretty strong position starting out with thosepeople. It's a particularly poor idea to do something unilaterally--to volunteer to turn ourselves in or to plead guilty. At least weought to make them work for it a bit! And it's too early in theseason for gift-giving. [Laughter] Releasing the policy record earlyI think would rob us of the asymmetric option. There may be anargument that we've overused the asymmetric option, but that ought tobe confronted directly.I also don't like the idea of announcing a federal funds ratechange. I don't like making announcements. We're not good at makingannouncements. First we have to be good at making the right decisionand then we have to be good at PR. The last time we really tried thiswas with the discount rate cut last December. We said that it wasgoing to be the last cut and that it was enough to sustain therecovery. Since then we've cut the federal funds rate 100 basispoints and the discount rate 50 basis points, and I don't think thatadded to our credibility. The Bank of Japan always does this andthey're ridiculed for it. We have moved the federal funds rate a lotmore than we've moved the discount rate. I think one of the reasons-64-11/17/92is because we make an announcement with the discount rate. When wemove the fed funds rate, it ends up on the financial pages; when wemove the discount rate, it ends up on the front pages. I agree withGovernor Angell that we ought to keep our options open. I would liketo see more flexibility in the federal funds rate. I don't knowexactly why it is that making an announcement would reduce thefrequency [of such actions], but I feel the evidence is pretty clearthat it would. So, my sense is that the process works pretty well.We have a pretty good record of accountability, and I think that's whywe receive so little criticism and why this has not been coming up asa big issue. And it's not really just one Congressman. To a largeextent it is one staffer resurrected from that era in which this wasan issue. So, I think the right approach to take is to try to figureout what is best and not try to respond to pressure. My view is thatthe current process works well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, the day is getting on here andit's just about all been said, I'm sure, but let me try to make onething explicit that I think has been implicit in much of what has runthrough [the discussion]. What is in the public interest? That'swhat we're talking about. I think there are two components of that.We have two public interest objectives here, but they're not of equalweight. One public interest objective is the best possible publicpolicy. That's essential and that can't be compromised. The otherpublic policy interest is that there be timely disclosure; that's oneof the basics of the political process of the country. That'sdesirable. The one is essential; the other is desirable when it doesnot compromise that which is essential. The essential part--the bestpublic policy part--I think is most closely associated with the issueof the deliberative process. In my view, that's what we have toprotect at virtually any cost. The desirable public interest part ismore closely associated with the timeliness issue. So, it seems to methat we might be able to take a look and do some careful thinkingabout meeting that desirable public policy objective of disclosure alittle more fully than we have today. But I would not want to doanything that would impinge upon the essential part of this, which isthe creation of public policy in a deliberative manner. So, what wemight do, Mr. Chairman, on another occasion with a little more timeand maybe a staff paper to go into it, is to take a look at thealternatives that would speak to timeliness but be prepared to take avery hard line on anything that impinged upon deliberativeness.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Just a very quick comment on earlier release ofthe policy record. A couple of people said they weren't sure that wecould defend what we're doing now. I would just say that it would benormal in a body like this in effect to review the minutes of the[previous] meeting when the body gets together again, because there'salways the possibility that somebody who reads that last revision hasa problem with it and we're all together and can resolve that andclose out that issue. Whereas if we're reviewing the minutes ineffect through a series of independent calls, we would never have thatopportunity. And I think we could defend it on that basis.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.-65-11/17/92MR. BOEHNE. I just wanted to make the point that I don't seethis as an issue between federal funds rate targeting or aggregatetargeting. It seems to me we could have more timely release of both;I don't see that it's a tradeoff or that it in any way compromises thefuture decision that we might want to go to some aggregate [target].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further comments anyone wants tomake? This has been a useful discussion, and I think we've prettymuch gotten everybody's point of view. Let me suggest the following:I'd like to sit down with a summary of these comments, think about it,discuss it with some of you perhaps, have a telephone conferencewithin 10 days or two weeks or so and report to you what I'veconcluded from this and possibly make recommendations--onerecommendation being to do nothing--and suggest how we ought toproceed from there. In the interim, I will write a letter to Mr.Gonzalez indicating that this meeting took place, that we had aconsiderable discussion, and that we will be proceeding on it shortly.MS. PHILLIPS. May I ask that we follow up on Jerry'ssuggestion about trying to get at least a little blurb on what othercentral banks do?MR. TRUMAN. It just so happens that we actually have twodocuments--a summary and a background document--that we did severalyears ago. With one exception, I think it's mostly current. It maynot answer all your questions but it will give you quite a lot ofbackground on what other central banks do; I'll distribute that afterthe meeting is over.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are you sending copies to everybody?We have them.MR. TRUMAN. I would have given them to you but I didn't wantto disrupt the meeting.MR. BOEHNE. Implicit in your comment is that we're going tohave one Committee reply to Mr. Gonzalez?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I should think so. Our position is veryclear. There is important agreement in this group on the principlesof what it is we're doing. The crucial issue is the deliberativeprocess and how to protect that process. That's the [unintelligible]of these issues.Okay, I think that concludes the meeting. May I just addquickly before you go, first of all, that needless to say this[discussion] is confidential in all respects as are all meetings butespecially this one. And secondly, we are scheduled to meet onDecember the 21st; that's a Monday. The question before the group is:Should we meet in the morning or would you rather meet in theafternoon?SPEAKER(?). Morning.SPEAKER(?). Afternoon.SPEAKER(?). It doesn't matter.-66-11/17/92 -67-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is morning acceptable to everybody?MR. PARRY. The presidents are coming in for dinner Sundaynight.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You are coming in Sunday night?MR. PARRY. Yes, we are.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Then Monday morning it is. Okay, thankyou very much, everybody.END OF MEETING