Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 19, 1992A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 19, 1992, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice ChairmanMr. AngellMr. HoenigMr. JordanMr. KelleyMr. LaWareMr. LindseyMr. MelzerMr. MullinsMs. PhillipsMr. SyronMessrs. Boehne, Keehn, McTeer, and Stern, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents ofthe Federal Reserve Banks of.Richmond,Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Kohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard, Deputy SecretaryCoyne, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey,Promisel, Siegman, Simpson, and Stockton,Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. McDonough, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market Account-2-Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Division of Monetary Affairs, Board ofGovernorsMessrs. Beebe, Broaddus, Lang, Ms. Lovett, Messrs.Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel,Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks ofSan Francisco, Richmond, Philadelphia, New York,Minneapolis, Dallas, Chicago, and Atlanta,respectivelyMr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank ofBostonMr. Thornton, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of St. LouisTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee ofMay 19, 1992CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. Would somebodylike to start us off by approving the minutes?SPEAKER(?). So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Bill McDonough,would you start off please?MR. MCDONOUGH. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, ladies,gentlemen. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it's apparent that we're movingin the direction that the Committee very strongly urged in the lastyear or two. My own personal impression is that we should move in thedirection in which [Bundesbank Vice President] Tietmeyer is suggestingwith regard to selling U.S. holdings of marks. The second questionthat you raised, namely the balance of what we have in our portfolio,is really quite important to address because I get the impression--indeed, I'm sure--that no coherent mechanism was employed inaccumulating these foreign balances in a manner that was in any wayrelated to what was a rational portfolio for long-term interventionpurposes. Now that we're finally getting to the point where we'reslimming down toward a reasonable aggregative level, it's probablywise to put back on the table what in fact should be the long-term--both strategic and tactical--position of the Foreign Desk. And Ithink it might be useful to have some recommendations coming from youin that regard.MR. MCDONOUGH. Certainly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I open up the meeting to questions withthe specific hope that each member will use the occasion to indicatewhether he or she is still on board with the position that we havetaken to streamline significantly the aggregative holdings that we hadas of a year or two ago. Who would like to start off?MR. SYRON. I think there's an opportunity to move further inthe direction that we want to go, and I concur that once we're closerto where we want to be it will be worth thinking [more precisely]about what that position should be.MR. KELLEY. I concur with Mr. Syron.MR. ANGELL. I not only concur, but I really want to expressappreciation for Bill McDonough's capturing the spirit of the Boardand the FOMC position and very well representing that. It's verycomforting to me to know the direction we're going, and I've had timeto worry about other things!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anybody have any questions?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I have no problem with the broaddirection we're going, and I completely agree with the point on thestructure of the balances. But I have to say on the D-mark balanceitself that if I extrapolate out this next $10 billion, I do have a5/19/92nagging sense of uneasiness that we might be getting to the pointwhere there's some danger of being too thin.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We still have $20 billion DM.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Not after the next [transaction],i.e. the further sales proposed by Tietmeyer.MR. MCDONOUGH. It would leave about $14.7 billion equivalentin DM after the next transaction, which would be about 24 billiondeutschemarks.MR. TRUMAN. Bill is using dollar equivalent figures andcombined Treasury/Federal Reserve figures. That's at current exchangerates.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I make this observation knowing, andI think broadly sharing, the sentiment of the Committee. Thereprobably are only a few of us who were around in the late '70s when wehad to approach the world hat in hand [to obtain needed foreigncurrency balances], and that was a very uncomfortable feeling. Iwould not like to find us in that position again.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think we still have a very largeblock of holdings.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I agree with what you're saying. Ijust want introduce a little element of caution, that's all.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Caution noted.MR. MULLINS. It's worthwhile for us to give some thought asto what is the appropriate balance, where we should start and stop,and how far we should go. I know that's difficult, but as we moveforward I think that's something that we should start to confront.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I agree fully. I've never had verymuch sympathy for intervention, but I do remember the days that Jerryhas alluded to when we had to draw on the swaps to get money tosupport the dollar. And if we are going to continue [to intervene],which I hope we won't, our holdings could come in useful, as he says.But I have never been sympathetic toward intervention and I'm gladwe're going in the direction we're going.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anybody else want to express anopinion or raise a question?MR. JORDAN. I'm new to the process and didn't participate inyour discussions before, but I like the direction. The desirablelevel, I think, is so far below $20 billion deutschemarks that I'mperfectly comfortable with getting down there.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no further comments, Ibelieve the content of what I just heard indicates that Bill ought togo ahead and see whether or not he can formulate the appropriatelonger-term strategy. I guess the next meeting would not be aninappropriate time to resurface this. If there are no further5/19/92questions, I'll take a motion on ratifying--no, we don't have toratify anything. Let's move on to the Domestic Desk, Peter.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Peter?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, as you are generallyaware, I wanted to bring to the Committee's attention the fact thatthe multiple investigations of the Salomon Brothers incident from lastsummer may be coming to a head in the near future. I say "may"because this is a very complex matter and things could change even atthe eleventh hour. I don't think I can characterize the bottom lineof that process except to say that a major effort is being made by allof the official agencies--the U.S. Attorney, the Justice Department,the SEC, the Treasury, and the Federal Reserve--to act in a way thatputs this unhappy event behind everybody in a coordinated fashion. AsI said, any number of things could change, including the most obvious--the precise timing. But the specific issues of primary dealerstatus and the status of Salomon's relationship to the Treasury in acontext of the bidding restrictions that they put on them last yearwill be addressed as well. The intention is to try to address thoseissues in a context that is consistent with the entirety of asolution. Again, I can't characterize the likely bottom line, becauseI still don't quite know what the pieces of that bottom line are, butI thought it important that the Committee be broadly aware that itseems likely, but by no means certain, that this could get put to bedin the near future.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Peter orJerry?MR. LINDSEY. You have to help me with my memory on this. AsI recall from the last time this issue came up, if there was a felonyinvolved in this, a suspension is automatic, isn't it?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, first of all, GovernorLindsey, in the new guidelines there is a reference to the fact thatif a firm pleads guilty or nolo contendere to a criminal charge, asanction would follow automatically. However, in Congressionaltestimony we went to rather great lengths to say that that specificprovision would not necessarily apply ex post to the Salomonsituation. Therefore, even if a firm were not indicted for a criminalcharge, we still would have the flexibility to impose a sanction eventhough that specific provision, which followed the event, is there.But we were quite clear in saying that we did not feel that we werenecessarily bound by that in the context of the events of last August.MR. LINDSEY. Thank you for that information.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no further questions, Iwill entertain a motion to ratify the actions of the Domestic Desksince the March meeting.SPEAKER(?). So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?5/19/92SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.MR. STERNLIGHT. I'd like to make a recommendation on leewayfor the next [intermeeting] period, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure, go ahead.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there any objection? We'll assumethe vote is in the affirmative. Let's move on to the economicdiscussion.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Prell?MR. PARRY. Mike, you went through some of the risks to theforecast. It seems to me that there are some areas where the economycould turn out somewhat better. Some of the work we've done suggeststhat perhaps we could get greater strength in the residential sector.It's conceivable that the dollar may end up being somewhat weaker thanwas estimated in the forecast and then net exports would continue tobe somewhat better as well. And the equipment area could be stronger.And finally, inventories--though they are not likely to get back to atraditional relationship--could perhaps not change as much as seems tobe implied in the forecast. When you look at the risks, do you see areal symmetry of risks in this forecast or do you think there might bea predominance of risks on one side or the other? What strikes me nowas opposed to the [forecast at the time of the] prior FOMC meeting isthat, at least in terms of visibility, there seem to be some upsiderisks that weren't there before.MR. PRELL. Well, we've felt that the balance of risks alsowas more even in the last couple of forecasts than it had been throughmuch of last year. And I think we repeatedly flagged what weperceived to be the asymmetry of the probability distribution throughlast year. We are reasonably comfortable with this forecast aspresenting fairly balanced risks. I think each of the items that youmentioned is a plausible story. The one reservation I would have inlight of the recent data is that the latest housing market data aredisappointing relative to even our meager expectations. We probablyhad about as low a forecast for second-quarter housing starts asanyone and yet the April figures--one month admittedly--do paint aweaker picture.MR. PARRY. Although rates have come down.MR. PRELL. Rates have come down and some observers sensedthat people were beginning to look at home buying as they would lookat car buying: They had to feel there was a bargain. You know, thegovernment offered rebates early in the year and people rushed to buy.We had not attached a lot of importance to that at the time, but inretrospect it may have pulled forward some housing starts from later5/19/92in the year, or certainly some home sales. And we're not exactly surewhere we are.MR. PARRY. So, you would say the risks still are relativelybalanced?MR. PRELL. I think they're reasonably balanced here.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mike, in reading the Greenbook, I concluded thatyou thought the first-quarter GNP, or rather GDP--I haven't made thattransition completely--increased at a 3 percent rate. Then in readingthe briefing papers last night, I thought at first you were going tosay 3.3 percent but then I looked at the chart and it appeared that itmight go as high as 4 percent. What is your best guess as to whatthat figure really might be?MR. PRELL. Let me give you the arithmetic [to the extent]that we are able to do these translations. Every number that has comein since the BEA's initial estimate has been higher than they hadanticipated, at least until the revision for the March housing starts,which had only a small impact. If you cumulate those figures, youcome out at this point with about a 4 percent increase in GDP. That'sassuming that the merchandise trade figure comes in right on theirassumption. It could be higher; it could be lower. Our feeling wasthat all these additional goods being sold might be tilting the riskstoward some lower [trade figure]. So, that's where we are, and Ithink it's a fair statement at this juncture. Now, BEA will confrontthe same anomalies that I noted, and they will have to take that intoaccount. They have some room to maneuver, but I think we shouldexpect a substantial revision.MR. BLACK. That really would be something of a surprise tothe private economy if it were that much, wouldn't it?MR. PRELL. Indeed. It's looking backward, but I don't thinkeveryone has caught up with this. I see that a number of privateanalysts have been talking in the last week or so about growth ofaround 3 percent, and they will probably refine that a bit. So, it'sunlikely to be a total shock, but it's coming in on the high side ofexpectations, well on the high side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mike, in the forecast you have an implicitdecline in long nominal rates.MR. PRELL. Explicit decline!MR. LINDSEY. Explicit decline, excuse me! I forgot where itwas in the Greenbook. Yet long rates seem to [be stuck in] a tradingrange; I think we all find them awfully stubborn. Suppose they stayin the same trading range. How much risk is there to the forecast ifthere is no decline over the next year in long rates?MR. PRELL. Well, I'm not sure how one would define the"recent" trading range. If you look at the period since early5/19/92February until recently, I think we're pressing against the lowerlimits [of that range] this morning, and we could conceivably breakbelow that. Looking at the broader time frame going back, with bondyields having gotten down to about 7-3/8 percent, that's about thedimension of the decline that we're anticipating in our forecast byearly next year. I think the answer to your question depends on whatcircumstances bring about this failure [of long rates to decline]. Ifit is a buoyant economy and strong demands for capital, then obviouslyit's not a problem. If it is higher inflation expectations, we getinto some more complex issues about how that might affect theaffordability of housing and so on; but if it's inflation expectationsand not real rates, again it may not be a compelling negative. Ifit's risk premia brought on by political uncertainties--and this maybe a year of tremendous political uncertainty--or just the wrongexpectations, as we've had on some occasions, that could be anegative. So it's really hard to say ex ante.MR. JORDAN. May I follow up on that question?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure, go ahead.MR. JORDAN. In the Greenbook, Part 2, on page III-3 you listthe indirect effects of Larry's question. You say "velocity rosefurther despite declines in opportunity costs. Recent weakness in M2occurred in the face of still small opportunity costs." You refer toa chart and so on. But then I flip over to page III-5 in theparagraph at the top of the page where it says "the lack of aggressivepricing for these deposits evidently has encouraged investors to movefrom retail CDs into stock and bond mutual funds in order to takeadvantage of higher anticipated returns." That says, at least forsome components of M2, that the real opportunity cost is not theshort-term yield change in the chart on the prior page but ratherthese longer-term yields and that those components of M2 are more likeinvestments instruments than they are like money instruments. So,that paragraph says that you've got the wrong opportunity cost, atleast for those components of money.MR. KOHN. Well, I think that's right. There are severalReserve Banks, including your own in particular, that have used otheropportunity costs that took into account the intermediate- and longer-term time deposit rates. And that does a little better. Although itdoesn't pick up all the unexplained shortfall in money, it does helpto explain it to some extent. Now, it has always been the case thatthe division between money and investment assets--particularly formoney after deregulation and after Reg Q was taken off NOW accounts--is very hard to see. It's hard to draw a bright line betweensomething you would call money and something you would call investmentassets. Other checkable deposits, NOW accounts, have elements ofinvestment assets; people hold them because of rate expectations. So,that has always been a somewhat fuzzy picture. I agree that ourmeasurement of opportunity costs probably could be improved. I thinkone issue here is what that is telling us when banks aren't competingfor these intermediate- and longer-term CDs. It's telling us in partthat they don't see loan demand; they don't intend to make a lot ofloans out in the future. Then we have to go back and ask whether thatmeans something: whether it is just a relatively benign redirectionof credit flows or whether it is saying something about theintermediation process that could feed back on aggregate demand. So,5/19/92I agree with your point on opportunity costs; but once you cut belowthat point, it still leaves a lot of ambiguity about the meaning ofthe slowdown in money.MR. JORDAN. But the reason for asking comes back to whatMike was saying [about whether] what the Greenbook says this month isright. The Greenbook says long bond yields have come down because oflower inflation; Mike termed that very appropriately [unintelligible]very hopeful outlook for 1993. I'd like to believe it. But thequestion was: What are the risks to the forecast? Can you connect upwhat is going on with these components of money and [say that] part ofthis optimistic outlook on inflation reflects the economy or is theresomething a little stronger than that to tie it to? Part of it, Iassume, is also because of slow growth of M2. Given this reason forslow growth of M2, how comfortable can you be with that?MR. PRELL. Well, let me just say that I think we noted inthe last Greenbook, not this one, that we didn't find the narrowermonetary aggregates nor the enhanced narrow monetary aggregate thatyou're implicitly describing as providing strong evidence on theoutlook. Historically, we haven't found that these provide all thatmuch better guidance than M2 as it is, with all of what I view asflaws in the logic of its construction. But I'd also argue that intelling the story about how money affects inflation, there's a short-run transmission mechanism which I think would run through thepressures of aggregate demand on aggregate supply. Thus, I think ourassessment of the pressures in resource markets is very relevant tothe short-run outlook for inflation through 1993. So, I can segmentthese questions to some extent.MR. JORDAN. With symmetric risks?MR. PRELL. Well, I guess I'm skeptical about the meaning ofthe monetary aggregates right now. I'm not inclined to assign a largeasymmetry to the risk just because the monetary aggregates have beenrunning low. Clearly, that's a judgment call. Others have differed,and perhaps wisely, in looking at the progress of this recovery. Butone also needs to interpret why the aggregates are behaving the waythey are and whether it is demand shifts or changes in the structureof intermediation and so on that may be neutral in terms of theirimplications for the cost and availability of credit to support it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mike, I have two questions, which are somewhattechnical in.nature, dealing with historical [precedent] in dataseries. One is that just in talking to people and getting anecdotalinformation on the housing market, [that information] is consistentunfortunately with the pattern of data that was announced thismorning. What I was wondering is whether there is any evidence ofincreased sensitivity to mortgage rate changes in housing and how thatfits in. I remember in one of your earlier nonfinancial reports thatyou talked about almost a change in the relationship between pricesand purchases. That is, as prices stopped declining in some markets,there was a hypothesis at least that people were more willing to buybecause they were less concerned about the [potential] loss, which wasa different sign on price than we thought.5/19/92I have a second question, but I wanted to get to that onefirst to ask how this fits in with our historical experience andwhether there has been a change in habits.MR. PRELL. Well, as a general matter, we would perceive theinterest sensitivity of the housing sector as being reduced from whatit once was, in part because of reduced market segmentation--theelimination of the non-price rationing effects that occurred a coupleof decades ago when rates moved above Reg Q ceilings and we gotdisintermediation. The introduction of ARMs might work in the samedirection, but how important that is isn't clear. There's a questionon mortgage rates. Some people have been able through considerableeffort to tease out of econometric equations some suggestion thatpeople will wait until the rates have come down and they don't thinkrates are going to go down any further before they will move. Butthat is a very short-run phenomenon and it doesn't seem to be a veryimportant result over significant spans of time.On the price side, it depends on which model you think ismost relevant. There's an affordability model, which clearly doeshave some importance. That looks at mortgage rates and prices and atthat combination relative to income; and that says that we have had aconsiderable improvement in affordability over the past couple ofyears. On the other side, if you look at an investment model, a user-cost model, it says that it's cheaper to own a home when you'regetting capital gains. So expected price movements would be importantin that model. Basically we've taken a middle-ground view sayingaffordability is better and the fear that people will be losing theirshirts in owning a home is probably abating because house pricesgenerally have firmed some over the past year. It's a hard call tomake as to which of these things is most important. I think whatwe've seen recently, as I was suggesting, is that people are verysensitive to a number of aspects of this. They jumped when they sawthose mortgage rates get down to low levels and when there was thefirst-time home buyer credit [proposal]. They seemed to have pulledback very sharply when rates backed up and the credit [proposal]evaporated. An environment in which people are still rather uncertainabout their employment and income prospects is a fragile situation.And, going back to President Parry's comment, if we can begin to get,without generating strength solely out of the housing sector, somereasonable growth going here and some confidence in employmentprospects, then people may move in response to this vastly improvedaffordability, and we could get a significantly stronger housingexpansion than we have forecast. We're certainly operating at lowlevels even given the prevailing demographic trends.MR. SYRON. For what it's worth, I think your analysis isprobably correct and that we don't necessarily get symmetric behavior.But after we have a period of declining prices, the relative weight onthe investment side becomes somewhat more important.The second question I'm trying to figure out is whether totake much encouragement in the household data. I've always beeninclined to look more at the payroll data but I'm just wonderingwhether we do have an historical precedent to some extent or if therehas been a shift there because of all of the restructuring that'sgoing on. Again, one hears these anecdotal stories of many newsmaller firms starting, etc. I just wanted to ask you if you could5/19/92explore that a bit more because we are seeing quite a diversion inpatterns [between the two series]. I'm grasping for encouragementhere if you can provide it.MR. PRELL. Well, it's not bad news. The question is howmuch good news there is in these numbers. We've looked at the historyand a lot of other analysts have too. Some have declared that thereis some lead, particularly in the early phases of an upturn, in thehousehold employment series relative to the payroll series. Othershave said that's just not a very robust relationship. We find hints,but [the relationship] doesn't seem to be highly reliable. The factis that in the payroll series the Bureau of Labor statistics make anallowance for new business formations as well as the closing down ofbusinesses. And it is a little murky how they do this. It isconceivable that they're underestimating the rate of new businessformations if the economy is picking up and that that is biasing thechange downward. But as I suggested, looking at corollary evidenceentirely separate from these things--such as initial claims and theresponses in the Conference Board surveys about job availability--allthese other things don't suggest that employment is growing at 300,000plus a month. [Actual growth] may be somewhere in between but I'mmore inclined to think it may be closer to the payroll trend at thispoint than to the household trend.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mike, looking back at the chart on page III-3 onM2 velocity: Last fall some around here were quite concerned that M2growth was quite a good indicator of where [the economy was] and yetthese first-quarter numbers I presume [raise] nominal [GNP growth] forthe first quarter up to somewhere between 6 and 7 percent. That makesV-2, with a one-quarter lag, shoot up to 4 percent. Doesn't thatreally cast a lot of doubt on all that concern about slow M2 growth?MR. PRELL. Well, as you know, I've not been an enthusiast ofthat view and have worried that that was more a coincidence.Typically, we have thought of there being a lag between changes inmoney growth and changes in GDP. So, the close timing last year Ithink was not necessarily in line with what we normally consider therelationship to be. Whether a one-quarter lag in velocity gets atthis or not is another question. I think we're looking at a period ofslow growth of money that stretches back a few years now. And in asense we haven't gotten some of the payoff [in] disinflation that somemight have anticipated. If [the economy is] growing at the rate itappears to be, that doesn't quite seem to fit. But I don't want tostate the case excessively strongly either. There may have been amessage--and it may show up in the second quarter or the thirdquarter--from that weakening money stock growth last year.MR. KOHN. Governor Angell, I had some work done, drawing itwith the two-quarter lag that people like to use and assuming that theGreenbook is close to right for GDP. That also shows some prettysizable increases in velocity in the first half of the year, unlikelast year when velocity was a bit flatter. So, after a while, as I'mabout to say in my briefing, I think there is some reason to believethat the weakness in M2 we see this year is not sending us the samekind of signal, whether it's coincidence or not, that it seemed to besending last year. But there is a question of confidence here. The5/19/92weakness is extreme and even if the signal-to-noise ratio is very,very low--MR. ANGELL. I calculated the two-quarter lag also and hadthe same conclusions. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's another way to come at this,which yields much the same results, in the sense that we've got thislong-term trend, the P*, tracking the general price level. Theexisting pattern of P* at this stage is at virtually zero if not anegative price level. If one is going to presume on the basis of thedata that we are seeing a resistance to coming down under the 3percent level or even that it is somewhat off the zero base, then thequestion essentially is whether we are incorrectly measuring [M2] inthe same context. Namely, if M2 is artificially deflated and [that]created this particular zero [or slight] decline, we have the wrongM2; we have the wrong proxy for money. If we had the right proxy formoney, it would be growing much faster than the numbers we are lookingat; it would be much closer to the opportunity cost even in thecontext that Jerry Jordan is raising the issue. It would also meanthat P* is back on track with exactly where the equation numbers are.So, it seems as though the financial system in a general way is morein line with the real economic system, with the outlier essentiallybeing M2. If we alter M2 everything else falls into place. It's adisturbing consideration, but it sort of leads to the conclusion thatall of our theoretical judgments with respect to the effect of the RTCon M2 have not been exactly correct and that there is a significantelement of technical erosion in the data as a consequence of theliquidation of the small CDs and the thrifts. There has been a fairlysignificant reduction in the thrift area without a spillover--as weall would have expected with the eliminations of the thrifts--from thethrifts into the commercial banks and other depository institutions.Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mike, I'm puzzled by the corporate profitsprojection in the Greenbook. It looks like fairly steady improvementduring 1992 and then it goes rather blah in 1993 with a fair amount ofswing back and forth from one quarter to another. What is therationale behind that projection?MR. PRELL. Well, without being too precise in this, we'veseen some evidence in the first quarter of a very big jump in profits.A sizable move at this point wouldn't be surprising in terms of thehistorical relations, which suggest an acceleration in output growththat produces an acceleration in profits. As things level out, asproductivity increases begin to move back toward trend, we get alittle additional pressure on the profit margins even though the rateof compensation increases is diminishing. And thus we get thisleveling out of the profit share and in the pattern we see for totalcorporate profits. It may be that profits should be trending up a bitmore. That certainly would be more consistent with the view that Ithink prevails among private analysts, which has consumer priceinflation stabilizing or increasing in 1993. Those people tend to seecontinuing upward movement in corporate profits.MR. LAWARE. The stock market would seem to indicate thatthat's the view on the whole.-10-5/19/92MR. PRELL. I think it's very difficult to read what thestock market is building in here. But looking at this year's profitforecasts, recognizing that the PE ratios are distorted byextraordinary factors in 1991 that may be unwinding in 1993, we cansee a movement of PEs at current stock price levels back into the highteens, still at a high level historically. But later on this yearthings will not look as out of line as they do now. And if interestrates are stable or coming down, this all hangs together fairlyplausibly. It's on the high side of history but plausible. I sensethe market probably is taking a view that with expansion come firmerprices and that profits will be a bit better in 1993 than we forecast.MR. LAWARE. Thank you.MR. HOENIG. Mike, just to follow up on your comment oninventories: You say that in the revised first-quarter numbersinventories are playing a more important role but that should not havean adverse effect going forward. That is what I think I heard yousaying. Can you go through that again as to why we would not havesome repercussions from that?MR. PRELL. Well, the repercussion is that had we ended upwith the level of sales we are running at with lower inventories asper the initial estimate, that would have been a bullish factor forthe economic outlook. As it is, though, we don't see that there is agross inventory imbalance coming out of the first quarter except forthe wholesalers. And in fact in the nondurable wholesale area thereare not very many signs of inventory/sales ratios being high. Ourexpectation is, though, that inventories are going to be managed verycautiously and that quite possibly wholesale inventories will run offsome. Manufacturers show no inclination to see their inventoriesrise. We expect to see some runoff of inventories for a little whilelonger but at a lower rate than even the reduced pace that we thinkthe first quarter produced. So that means that inventory investmentmakes a small positive contribution in the second quarter in ourforecast and a considerably greater contribution in the second half ofthe year as we see a swing to a mild rate of accumulation as salestrends continue positive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions? If not, let'smove on to the Committee discussion. Let me make a request to thoseof you who have any insights into the commercial real estate area toput them on the table. Very specifically, I think it would be usefulto know if there are any indications of a pickup in commercial realestate transactions, [because] what we have been looking at is adecline in offerings and appraisals. And until we see the bids comingin, we will be getting no indication of any stability. Obviously, asthe bids begin to move in, that will engender transactions and it maybe a far clearer signal that we're getting closer to the bottom of[the decline in that sector] than any rather dubious price index forcommercial real estate. So, for those of you who have any sense ofthis, it would be useful for the Committee to get a better view of anarea that has been crucial to us and for which our data sources havebeen less than correct. Who would like to start off? Jerry.MR. JORDAN. To comment exactly on that point, the commercialbank I was with conducted eight auctions before I left. They were allin the Southwest and on the West Coast. But the process was: Once we-11-5/19/92did the first auction and generated the interest that there is amarket out there, each one went better than expected and better thanthe prior one because it was clear that there was a core market left;[we started] in Texas and then we went over to Arizona, Nevada, Utah,and Colorado. It appeared to us that there were a lot of people whohad been waiting for the bottom, figuring that this was going to bethe buy of the century in commercial real estate, in particular. Someof it was raw land but most of it was in structures. As they saw eachsuccessive auction going better, with greater interest than the priorone, they became concerned that they had missed the low point and ittended to feed on itself with great success.MR. KELLEY. What is the time frame you're talking about,Jerry?MR. JORDAN. The first one was about 18 months ago, and thenabout 4 months elapsed before we tried the second one. And from thatpoint it picked up in pace.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Jerry, would you like to comment on yourgeneral view on the District while you have the floor?MR. JORDAN. Well, just over the last 10 weeks the sensearound the Fourth District is that things are definitely improving.The comments from all parts of the District have been of a uniformlyupbeat nature. The negative tones come in on the lack of robustness--not on the direction but the vigor--and still with expressions ofconcern about the durability or sustainability of the expansion.There are frequent references by full-time directors and members ofour small business advisory and small banker advisory councils tohaving been disappointed last year when they thought the recovery wasunder way, and they are concerned now that we could have another falsestart. Most of the durable goods manufacturers, especially thecapital goods firms that have the ability to export, are experiencingvery strong order books. Some are exporting to Canada and some toEurope with some surprise at the strength, especially in Germany, intheir capital goods [orders]. A number are expressing pleasure athaving recaptured domestic markets, especially those in the autosector who now are able to start selling to Japanese transplantcompanies and finding success against foreign competition in thatarea.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, the staff forecast has changedreally just a little since the last time. We thought it was a goodforecast then, and it still seems to be a reasonable forecast to us.Certainly, most of the anecdotal and other information that we aregetting in the Fifth District and also in the country as a whole isconsistent with this relatively moderate rate of recovery that thestaff is projecting.On the point regarding commercial real estate transactions,our Vice Chairman is a big real estate operator. He does a largevolume of business and also is a solvent real estate developer, whichmakes him an unusual breed. He has been reporting for about twomonths now that commercial real estate is beginning to move. Nothingnew is being built, but it is beginning to move; the prices had-12-5/19/92dropped to the point that they looked attractive. He also always adds"and there's plenty of financing out there for it." This was not truea while back, but that's the way he has seen it for some two months.And I think that's a pretty [reliable] reading because his firmoperates in a lot of cities throughout the country.It's certainly true that both manufacturing activity andretail sales did appear to have decelerated a bit since we had thegains earlier in the year. Nevertheless, most of our contacts believethat the recovery is here to stay this time. That view was universalat our last board meeting, for example. And for the most part theyexpect their own businesses and industries to grow at a solid, ifsomething less than spectacular, rate over the months ahead. Thesecontacts cite a wide variety of leading indicators; they all seem tohave their favorites, and those range from increasing truckingactivity to reduced loan delinquencies to rising telephone hookups,and on and on.Even though I think the staff forecast is reasonable, it'scertainly true that reasonable forecasts don't always come true. Sowe have to ask, as we always should, where the risk lies. And I thinkthe risk of errors may be on the down side. I'm bothered by thissharp deceleration in the rate of growth in M2, although I think yourexplanation comes very close to explaining why it has misbehaved, andI'm very sympathetic to that. The apparent continued sluggishness inMay is obviously a further risk on the down side, and it's a risk Iworry about a great deal. Still, I believe we can be fairly certainthat the weakness that we had results from these special factors suchas the lower non-withheld personal income tax payments and themovement into other kinds of assets, this substitution for M2-typebalances. My 85 year old mother-in-law, for example, is now out inthe longer end of the market and that is something I never thoughtwould take place! And I think we'll be better able to gauge--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. She's holding until maturity?MR. BLACK. Well, if we get the lower interest rates that thestaff has projected she might take capital gains on that! Anyway, Ithink to be better able to read the significance of M2 we have to geta little further past April and the tax date.Now, on the other side, I think it's worth noting that themain differences between the staff forecast and most other forecastsis that the staff expects inflation to decline further this year andthen hold steady next year. Many of the other forecasters thinkinflation is going to bottom out this year and is going to be higherin the next few years. The staff is also projecting, as I justmentioned, lower long-term interest rates over the period ahead and itseems as if most other forecasters expect interest rates to continueon an uptrend. I see the Greenbook projection as more desirable, andit is certainly plausible. But I believe the chances of achievingthis are going to depend pretty highly on whether or not we make theright policy calls in the critical months ahead. In particular, Ithink we have to convince the markets and the public that we are stilldetermined to reduce inflation further even as we try to foster thisbudding recovery we apparently have under way. The credibility of ourlong-term strategy is at a very crucial point right now and it'sreally on the line. So, I think we need to do all we can to reinforce-13-5/19/92this commitment that I think all of us in this room share to workinginflation down over the longer run.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Twelfth Districteconomy is experiencing varied signals, with weakness in Californiaoffset by modest growth in other District states. In California,there is some improvement in the north, with continued problems in thesouthern part of the state. I guess that latter comment is somethingof an understatement. The five-county Los Angeles area accounts for50 percent of state employment and it also accounts for 80 percent ofthe 550,000 jobs in the state that were lost between May 1990 andMarch 1992. So, it's clear that not only is there weakness in thestate but it is highly concentrated in the southern part of the state.The riots in Los Angeles are estimated to have cost $1 billion intotal property damage and to have resulted in additional job losses ofaround 25,000. Now, I have seen estimates as high as 40,000, and thatmay be referring to a peak that endured for just the number of daysimmediately following the riots. But the number that we're going withis 25,000; and expectations are that in a number of weeks that couldfall below 10,000 as some buildings are repaired and some stores arerestocked, because some stores were just looted and not seriouslydamaged. There is also obviously further concern about the effects ofthe riots on tourism and firm location decisions. And while I'm stilltalking about Los Angeles, I don't think I can give you any of thoseglimmers of hope with regard to commercial real estate. Last year 9million square feet of office space was added in the Los Angeles area.It caused vacancy rates to shoot up quite a bit; it depressed leaserates and property values; and projects under way indicate that theproblem is going to get somewhat worse before it gets better. So, Ihave not been able to pick up any improvements, at least in the LosAngeles area. I would agree with what Jerry Jordan says in terms ofsome other areas in the District. We even picked up a few optimisticcomments coming from some people in the state of Washington wherethere also was a fairly serious condition of over-building as well.For the state [of California] as a whole, indicators ofeconomic activity are mixed. Existing home sales reports indicate amodest rebound; payroll employment rose in April; and it appears asthough agricultural conditions are improving. However, manufacturingemployment continues to contract. And while construction employmenthas risen for two consecutive months, nonresidential constructionawards and residential permits are below their year-earlier levels.There is a very big issue that you may begin to read a bitmore about in the month ahead. Reflecting recent economic weakness,the state faces a severe shortfall of $10 to $12 billion through theend of the next fiscal year. Not surprisingly, revenues have fallensubstantially below projections. The law in California requires thatthey enter the new fiscal year with tax and spending plans to producea balanced budget. And this is before July 1st. There obviously aresome things that they can do that are of a rather tricky nature, butin large part they have to find $10 to $12 billion of reduced spendingor higher taxes. And that's not exactly the Keynesian approach todealing with California's problems.-14-5/19/92Outside of California, District states have performedrelatively well over the recession, and they continue to show modestgrowth. Construction activity is rising in several District states asare home sales. Cutbacks continue to be reported, unfortunately, inaerospace, with job losses of 6,500 projected for Boeing this year. Ishould point out that Boeing employs over 100,000 in the Seattle area.In addition, Boeing continues to have a large backlog of orders andactually has a very strong long-run forecast with growing demand fromthe Pacific and Asian region. Contacts that we have in nondefensemanufacturing report a modest rebound, with lumber and wood productsmanufacturing currently bottoming out, and that was a considerablesource of weakness in the past year.If I may turn briefly to the national scene, incoming datasince our last meeting seem to add to confidence that a moderaterecovery is under way. Indeed, as I [noted] in my discussion withMike, it's not difficult to come up with an outlook that is a bitstronger than is indicated in the Greenbook. For example, ouranalysis points to somewhat greater strength in inventory investment,residential construction, and net exports. And we end up with agrowth rate over the next year and a half of a little over 3 percentcompared to the Greenbook expectation of 2-3/4 percent. I agree withthe Greenbook that inflation is on a very slow downward trend, but Ifear that such slow progress will make others question the resolve ofthe Fed to deal with inflation longer term. It seems to me that wemight be at a point soon where we'll have to be more forthcoming aboutour inflation objectives. And probably we can't do that until 1993.Thank you, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, in the Sixth District,conditions clearly have continued to improve. The business people Ihave spoken to over the last several weeks are much more upbeat thanthey were and they have more confidence that the recovery is going tobe sustainable. I hear much less talk about a stalling of the economyor a double or triple dip, whatever you want to call it. There also,I think, is a recognition among business people recently that therecovery is going to be modest. They are no longer looking for thathistorical type of recovery that we've had.We've had gains in a number of areas in the District--retailsales among them, especially in apparel. And that's in spite of thefact that we had a late Easter and some bad weather. Auto sales havealso been relatively good, as have other durables, particularly thoserelated to housing. Home sales have been fairly decent also and thathas reduced [housing] inventories and led to greater growth in housingpermits. Capital spending is projected to be fairly modest, butmanufacturers are reporting that orders and shipments are turning up.A couple of other areas that are important to us are tourism and[convention] business, and we see gains in both of those areas.On the commercial construction question that you asked,anecdotally I've been hearing from people that commercial constructionperhaps is at the low point. I can say that commercial space is muchless of a drag than it has been. We've had some absorption of spaceand that is beginning to stabilize lease prices. And that's prettymuch [the case] around the District's major cities. On the price-15-5/19/92side, prices for finished goods are holding relatively steady, and inother industries we see stable input prices and no pressure on wages.The two geographical areas that are dragging a little are Florida andLouisiana. Florida is suffering from reductions in defense spendingparticularly, as well as the lower interest rates that are affectingthe high number of retirees. I guess there are a lot of mothers-in-law in Florida!MR. BLACK. Tell them to go long!MR. FORRESTAL. Louisiana continues to suffer as a result ofthe energy situation. So, with respect to the District, Mr. Chairman,things are looking relatively good and more sustainable, as I said,than they had been.With respect to the national picture, the Greenbook forecastis quite a reasonable one and, in fact, I would be very happy if wecould achieve it, especially on the inflation side. Our forecast isabout the same as the Greenbook in terms of GDP but we see somewhatlower unemployment and higher inflation. I think the difference isbasically that productivity gains [are lower] and labor costs arehigher in our forecast than in the Greenbook. I do think theexpansion is likely to endure. The efforts we see on the part ofpeople to get their balance sheets in order lay the foundation for amore sustainable expansion but, of course, we haven't seen the fulleffects of that, and I guess that leads to some questions about therisks to the forecast. I was prepared to mention that but Mike did avery good job of detailing those risks in the forecast, so I won't goover that again.I would say with respect to the slow growth of M2 that a lotof this, if not all of it, we hear is principally the run-off of smalltime deposits. Banks are not bidding very aggressively for funds inthis current environment and that suggests the process of financialdisintermediation is still constraining. Putting all of thistogether, it seems to me that the risks in the forecast are moreevenly balanced than they were. They are more symmetrical, and thatsuggests to me that we don't need a change in policy at the moment. Icontinue to be concerned about the outlook for inflation. Maybeparticipants in the market are wrong, but it seems to me that theyield curve is telling us something about future prices that we needto take into account. The price numbers themselves are somewhatdisappointing and we don't know at this point whether we are lookingat a temporary blip or whether we are on a trajectory toward a higherlevel of prices. So, I think as we approach the policy discussion weshould move very, very cautiously. Thank you.MR. STERN. With regard to the District, the modest butsteady progress that has been in place for quite some time continues,and I won't go into details except that there are a few concernsaround. One is in agriculture where, of course, this time of yearmoisture is always the major uncertainty, and that is the issue insome parts of the District. Beyond that, there is some concern in thetimber industry where environmental issues are limiting activity, andwe've seen some marginal mining operations go out of business. Butotherwise the District economy is in pretty good shape, I think.Attitudes are also in pretty good shape.-16-5/19/92With regard to the national economy, my views do not differfrom most that have been expressed so far. As Mike Prell indicated,if anything, we've done at least as well or better really than wethought we would over the last couple of quarters. That [improvement]does seem in my judgment to be continuing; I'm referring to the realside, and I don't see any reason at this juncture for renewed oradditional concern in terms of real activity. The disappointment, tothe extent there has been some, has been on the inflation side, atleast as measured by consumer prices or the employment cost index. Intalking to business people in the District, for the most part theycontinue to describe a very competitive environment and they don'tgive any impression that it's easy to raise prices or pass along costincreases or whatever. But it's a little hard to know in light of allthe data whether they simply mean by all this that they can live with3 or 4 percent inflation and thus that's what they mean by a verycompetitive environment. It's just hard to know what they have inmind as they describe that situation.With regard to commercial real estate, the situation is quitemixed as best I can judge it. I have heard of some renewed activityin the construction of warehouse and manufacturing space; it's not alot, but there do seem to be some signs of life there. With regard tooffice space, one of our directors, with whom you're familiar, hasbeen "bottom fishing" in terms of buying office space in various partsof the country for a couple of years now. He also has bought some rawland in some locations. I think he feels quite positive andcomfortable about this. On the other hand, I do come across investorsand developers who tell me it's still difficult to find financing.They're not talking about financing just for new projects but torefinance or to purchase existing buildings; although when I express acounter view and basically describe what one of our directors hasdone, a number of people will admit that they've been doing that too.It leads me to believe that perhaps there is a little more activityaround than we might appreciate, but perhaps it's a littlesubterranean. Olympia and York has not been a topic of conversationin the Ninth District, but we have our own interesting situation: Theso-called Mall of America, a mega mall, is nearing completion. Thefirst part of it is supposed to open in August and now that it's toolate there is growing concern about how successful it is going to be.So, we'll just await developments.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In terms of thenational economy, our forecast for growth this year is very consistentwith the staff forecast. We get there in slightly different ways.Our consumption numbers are a bit lower. I think the differences indurables probably relate to the fact that our housing numbers are alittle lower than those in the staff forecast but, offsetting that,our export numbers are a bit stronger. There is a difference, though,in the outlook for inflation. Our numbers are more constructive thanthe staff forecast. We expect in terms of the CPI that we would begetting down to the 3 percent area by the end of this year and thenperhaps see continued improvement next year.With regard to the District, there seems to be slow butsteady improvement in the major segments of our economy. But I mustsay the magnitude of the improvement between this meeting and the last-17-5/19/92meeting is not quite as great as was the case at the time of the lastmeeting. In that prior period there had been pretty good improvement.In fact, in some cases there are signs of moderation appearing. As anexample of this, our housing activity is down a bit but from very highlevels. Seasonal factors had a big effect on January and Februaryhousing activity. Also, that was a period in which mortgage rates hadcome down quite substantially and that gave housing in the Midwest apush; but we're now seeing some softness in housing. Retail activityalso has slowed a bit; it is still positive compared to last year butthe momentum has slowed, again from a very rapid pace in both Januaryand February.On the other hand, the manufacturing sector continues to showslow but steady improvement. Second-quarter production in the autoindustry is continuing to run well ahead of last year, but of coursethe second quarter last year was comparatively weak. Third-quarterschedules have been set a little higher than the third quarter of lastyear, but the magnitude is not as great as the pace of the secondquarter. Current dealer attitudes are good, I'm told. Their orderrate from manufacturers is very much in line with the productionschedules. But I will say the dealer order rate is a bit ahead of theretail sales level. Still, the inventories out there don't seem to beout of line, particularly for this time of the year. I must say thatin this overall category I have heard from just everybody that thedemand for light trucks is very, very strong. The industry salesforecasts are a little stronger than ours. They are expecting a verygood third quarter and an even better fourth quarter. So, there ismore to come on that. The heavy truck business continues to be betterthan last year. The current order rate is running about 10 percentahead of last year, but of course that's an increase from a very lowlevel. And heavy truck manufacturers are operating at about 70percent of capacity. They are forecasting an improved sales levelthis year of only about 119,000 units and that's versus a good yearof, say, 165,000 to 175,000 units. The steel business also is doing alittle better; orders, particularly for sheet, are coming in at goodlevels. That I think is reflective of the auto production schedulesand also a bit of strength on the appliance side. The steel industryis operating at about 83 percent of capacity. They're going to ship40 million tons in the first half and are forecasting 42 million tonsfor the second half, so it ought to be a good year in terms of the[tonnage] being shipped. But the pricing is just terrible. I findthis somewhat of a contradiction: They're shipping a lot of metal butthey're just not making any money.With regard to the real estate question that you asked about,the firm I talked with feels that we may be getting to the point ofstability but we still aren't there yet. They are seeing someincreased interest on the part of funds to buy real estate. There's agreater level of interest but not a significant volume [of sales] istaking place. They think we're going to have a continuation of pricedeclines this year, perhaps as much as 10 percent for the year as awhole. That's lower than in previous years, which again is indicativethat we're getting to a point of stability. The vacancy rates inChicago are going to go up. We have two or three big projects thatare still finishing up, so our already fairly high vacancy rates aregoing to go up. This firm does not anticipate a return to normalvacancy levels until 1995 or 1996.-18-5/19/92In the agricultural sector, we've had a very unusual plantingseason. It has been cold and wet in most of our area. But in oneweek, the week of May 10th, some 50 percent of the corn acreage wasplanted, which was pretty phenomenal. However, given the carryoverstocks, which were fairly low, and the significant uncertainty withregard to weather, our expectation is that it's going to be a year inwhich prices are going to be very, very weather-related, but at leastwe're off to a pretty good start. I might say that the ag equipmentbusiness is sour. Contrary to earlier expectations, retail sales ofmajor agricultural implements have slowed significantly. It's downabout 13 percent currently from last year. As a consequence theproduction schedules, which had been set at a pretty conservativelevel, now are being reduced.With regard to inflation, I do think that the outlook isincreasingly constructive. Price increases are just not sticking. Inthe manufacturing sector, I continue to be impressed by the majormanufacturers who are continuing to get decreases in their prices forpurchased products or, if there are increases, they are pretty modest.The same also is true in the retail sector. People who supply themajor retail stores know that they just can't get price increasesthrough. The consumers in turn are very tough. So, I must saygeneral attitudes in the District are that rising prices are just nota major danger. Labor contracts continue to be negotiated underfavorable terms. Three-year contracts are the norm. The occasionalsix-year contract in the paper industry and the wage increases underthese contracts are easily managed through productivity improvements.After months of bitterness that I have commented on from time-to-timehere, the Caterpillar strike just went "poof." When the companythreatened and then began to bring in replacement workers, the unionattitude just collapsed. They have not, of course, settled thecontract yet, but they're back at work. This won't necessarily set apattern for the UAW negotiations with the auto companies this fall,but certainly it's going to have an effect on the tone as they go intothose discussions.Net, while I think the economy is continuing to show signs ofslow but steady improvement, without more strength in some of themajor segments the question [of sustainability] has to be asignificant one. Therefore, as we see it, the risks in terms ofgrowth continue to be on the down side. And with the improved outlookwith regard to inflation, it seems to us that our policy responseshould be geared to dealing with signs of deterioration in growthshould they begin to emerge. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I'd say the District is mixed. Manufacturinghas been up for several months running but there is some slowing inthe pace of advance. In retailing, there just isn't much of a trendeither up or down; it seems to be fairly stuck. Residential[construction] is growing but not robustly.As to your commercial real estate question, I have the sensethat the District is either at or approaching the bottom of the holebut that there is not much sign of a pickup. The general [view] isthat this is a three-to-five year problem to work our way out ofbefore we get vacancy rates at the point that they will stimulate much-19-5/19/92construction. The bankers, I think, feel that the worst surprises areon the table; but the most optimistic feeling is that we may be atabout the bottom.The bankers see some evidence of a pickup in loan demand,although not much in the hard numbers; it's more at the inquiry stage.Attitudes, in contrast to this mixed view of the real sector, are moreupbeat than the hard numbers would support underneath. There just isa sense that things are going to move, and that's an improvement overa couple of months ago. But I suspect that this sentiment is notfirmly based and that one or two months of poor sales or shrinkingorders would change the attitudes. Nonetheless, I think the attitudesare better.For the national economy, I think we do have a moderaterecovery; if anything, it's faster than expected. And it's hard notto feel better about the sustainability issue and feel that we have asustainable recovery. The money supply issue strikes me as one ofthose things we can argue about day-in and day-out. We have some goodreasons not to worry about it, but it is a shadow that hangs over us.I think the only way to settle it is not to worry about it as long asit's an outlier and the economy picks up. But if we start to see someweakening in the real sector, then it's going to mean something. It'salmost an agnostic approach in terms of how we should deal with it.On the inflation side, my sense is, much as Si justexpressed, that it's awfully hard to see upward pressures in prices.The other side of that is that, particularly in large cities, theunemployment problem looks as if it's just stuck. There is anattitude both from the business side as well as those people seekingjobs that there just isn't going to be much improvement. How all thatwill play its way out through the warm summer months in these citiesis something that one has to be uneasy about.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Relatively speaking, the Eleventh Districteconomy remains one of the stronger District economies, at least interms of employment. From the bottom of the recession in April of1991, employment has grown about 1-1/2 percent in our District.Within the District the weakest, and the declining, sector is energyand the main source of strength is exports, especially exports toMexico, which account for a third of Texas exports to foreigncountries. Between 1990 and 1991, Texas exports to Mexico were up16-1/2 percent; and exports to Canada, which is our second largestinternationaltrading partner, were up almost 8 percent. The numberof businesses requesting information on assistance with exporting fromthe international marketing division of the Texas Department ofCommerce was as great through April as they had expected for theentire year. So, there's a lot of activity gearing up for theprospective North American Free Trade Agreement, which is veryimportant to our part of the country. And given the present economicenvironment and political climate, freer trade--even though we wouldall agree that it's desirable--is becoming a harder sell politically.That's not so much true in our area because our business people expectto benefit disproportionately from NAFTA, but I hope that all of youthroughout the country will give it a plug in your speeches and inyour publications and your economic education efforts. I think it's-20-5/19/92very important to the near-term and long-term health of the economy.Prospects are pretty good for continued growth in our District basedon the confidence that we hear increasingly expressed in the businesscommunity and based on our leading indicator indexes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our District economyis growing, but it's still very slow and somewhat mixed. As othershave mentioned here, the agriculture area is subject to someuncertainty due to the dry weather. Also, in our area cattle is avery important industry and, although prices are up, there's a lot ofuncertainty there. With this environment of uncertainty there hasbeen some very reduced activity in the agricultural sector; in factour banks' loan-to-deposit ratios in that sector are at their lowestlevels in some time, at just over 50 percent. Manufacturing is mixedto flat, I would say. In the aircraft industry there has been someslowing in shipments recently. And in our auto industry, there hasbeen activity but no real expansion in activity, with some modestgains overall in employment. Our energy industry is suffering verysignificantly. The level of drilling activity in both oil and gas isat post-World War II lows and [the outlook is] not at all good.Everyone one talks with is blaming it on some of the regulatoryrestrictions as much as on some of the economics, so that is a verysore point in our area. As to the construction side, constructionactivity in the residential sector has been very high but ouranecdotal information now suggests it is backing off from those highsjust as you hear is happening elsewhere.On the commercial real estate side, there is some increasedabsorption but still enough vacancies out there that we're not seeingany significant pickup in prices. An important factor we've heard invery recent conversations is that in some of our areas the lease ratesremain extremely low. And until those pick up we don't really expectthat the price levels are going to pick up at all. That includesDenver, where there has been some activity; still, lease rates arevery favorable, and though we have had some sales we're not seeing areal pickup in the prices or bidding to any large extent.On the national economy, our projections are very similar tothose of the Greenbook. There are some differences. We are lookingat a little weaker consumer spending and residential investment, and alittle stronger government spending and stronger still business fixedinvestment. On the inflation front, we're very much in line with thestaff forecast; we may be a little more optimistic on inflation butnot enough to make a real difference overall at this time. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I'd like to make two general comments; the firstrelates to M2 and how to interpret that. One comment that I don'tthink has been made in the comments we've heard today is that somework we've done would indicate in our view that the relationship of M2to nominal GDP is stationary only over very long periods of time. Ithink we're talking five or more years. It follows from that that theability to predict velocity shifts in the short run is not at allgood. Therefore, the idea that--and I'm not suggesting anybody hasadvocated this--M2 can be used as a short-term targeting tool for-21-5/19/92monetary policy, as far as I'm concerned, just doesn't fly. To someextent, I think the emphasis that we have placed on that target hasperhaps in a public relations sense painted us into a corner somewhat,and there are probably ways to deal with that by citing some otherfactors. But the fact is, when push comes to shove in the short run,I would have a hard time justifying a policy action aimed at trying toget M2 into the target range or to some point in the target range forthese very reasons I've cited. Obviously, it's better to be in thetarget range, but if we have questions about whether M2 is [outsidethe range because of] technical or fundamental factors--and we'repretty confident there are some important technical factors--I wouldbe inclined to explain those and take the heat for missing it. That'sthe first point I wanted to make.The other point, which relates generally to the economy, isthat we're a year into the recovery now and my sense is, both in termsof the statistics that we see and what I hear anecdotally, that thepace is picking up. Obviously, the recovery is not in line with otherpost World War II recoveries, but I think it's well in place andpicking up. And I'd say that in general other forecasters areprobably looking for the best inflation performance in 1992 with somepickup in '93. Now, we all know what the Board staff's forecast is;but even there Mike has seen fit, based on some recent information, toratchet the forecast up. And I think we've seen from time-to-time,not at the present moment, in the bond market and perhaps to someextent in the foreign exchange markets some questions about the Fed'sresolve with respect to long-run price stability and so forth versusshort-run fine-tuning of the real economy. The point I would makewith respect to that is that I don't think one can get terriblyalarmed by anything we've seen in those areas as yet, but once it'sclear in those indicators that we've lost credibility it's very hardand very expensive to buy it back. So, in my view we want to stayahead of that. All of this is to suggest that I think the time reallyhas come for us to focus not on when we're going to ease next but onwhen it is we are going to tighten. And my final point on credibilityis that while words can help, this is one of those times when peopleare going to watch what we do, not what we say.Just very quickly on our District, the picture is the same asI presented last month. We are continuing to have moderate growth.On the employment side, [growth] is coming primarily in the servicesarea. Manufacturing is still sluggish. In particular, strength onthe nonmanufacturing side is coming in construction; we haveresidential and nonresidential contracts up 20 to 30 percent from theprior three-month period. My sense is that in the nonresidentialsector it's primarily in the industrial area. I don't have any senseof [much] going on with transactions in office buildings and so forthat this time. Finally, just the tone of the comments I pick up isimproving. The anecdotal information seems to confirm this picturewe've been looking at for some time in terms of improving economicactivity in our District.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I must say that overthe last six weeks or so I have become more of a cautious optimistabout what is going on in the economy. It seems to me that these mostrecent figures on consumer attitudes forebode a much brighter outcome.-22-5/19/92Consumers have been gradually reducing their debt load, which I thinkhas helped to improve their feeling of confidence as reflected intheir attitudes toward housing, auto, and appliance acquisitions. Atthe same time, long rates most recently have shown some slightimprovement, and we have some reason to believe that that may nowcontinue. The banking system I believe is substantially recoveringfrom the problems that have plagued it the last four or five years.Operating margins, net interest margins have improved; earnings haveimproved. The restructuring of many of these institutions towardgreater efficiency is beginning to take hold. Balance sheet valuesare certainly much sounder and much closer to reality today than theyhave been, although in some isolated instances there is still a waysto go. Clearly, they have better access to the capital markets sothat the capital shortages that still exist certainly can be dealtwith much more easily now than they could have been up until thistime. I believe that these bankers are still cautious lenders. Ithink the burns haven't completely healed and the memories aboutrecent events will be long. But I believe that they are now able, andto some extent willing, to respond to legitimate demands. So, I thinkthe banks will be able to finance whatever level of recovery is comingalong.Corporate conditions, I think, have improved significantly.Again, restructuring has had a very salubrious effect on corporatebalance sheets. Corporations have eliminated in the process not justpeople, but some poor businesses. The divestiture or even shuttingdown of businesses that have been otherwise a drag bodes well forfuture profitability. Also, the reduction in debt service has beenappropriate. They have done this through much more favorable debtfinancing and by replacing debt with equity. So, I think the generaltone there is better and that's why I'm a bit skeptical about the 1993projection for corporate profits. I think there may be somefundamental improvement there that can be very helpful.Having said all that, I think the progress on inflation isdisappointing in view of the length of time that we have had a fairlyrestraining hand with regard to policy. And it's particularlydisappointing and puzzling that the figures are better when you leavefood and energy in right now than when you take them out. They'vealways been seen as the wild cards.It seems to me that the Greenbook forecast is a reasonableone. My own would be somewhat more optimistic but only marginally.But I don't think we should be discouraged by a modest growth rate inthe GDP. I think it is fully consistent with a continued move towardprice stability, which should be our objective. We must be sure tostop pouring drinks while everyone is still sober, and probably thenext policy move will have to be toward restraint rather than ease.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To start with theDistrict, I'd say the New England economy remains lethargic. It's nolonger in a pronounced decline but it really has little momentum goingin the opposite direction. It's interesting actually to hear BobMcTeer talk about things being more encouraging in Dallas. We've saidthat things are more encouraging in New England because on a moving-23-5/19/92average basis the decline in employment last month was only 2 percentat an annual rate. But we do think things are close to the bottom.As far as different sectors go, after a fairly good openingof the year, the retailers now seem--I've talked to some of themmyself--a fair bit more concerned. In housing, we don't know if thishas to do with weather or what the story is, but there does seem tobe--"softness" is too strong a word--an attenuation in the growth thatwe've seen in housing. It had done quite well; now, it's slowing offagain, which is why I asked the question about interest ratesensitivity. And, of course, the expected depreciation is a very bigissue in New England.As far as your question on real estate goes, it's a veryinteresting pattern here. It depends a great deal on the sectors thatone looks at. In the pure office space sector, absorption now isabout flat; we don't have negative absorption any more. I hope noneof you has too much money in TIAA-CREF because you're going to takesome loss in the Boston market. We have an interesting phenomenongoing on with the zero absorption; people are trading up at the sameprice to higher quality space and there just isn't going to be amarket for some of the B+ quality space to [say nothing about the] Cspace. The retail market is really quite interesting in that it showsthat real estate is very local. We have a couple of new smallshopping centers being built with new retailers coming in at the sametime that we have great excess capacity in retail space elsewhere. Tocome back to something that Jerry Jordan talked about, the one areawhere there has been some success in auction type sales has been inthe condo market. It hasn't held true in the commercial or the retailor office building sectors, but in the condo market finding a pricefloor has produced the same sort of pattern that Jerry talked aboutfor some of the markets.We hear less about the credit crunch than we did a year ago,although I think it's still somewhat of a residual drag. There aresome tentative signs of a pickup in lending. Some of these companiesthat John LaWare talked about are in a better competitive position.Some of our institutions have raised capital and there's nothing likea little competition. We're hearing now about beating the drums ofwho will be the next aggressive lender.As far as the manufacturing sector in the region goes, that'smixed. Well, that's true obviously of anything that's tied todefense, and we have a lot that's tied not only to defense but tocommercial aerospace, which is also somewhat weak. Until recently,autos and housing-related manufacturers had been doing relativelywell. An encouraging sign we just had is this: Digital puts on ashow every couple of years where they bring people in from all overthe country. And actually they sold more equipment on the floor therethan they expected by a fair amount, though other manufacturers wetalked to are concerned about seeing their backlogs decline.For the U.S. economy overall, I have little reason, as usual,to disagree with the Greenbook. I can quibble on the unemploymentrate, which we think might be a little higher in the out period thanthe staff has it, but the difference is minimal. Also, I reflecteveryone else's concerns about disappointment on inflation. Lookingahead, while I don't have any disagreement with any individual-24-5/19/92forecast--and this doesn't hold true just for the Greenbook--in mostforecasts there has been a serial correlation going out two to threequarters, and we've all been overly optimistic. Again, it's not acriticism of any individual forecast but it makes me wonder why thathas been the case and whether it's more inertia and whether there hasbeen more of a shock to the economic system in some confidence sense[than was anticipated]. And it makes me worry, particularly sincewe're counting a bit [on] even the relatively anemic growth we see inthis quarter, [about] what is going to happen to PCE in the durablessector and autos and in final sales generally. That leads me to theview, even if I agree with this [forecast] that the probabilities arefairly evenly balanced on the outlook, that I'm not sure the risks arerelatively evenly balanced. The reason is that if we were to getanother negative surprise regarding the pickup, I'd be quite concernedabout the impact that could have on confidence and for building inthis inertia in terms of trying to get things moving. Another part ofthat, though, is that I don't think there's very much we can do aboutit. Just looking at what is happening in several asset markets, thereis a potential for disappointment, an incongruity between the rate ofgrowth we expect in the economy and some asset [market behavior],particularly in my own mind the securities markets. Now, I'm notsaying it's our role to ratify it, but I think we have to take intoconsideration that that's a potential disappointment that is going tocome along and is going to have a negative pull on the economy.I agree very much with Tom Melzer's comments on the Ms. I'vealways been pretty agnostic about that. But I think we're in thisdifficult position in that we've said that we're watching the Ms, andI worry about a situation in which we might have a combination of theeconomy coming in soft and the aggregates being out of their ranges.I'm worried about that even in a world in which we do want to get tolower inflation. I think we all agree on [the desirability of]getting to price stability, but the problem I have is that we couldsee something snap in the process here that would lead toprotectionism, fiscal policy [moves], and other kinds of things thatwould make it more difficult in an ironic way for us to get to pricestability. At some point I think we're going to get some happysurprises in terms of this correlation of the forecasts, and I'mlooking forward to that and will be happy to deal with those when thetime comes. Unfortunately, I have no reason to believe that thereshould be any bias toward a happy surprise more than a continuednegative surprise at this point in time.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Thank you, Dick. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I've always been very sympathetic to watchingthe monetary aggregates, and I believe that they really are a very[integral] part of our fundamental program against inflation. But asyou know, from time-to-time I have looked carefully at other means todetermine whether or not there is a shift in demand for any one of theaggregates. And I've concentrated on commodity prices as probablybeing the most sensitive in showing whether or not monetary restrainttruly is in place or whether [policy is] characterized by monetaryease. At the present time commodity prices, although they have thereputation of being very volatile, seem rather stable to me. Ifthere's any trend it's probably slightly upward but not as strong asordinarily would be seen in a recovery phase. So, on the surface thatdoesn't seem to show great inflation signals out ahead.-25-5/19/92Gold prices probably need to be looked at some, particularlysince there are those who view the declining gold prices as[unintelligible] into growth rates. This thesis holds that M2 growthhas been very slow and it shows up by following gold prices. I thinkit's important to recognize that gold is always [unintelligible] inregard to its monetary properties and for a long period of time goldprices were lower than market forces would have dictated due to thefact that many governments wanted to sell out their gold stocks.Consequently, gold stayed in the [$340] range a lot longer than itotherwise would have. Costs of production in many places in the worldwere way above that, and so there was no technology going into thatindustry. When gold prices are running up so the optimists believethe price is going to be in the $500 range, then you get a surge oftechnology into that industry. And it seems to me we're experiencingthe impact of that surge. Indeed, the surge has been primarily a U.S.surge. In the United States, we've had during the 1980s over $8billion of investments in gold mining, just as an example of whattechnology can do when the price outlook is favorable. That hasresulted in a very quick [advance] for the United States from nowherein the park of gold producers to the number 2 position. Indeed,production in the United States is now above 60 percent of that inSouth Africa and very well could exceed South African productionbefore the decade is over. A new technology involving heat-bleachingmeans that the cost of production with that new technology runs closerto $250 an ounce rather than to $350 an ounce. When you look at whatis happening in Chile and other areas around the world, it looks as ifthis same technology probably is catching on in other places. Onewould then expect the price of gold to fall closer to its cost-of-production in the marginally efficient areas. I give this explanationI suppose partly because I've begun to receive "hate mail" [accusingme] of having been unresponsive to falling gold prices and [sayingthat I] should have been an advocate of monetary ease based upon that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How did you answer the question?MR. ANGELL. Well, I answered the question by saying that Ihave never supported $350 an ounce gold; people just think that I do.MR. LINDSEY. I thought it was in support of gold $10 belowwherever it is now!MR. ANGELL. I see. Well, it's all right to be in thatdirection. It seems to me that we ought not let the currentinformation on inflation, disappointing as it is, cause us to move toprecipitate action. It seems to me that sound money is something weaccomplish over a long period of time. But it does suggest to me thatthe level of restraint that's out there is probably not as great asmany have thought it to be and that we do need to be in a posture ofmaintaining constant restraint over time until we get the producerprice index numbers behaving better than they're behaving. There's noreason for us not to get inflation in the goods sector quickly down tozero. And I think if we maintain the kind of posture that's needed,that will occur. I do think there will be a time lag between [thatand] the adjustment of inflation in the services sector to zero.Looking at the real economy, the Greenbook forecast is onewith which I would have no strong arguments. I would expect exportsto be somewhat stronger than in the Greenbook and I would expect-26-5/19/92productivity gains in 1993 to be more of a continuation of thepatterns seen in 1992. I would consequently expect corporate profitsto be in range similar to what John LaWare has outlined. It's a verydisappointing period in regard to those inflation numbers. I think wedo not stand ourselves in good stead by representing too strong aninterest in movements in the real economy from quarter-to-quarter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In terms of the national economy, ourforecast is very similar to what Mike talked about earlier today. Andas he indicated, and others have also, I also have a feeling that therisks are distinctly more balanced. That seems broadly consistentwith the kinds of things one hears on the anecdotal side with thisnagging question about sustainability, which is a question that nagsat me a little too. But in talking with business people, especiallyto the multinationals, most of them are now saying that things arebetter and a few are saying that they're better with emphasis. Andthat, I think, is different. Several people have cited exports;again, the anecdotal comments from these companies are quiteconsistent with that in terms of being surprised at how well theirexport activity is holding up. And as Ted or Mike or somebody said, alot of it is to Latin America, Asia, Eastern Europe, and Japan.On the commercial real estate question, I have reported overseveral meetings a sense that the decline in prices in the New Yorkarea had abated and perhaps even bottomed out. And I think Imentioned at least once that there were very specific transactions,quasi-auctions, for very large buildings where they had cleared themarket. I know of at least a couple of cases [of property] sold bybanks where they cleared the market at prices that exceeded thecharged down level on the books of the banks--in other words, theprovisions which they had taken for [loan losses]. Now, at least inthe New York area--and someone may have touched on this when I was outof the room--I think the Olympia & York situation does cast a bit of acloud over that. Their total real estate in New York is enormous andI think it's a little too early to make a judgment on that. But thatcould represent a further dent here, certainly in New York. The juryis very, very much out so far as how that is going to play out. As Isaid, that introduces a new element of uncertainty.Looking more broadly--a number of people have already touchedon this and I don't want to beat a dead horse--let me comment on thisinflation outlook issue. If I look at the 1993 forecast that Mikehas, 3.2 percent I think in the CPI ex food and energy, I sense thatthat is a reasonable number. I think it is going to be darn hard todo better than that, and it's not so hard to see how we can do worsethan that. Again, and John LaWare touched on this, in a broaderperspective of what has happened going back to 1988 in terms of theCPI ex food and energy, we've essentially gone out through 1993 in theforecast from a 4-1/2 percent core inflation rate to 3.2 percent. So,we will have brought about, if you will, a 1.3 percentage pointdecline in core inflation. And if you look at it in terms of cost,it's five years of cumulatively very modest growth at best; the lasttwo years, 1992 and 1993, are a little better but for the five yearsas a whole, it's not much. Now, if you look at M2--and I agree with alot of people in that I think that's not the right thing to look at--we will have had seven years of distinctly modest M2 growth going out-27-5/19/92through 1993. What I keep coming back to here is that no matter whatwe look at we also have to look at what is underneath, such ascompensation costs, productivity, and unit labor costs, and there's alot of slippage there. But when you go underneath, even if you lookat it simply as arithmetic and not as economics, it's still hard tosee--at least I find it hard to see--how we're going to do a heck of alot better, if at all better, than that very costly process that we'veseen over the last five years. I don't think that should alter ourcommitment to work toward that goal of price stability, however that'sdefined. But the evidence is rather overwhelming that this is a veryslow, costly, tough, grinding out process. I don't see much that'sgoing to change that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I guess I have nothing especially useful or newto add. I generally agree with a lot of what has been expressed. Ithink we have a weak recovery. And as I understand the Greenbook, therecovery is projected to be fueled by growth in consumption driven bygrowth in income. The only difficulty is identifying where the growthin income will come from. I guess the answer is sort of everywhereand nowhere. Everything grows a little and the whole juggernautgradually moves forward and momentum will carry us. It seems to methat the concern about sustainability is really the fact that we can'tpoint to an engine driving this. Perhaps we thought it was going tobe residential housing; I think there's evidence that the steam iscoming out of that. And there are still concerns about losing steamespecially if the first-quarter growth rate turns out to be 4 percentand the second quarter is 2 percent; that might have some impact onconfidence. It is encouraging that consumer buying attitudes, as JohnLaWare mentioned, in all three of the major categories of the Michigansurvey have steadily strengthened. But the overall confidence indexis still below where it was in the summer through September, thoughthat's still progress. When I look at the picture, I don't see muchthat is robust on the real side or the financial side, but there isrelatively broad-based progress in terms of moving forward. And, withthe ample slack in production resources, echoing a little of whatJerry Corrigan was saying, I don't see too much risk on the up side.The economy still has an adjustment to make on defense spending, instate and local governments such as California, and in commercial realestate; we still have some further financial adjustment to go as well.I think Bob Parry is probably right: The economy could easily bestronger with growth above 3 percent, but the consequences of thatsort of upside risk would not bother me much.It is discouraging that after the long period of sloweconomic growth and many years of slow money growth we haven't mademore progress on inflation. I should point out that I think we'veonly had significant slack in the economic system for a little over ayear and a half now. When I came on the Board the unemployment ratewas 5-1/2 percent and capacity utilization was 85 percent or higher.It is also interesting to note that inflationary expectations asmeasured by the Michigan survey in the near term continue to come downgradually; but it is still true that core CPI is 4 percent, where ithas been for eight years. I think it is probably deeply embedded.On the financial side, short rates in real terms look low nowand less low for lending to bank customers because the prime rate is-28-5/19/926-1/2 percent; it still has the margin built into it and consumerrates have that margin as well. So, I think we still have somethingof a dichotomy where I see easy conditions on rates in the financialmarkets and somewhat tighter conditions in the intermediated markets.I think it's fair to say that the yield curve is still very steep, andit's not clear to me that this is driven by inflationary expectations.It's pretty clear that people are betting big money that rates aregoing to be a lot higher in a year or so. And I think it's not at allunlikely, even if inflation doesn't re-emerge when credit demandsre-emerge, that we will be joining the global village of high realrates just as everyone else has high real short-term rates. We'rereally the outlier in the world, and it's primarily because we havesuch weak loan demand.As far as M2 is concerned, I'm certainly not here to praiseit; I thought we buried it last summer but someone dug it up again.I'm fully prepared to accept the notion that the traditionalrelationship between M2 and GDP has been distorted by weakness in thefinancial system associated with restructuring. Just because thetraditional relationship is altered does not mean that a sharpdeceleration of M2 conveys no useful information. Obviously, I'm abit biased by this coincidence last summer. We've only had a handfulof months in recorded economic history where M2 has been negative orzero. We had one last July and then August and September wereessentially flat. In the fourth quarter, we did get some decelerationbut now in March and April it is negative. Clearly, the traditionalrelationships don't hold, but dramatic decelerations still make menervous. Now, since the RTC has shut down temporarily, M2 should snapback smartly, presumably. And we're over the tax season. I don'tknow how much comfort to take in Tom Melzer's observation that therelationship holds only over a long period of five years. I tend toconclude from that that we're going to have five years of stagnationsome time in the future. The only other thing I would add to the M2debate--other than saying that it's a mystery and I'm less concernedwith it being low than with the deceleration--is that it's not only M2that is weak and not only M2 and M3 that are weak but L is weak. It'snot just intermediated liabilities that are weak. Domesticnonfinancial nongovernmental debt is, I would suggest, about as weakas it has been in any period we've recorded. Even when you throw inthe government, who is usually a dependable borrower, it still looksrelatively weak. So, my view is that with projected GDP growth in thesecond quarter of 2 percent, with 1 percent of that coming from autosand 1/2 percent from inventories, without a dependable engine to keepthe momentum going, with this weakness in credit pretty much acrossthe board, and less concern for capacity to overshoot at this stage, Istill think the most prudent stance is to remain sensitive to therisks of losing momentum.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, we are now five months into theyear. At the very first of the year, there was an extremely strongconsensus that [economic activity] was going to start out very slowand then begin to gain a bit of momentum in the second quarter and bemuch stronger thereafter. A contrariness instinct at that time was toask the question: "Where is the surprise going to come from?" becausethe consensus was too strong. There was some indication that thesurprise might be on the up side, and by the time we met in March it-29-5/19/92was fairly clear that we were getting an upside surprise. News overthe last six weeks has been that it looks as if the first quarter waseven better than [expected]. So, it seems now that the question hasshifted just a little to: "Is what we've seen so far something of afalse dawn or are we going to continue to be favorably surprised onthe up side?" There is the usual array of factors and we've certainlybeen through them this morning. On the concern side are theaggregates and the fact that housing has again slowed a bit. Severalsea anchors are still [restraining growth]: commercial real estate,the defense slowdown, net exports, and the disappointment we all feelin the year so far with regard to the CPI ex food and energy. As Ilook at that array it seems to me that people might say in the marketthat most of that has been there for a while. And while it's stillthere it has had its impact.On the other hand, I think one can say that there may be, andhopefully are, a couple of emerging trends on the favorable side thathaven't really had a chance to catch on yet. One may be employmentgrowth. I've been taught since I've been here that the payroll surveyon employment is more reliable than the household survey, and I acceptthat. But it may be that early in a recovery here we are getting someleadership from the household survey. I wouldn't suggest thatemployment has grown 350,000 a month, but it may be that the householdsurvey is telling us that [employment growth] is somewhat strongerthan we thought. If the household survey is telling us good things,they are coming from the places that traditionally have helped a lotand that is small-business entrepreneurial activity and so forth, [andthe statistics] may lag a little [before] the payroll survey picksthat up. The other [favorable trend] that may just be beginning toset in is in the area that we've called in short hand "the creditcrunch." An array of factors is there. As John discussed a whileago, banks clearly are stronger: Their profitability is up; theirliquidity is high; their balance sheets have come back; the loanofficers survey indicates that they are getting a little more ready tolend money, and there are indications that that should continue. Onthe demand side, there's a lot of anecdotal information that small andmedium-size business credit demand is beginning to come back. We knowthat balance sheets have been restructuring generally across theboard, and consumers have been very reluctant to borrow; they mightcome back. So, it seems to me that we could well be seeing anincipient trend toward a better climate for credit extensions. Thereare some other things, too. The dollar has been on the weak side. Wemay get a little better [performance of] net exports as a result ofthat. Consumer confidence is not high but it has been risingsteadily, and it seems to me that it's very responsive to employment.And if we do get the good news on employment that I hope is going tocome, then maybe that will give a further boost to consumerconfidence.So, I think it's possible to build a rather plausible, rosyscenario here around employment growth and a thaw in credit conditionsmore than anything else. I'm not buying into that wholeheartedly;there are too many negatives still out there to do that. But I thinkthe odds are improving that real activity is going to continue toimprove. And there's a fair to good chance that we can hold policywhere it is. I certainly hope so because, if that's the case, I thinkthat improves the chances [for continued expansion] for a whilewithout our tightening too much as the economy strengthens. And the-30-5/19/92longer we can do that responsibly the better news there will be overthe long haul.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, growing up I never thought I'd bean economist; I didn't know what an economist was. I think my motheris still waiting for me to make something of my life and go to lawschool! But I always liked math and I liked history and I found themtogether in economics. And my first comment is on math.I don't think anyone thinks velocity is stable on a quarter-to-quarter basis. In fact, on a distributional basis using the 120quarters from 1961 to 1990, there is a 7-1/2 percent chance ofvelocity being more than 3 and an 18.3 percent chance of velocitybeing more than 2. And if you use lagged velocity, I have adistributed lag function where the odds are even greater than that:29.2 percent for having a velocity shock of more than 2 percent. So,I think what we're seeing now is very much in line with historicalaverages on the up side. One need only to think back to the early1980s. I wasn't here, but I've looked at the numbers; there was avery strong negative velocity shock on the order of perhaps 2-1/2 or 3percent a year. So, I don't know if we really want to abandonvelocity just because it's unstable on a quarter-to-quarter basis. Iagree with President Melzer's comment in fact that it's over longperiods of time that M2 and the M2 velocity relationship are stable.Of course, that means that if we're going to have 4-1/2 percentnominal GDP growth and we have a year and a half of 2-1/2 percent M2growth, that we should be equally comfortable with a year and a halfof 6-1/2 percent M2 growth. If one is willing to let [M2 growth] goto 2 or 1-1/2 or 1 percent, one should also be willing to let it go to7 or 7-1/2 or 8 percent for an equally long period of time on theother side. So, the real question is whether or not we want to usemoney as a policy variable in constraining [the economy]. The pointis that velocity is stable over the long run, so we're going to have abounceback. Indeed, all the explanations we've heard this morningsuggest that that's the case. Don Kohn yesterday mentioned that if weinclude the yield curve we can explain perhaps a 1-1/2 point velocityshock. I don't think anyone thinks the yield curve is going to remainas steep as it is now. It's going to bounce back and so willvelocity. How about the flight from CDs? Well, certainly, it isn'tgoing to go on forever; eventually CDs would go down to zero and then[the decline] would have to stop. My suspicion is that CDs probablywill catch on at some point in the future and money will flow backinto CDs. So, again, we have to think about the fact that in the longterm we have a stable relationship here. M2 growth of 2-1/2 percentis not a long-term sustainable rate of growth. How long we want totolerate it in the short run is something we might want to debate.But no one says that it's a short-term parameter. That's the mathlesson.The history lesson is one that I was debating about, but mycontrariness juices really got flowing. I heard a wholesaleabandonment of money here this morning and that takes three [forms];(1) money doesn't matter; (2) banking weakness is also not a monetaryphenomenon; and (3) that one [assesses] monetary ease by looking atinterest rates and not money growth. I happen to have these quotesfrom history; we've been here before. As to the first that money-31-5/19/92doesn't matter: These events "shattered the long-held belief, whichhad been strengthened during the 1920s, that monetary forces wereimportant elements in the cyclical process and that monetary policywas a potent instrument for promoting economic stability. Opinionshifted almost to the opposite extreme, that 'money doesn't matter'that it's a passive factor which chiefly reflects the effects of otherforces." That was Friedman and Schwartz. They went on to say thatthere was a tendency--this is again in the early '30s--to regard bankfailures and contraction of deposits "as regrettable consequences ofbad management and bad banking practices or as inevitable reactions toprior speculative excesses,"--Where have I heard that before--"or as aconsequence but hardly a cause of the financial and economic collapse"of the time. And finally, regarding nominal interest rates, agentleman named Sprague who was a consultant to the Fed--and this wasin February 1931--wrote that the Fed concluded that an aggressive easymoney policy was practically out of the question in the United States"for there is no general acceptance of view in this country thatadditional good loans and additional good investments are available ata lower rate of interest." And continuing on the line that short-termnominal rates are a measure of policy, the Annual Report of the Fed in1930 said: "The Federal Reserve pursued a policy of monetary ease" inthe last year. In 1931 it said: "The credit policy of the FederalReserve System in the first nine months was directed toward thefurtherance of easy credit conditions, as indicated by furtherreductions in rates on discounts and acceptances." And finally in1932--this is over a period in which money shrank by a third--"Conditions in the open market for short-term money were relativelyeasy throughout the year and in the latter part money rates declinedto exceptionally low levels." We've been there before. My suspicionis, and my fear is, that we might be there again. I certainly hopenot. And finally, this is from the FOMC statement of October 1935 andsuggests that inflation is always a fear we have: "The Committeecannot fail to recognize that the rapid growth of bank deposits andbank reserves in the past year and a half is building up a credit basewhich may be very difficult to control if undue credit expansionshould become evident." They were worried about it in 1935.With regard to existing conditions, clearly we're on a goodpath. I'm not sure that an easing at this time is the right thing todo, but whenever I see the kind of wholesale abandonment of monetaryaggregates that I heard this morning I get nervous. So, I'd ratherhave the gun loaded, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS..PHILLIPS. Thank you. I think I'm bringing up the tailend again and I'll keep my comments short. It seems that since I'vebeen here we've been on the cusp of a recovery, trying to get arecovery going. Certainly the signs on the real side are morepositive this time; certainly that's what we've heard this morning. Ifind myself being concerned about and questioning its strength and itssustainability. Some of the sources of strength that we've beenpointing to the last couple of months--housing and exports--seem to befading a bit. And I think it's interesting that no one has reallytalked today about some of the problems in the economy that we seem tohave forgotten about. The first one that I'd point to is the federaldeficit, which I think is a continuing drag on the economy. We havetalked about the state and local government shortfalls, and I've seen-32-5/19/92a few tax increases coming out of some states but not a lot. So, Ithink we're going to continue to see that as a drag on the economy.The major area of concern that I would point to--and I wouldmagnify perhaps Dick Syron's [remark] with respect to its potential--is consumer confidence, which seems to me to be very much tied intothe labor market situation. I think the 7.2 percent unemployment rateperhaps understates some of the weakness in the labor market becauseof the pervasiveness of unemployment through a variety of occupationsand the restructuring that is going on in industry. This wholeconcept of underemployment and downward mobility is continuing tolengthen the period of time it's going to take us to get a realrecovery going. Certainly, on the money and credit aggregates, whichwe've talked about so I won't go into it, I'd agree with Larry: Idon't think we ought to abandon M2; we ought to look to see what it'ssaying at least in part. On inflation, I am concerned that we'restill seeing a bit higher inflation than we'd like. I would have tosay, however, that we need to expand our research on what zeroinflation is. I'm beginning to wonder if we're not getting closer toit than the traditional CPI measure or even the deflator would imply.On balance and in sum, I'm pleased that we're making some progress butthe risk of another stall is certainly in the realm of possibilities.So, I think we should be alert to weakness on the real side.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Thank you, governor.MR. MELZER. Jerry, I might interject for those who worryabout money that from the third quarter of 1987 to the first quarterof 1992, M2 grew at a 4.2 percent annual rate even with all theweakness we've had recently.MR. MULLINS. So, with 4 percent inflation we're looking atzero real M2 growth?MR. MELZER. Yes.MR. LINDSEY. Do you have our average target for that period?MR. MELZER. No, I don't.MR. ANGELL. The average target would be more like 4-1/2 to 5percent.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not only did that note about the coffeesay that the note was an hour and a half late, but I think the coffeeprobably arrived an hour and a half before the note!SPEAKER(?). You're right!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. With that, I would like to call upon Mr.Kohn.MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Mr. Kohn?-33-5/19/92MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, this is in a sense a proceduralquestion: As I read the Bluebook and the projections for the monetaryaggregates, particularly the alternatives, the time frame is fromMarch and April to June. I wonder if we wouldn't be better served inthe policymaking decision to have a longer time frame extending beyondJune for those projections. We're practically at June now. I assumeyou have those [longer-term] projections, and it seems to me that itwould be better to have a projection out perhaps to the fourthquarter.MR. KOHN. President Forrestal, if you look at paragraph 15in the Bluebook, it gives a sense of where the aggregates might comeout for the year--1/2 point more or less than for Alternative B withthe selection of "A" or "C." We have been going for many, many yearswith this [procedure], but I agree with you. The reason thatparagraph 15 is in the Bluebook is that the effect of anything done inthe middle of May probably would be greater in July and August than itwould be in May and June, so you do need to be thinking about that.MR. FORRESTAL. Yes, I realize this is the way it has beendone for a long time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think there is another problem withthat in the sense that if we introduce a longer-term time frame formoney supply where it tends to override the targets that we came outwith at the beginning of the year, what we're in danger of doing ishaving two forecasts. It's essentially the targets on the one handand a specific one on the other. In general that might be fine if thesecond forecast is close to the middle of [the target range]; but ifit is not, we're raising an interesting question about what it iswe're trying to do. It's almost as though we're trying to find adegree of accuracy that I think isn't even remotely possible. I wouldbe more inclined to the argument that we drop that forecast thanextend it too far because our ability to forecast is awful.MR. SYRON. You raise an interesting question--maybe notfacetiously--about dropping it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would prefer to drop it. I have notgiven it any thought until this minute, but I ask: What does it dofor us? What would happen if we were to drop it?MR. KOHN. Well, I think the issue would be how it feeds in.Perhaps it's an issue that really should be discussed in July becauseit's a question of having annual ranges and where the aggregates are[currently] relative to those ranges or whether you care where theyare relative to the ranges. If you were to drop the--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Could you draft us a memorandum? Couldyou circulate to the Committee the pros and the cons?MR. KOHN. Sure.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Include President Forrestal'srecommendation. That ought to be addressed.MR. KOHN. Certainly.-34-5/19/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There are a lot of anachronisms sittingin our directive. Every time I read it I'm waiting for somebodysomewhere to write a fun piece in some newspaper about the FederalReserve directive! I hope Bill Saffire of The New York Times doesn'tget hold of that!MR. KELLEY. How about Art Buchwald?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Either one of them!MR. ANGELL. You know, it's written as it would be written ifwe were going to publish it the next day.MR. SYRON. And as if we [know] all of the structural shiftsin these relationships and how tight they are.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. MULLINS. He might also compile our estimating accuracyover the past few years!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a mean thing to say!MR. KOHN. We do actually do that as an internal matter fromtime to time.MR. LINDSEY. Very internal!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Don?MR. SYRON. Just a quick technical question. Don, youmentioned that the lags had to do with the tax payments and some ofthe other things that we think have distorted these [numbers]. Couldyou quantify the lags from the inside to the outside of the deposits?MR. KOHN. Well, on the taxes, I certainly expected the sortof snapback we saw. [Our analysis suggested that] those checks wouldbe clearing in late April and the first half of May--MR. SYRON. Right.MR. KOHN. --and that's when one would expect to see asnapback [in money growth]. So, the fact that we had a $9 billionincrease, or whatever it was, in M2 last week and that we have anotherincrease in the $4 to $5 billion range coming for the week of May 11this not surprising. And it's heavily in the M1 component, which iswhere the transactions money is, where you'd expect most though notall of the tax payments to be made. So, I'd expect the tax [effect]to play out pretty much by the second half of May. The other[factors] I think are much harder to explain. The [effect of] RTCactivity is a bit contrary to common sense. We have always found,though, that there were some lags in that. That is, RTC activity oneand two months ago was having an effect on M2 growth this month. Now,I think that's partly because it does take a while: peoples'depository relationships are disrupted; they get notices that theirrates are reduced or a new bank has taken over and it takes them awhile to react to that and to reconsider their portfolios. So,perhaps it's not that contrary to common sense, but there is a little-35-5/19/92lag there. So, given the lack of RTC activity after about the secondweek of April or so, we probably will begin to feel that more in Juneand moving into the third quarter. And on the other one, the interestrate [effects], the lags are of course even longer so that they canplay out over a longer period of time. We have by the way, PresidentForrestal, about 3-3/4 percent growth on a quarterly average basisprojected under "B" for the third quarter and then 4-1/2 percent forthe fourth quarter. So, we would have a strengthening in the thirdquarter, presumably.MR. SYRON. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. To catch up a bit with you on where you arecompared to where you thought you were: I don't know what you werelooking at in terms of alternatives in your midyear review last yearbut you mentioned an easing in policy since last summer. If at thattime you had run your model contemplating a drop of 200 basis pointsin the funds rate over the next nine months, what would you have beenprojecting for the Committee in terms of monetary growth?MR. KOHN. I'm sure I would have been projecting severalpercentage points more than we had, but at the same time we did embodyin the projections to the Committee last year and in February of thisyear an expectation of downward shifts in money demand. So, I don'tthink we would have been as far off as you might imagine just fromfeeding that [funds rate decline] through because we were aware at thetime that things were out of kilter relative to the standard models.We allowed for that; last February we were predicting only 3-1/2 or 4percent [M2] growth for 1992. So, we had allowed all along for someslippage there. But I'm sure we would have been predicting probablyabout 2 percentage points more--maybe instead of 3-1/2 percent morelike 5-1/2 percent for 1992--if you had told me in July that we weregoing to have 2 percentage points lower interest rates.MR. JORDAN. With your past experience with the model, whatis the probability you would assign of an offsetting error goingforward? Is that a tendency you have any confidence in?MR. KOHN. Well, there used to be, but I don't have muchconfidence in that right now given that we've had a string of abouteight shortfalls in a row counting the second quarter of this year. Acouple of years ago I would have said that I'd expect some offsettingerrors and come out about right. But I don't expect that now. We arenot projecting an offsetting error in our projections of 3-1/2 percentfor 1992 and 4 percent for 1993 for M2 growth consistent with theGreenbook GNP; we do not have offsetting errors built in. We havecontinued increases in velocity. We do have a fading out of some ofthe shift that's occurring; instead of continued downward shifts wehave it fading out gradually.MR. JORDAN. Okay, that answer suggests a one-time leveladjustment on M2, a mirror image of what happened in 1983 when MMDAswere introduced.MR. KOHN. Right.-36-5/19/92MR. JORDAN. We got double-digit growth of M2 for about ayear. We all recognized it as a shift of the level and then resumed[with] what a model [would predict] afterwards.MR. KOHN. Right.MR. JORDAN. Is that the way you would characterize thisperiod?MR. KOHN. Well, no, in the sense that in 1982 one couldidentify a specific deregulation event. We knew the MMDAs werecoming. We actually surveyed people to find out what they wereshifting into NOW accounts and whatnot. In one sense you're right:If the shifting stopped and it was just a level adjustment, that wouldbe fine. I'd have more confidence in that if I saw the shifting stop.But in an underlying economic sense, I think a very different kind ofthing is going on. One can't identify it so strongly with an externalderegulation or technology change as we had with Ml in the mid-1970s.It's something much deeper in the intermediation process and I thinkharder to analyze.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. What's the sample period, Don, over which youestimate your standard model?MR. KOHN. I think it's about 1963 to 1986. Is that right,Dave?MR. D. LINDSEY. I think it goes up to 1988 now.MR. KOHN. It's the same model, however, that we used in theconference we had in 1987 on money demand.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Don, in your comments about the structure ofinterest rates and the yield curve, I don't think I heard you sayanything about the supply factor and the impact that has on rates. Isthat in your mind not an issue?MR. KOHN. Well, I think it's a smaller issue than expectedin increases in real interest rates because of where we've drivenshort-term real rates and perhaps inflation as well. I tend todiscount it to a certain extent. On the supply, one thinks of notonly government but even more particularly corporations and householdsshifting way out on the yield curve. On the other hand, we have hadthe households supplying the funds in some sense through shifts intobonds and mutual funds. It probably had some effect but a small onerelative to the other [factors], in my judgment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Could I follow up on Jerry Jordan's question?At what point do you predict that the leveling off of velocity willoccur?-37-5/19/92MR. KOHN. Well, in terms of our models we actually have thedemand shift pretty well dying out by next year. We do have anincrease in velocity next year on the order of 1 percent. We wouldview that partly as still a working down of some things like savingsaccounts and NOW accounts, in our models anyhow. And I think thatwill probably be true in real life as well. Rates on some of thesetypes of accounts, like NOW accounts and savings accounts, willcontinue to drop very slowly over an extended period of time inresponse to the lower rates. So, we will have an increase in velocitynext year but not really a money demand shift.MR. LINDSEY. Could we call that a continuing response to thesteepness of the yield curve?MR. KOHN. No, that [effect] sort of dies out. The way theyield curve plays out in our model is that it is affecting [M2 growth]this year and is rather neutral for 1993. It's not affecting it muchone way or another.MR. LINDSEY. What happens when the yield curve starts tolevel out?MR. KOHN. Well, assuming that the CD rates then come intocloser alignment with market rates and market rates level out, thenI'd expect some reflows into M2.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Don?MR. MCTEER. On the question of resumed bank lending, haveyou taken much account of the risk-based deposit insurance as well asthe risk-based capital coming into view?MR. KOHN. Only a little, I think. We implicitly had a sensethat banks would not be actively pursuing deposits in order to makeloans in part because the cost of making loans is going to be higher.We have not specifically factored in the risk-based premium. We had,I believe, a notion that premiums would be higher; whether they wouldbe risk-based or not is another issue. That may be more an issue ofdistribution of loans throughout the banking system rather than thetotal.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions? If not, why don't Iget started. Listening to this general conversation, it creates asomewhat better outlook than I was perceiving as I walked into theroom--not a great deal better, but enough to be somewhat noticeable.The general consensus around here, which is clearly supported by thedata, is that the economy is moving forward on a fairly broad frontbut that nothing seems to be moving very quickly. There doesn't seemto be significant, outsized momentum in any sector, but it does seemto be gradual and pervasive across a fairly broad [spectrum].The crucial question, however, is how fast [the expansion inthe economy] really is. I think the issue that Mike Prell raised withrespect to the first-quarter GNP problems is a clear indication thatthere is something peculiar in our data system. There may besomething to the argument that the payroll series could be moredeficient this time than usual. The general argument that we all canmake with respect to month-by-month changes in employment is that the-38-5/19/92standard error of the employment change in the household series isvery high. It isn't all that high if you take a time frame of four,five, six, or seven months, average two or three months on one end andtwo or three months on the other, and calculate the standard error ofthat change; it's obviously very substantially lower. So, it's hardto believe that with a sample of 60,000 [in the household series],with some historical parallelism to the payroll series, that theargument has to be that the payroll series is really beingrepresentative and that the man-hour data that are implicit in it arethe best indicator for industrial production because, remember,industrial production is weaker than the GDP. Obviously, if wedecided that the household payroll series was accurate and built upthe gross domestic product side with those data, then the statisticaldiscrepancy, which is the problem with the first quarter, would narrowvery considerably. And, obviously, what you would get is asignificant rise in the saving rate in the first quarter which, ofcourse, is where the discrepancy change gets offset in the accounts.When you look at that, you ask if it is possible that the economy isreally growing at 3-1/2 to 4 percent [and] that we have a saving ratewhich suggests that there is actually room for consumption to movefaster than income; that is sort of a scenario that suggests there ismore buoyancy in this outlook than the first-quarter data show. Thetruth of the matter is that I'm not sure anyone can judge that. Theanecdotal evidence raises questions as to whether the economy hasanywhere near that type of momentum. Even though the orders data inmanufacturing look somewhat better, they are not consistent with thetype of significant rise in employment in manufacturing that one mustpresume would be part of the acceleration in household employment ofthe size or order of magnitude that we've been seeing in recentmonths. I conclude that we're probably doing somewhat better inemployment than the payroll series [indicates] but far short of thehousehold series [increase] in that the economy in the first quarterwas fairly good.The only question I would have with it is whether it is toomuch too soon in the sense that rather than going into the secondquarter with inventory liquidation, we're going in with very modestliquidation and with upside momentum. If one looks at the data asthey are materializing with respect to auto sales, starts, and thelike, they don't suggest a really robust second quarter.It also looks as though we are financing this recovery veryheavily internally. If you look at the household sector, for example,there's very little borrowing. That essentially means that both grossasset expansion and gross liability expansion are very significantlybelow normal. That is another way of saying that M2, which is on thehousehold asset side, is exceptionally slow and that the slowborrowing, with everyone financing internally, is an element of riskaversion. Clearly, that has also been the case, although I suspect toan increasingly lesser extent in the corporate sector where one mustpresume, if these numbers are correct, that a very significantincrease in cash flow is going on and that even though we have somefairly heavy borrowing externally a very large amount of financingwith internal funds is going on pretty much as usual.So, this is in a way an odd sort of recovery, one that we'vediscussed at length in connection with the question of balance sheetrepair, which is another way of saying that a significant amount of-39-5/19/92cash flow is going to pay off debt rather than going to theconsumption of goods and services or investment. The outlook does notseem to have changed significantly from the last time we were herewhen there appeared to be some form of financial ceiling on theeconomy basically represented by the balance sheet pressures andessentially reflected in the fact that every time the economy seems topick up, long-term interest rates seem to go up. What we have learnedapparently is that that is having an effect on a number of areas, veryspecifically on the housing area, which leads me to conclude--prettymuch as I have been concluding since the beginning of the year--thatthe crucial statistic in the outlook is nominal long-term interestrates. To the extent that they have a significant effect in thehousing market and the turnover of mortgages, refinancing, they havebeen a critical factor in the general forward thrust of the economy.I think we're also learning that the inclination at the longend of the market for rates to move lower with lower federal fundsrates is increasingly dubious. While I must say that I can't give apersuasive analytical argument at this particular stage, I nonethelesswould be willing to put money on the table that moving the fed fundsrate lower right now would not bring a lower long-term bond yield.However, that may not continue to be the case. As a consequence ofthat, I would be disinclined to try to move the funds rate lower now,but if it turns out that at some point it begins to look as though wemight be able to prod the long-term rate lower were we to move thefunds rate, I personally would be more inclined in that direction.Frankly, my overall view is that we are probably more likely as aCommittee to be moving to lower rates than to higher rates in the nextseveral months. The next move is more likely to be down than up, butI don't think the odds are skewed enough in that direction to argue infavor of an asymmetric directive. I must admit that I don't have anystrong feelings personally either way. I would be somewhat inclinedtoward symmetry if for no other reason than that in listening to thetone of the individual District discussions, things are somewhatbetter than I would have suspected; but I could live with anasymmetric directive. In either case, I would argue that we shouldadopt alternative B. I would prefer symmetric but could very easilygo with asymmetric if that's what the Committee wants. PresidentParry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I would strongly support yourrecommendation. It seems to me quite likely that the economy could begrowing at a rate of 3 percent over the next six quarters. At thesame time, all of our forecasts are showing that inflation is notgoing to show significant improvement. In that kind of environmentand with those kinds of prospects, I think it would be very desirablenot to change policy and also to have a symmetrical directive. Imight also point out that if we get a very significant upward revisionof those first-quarter data and the next thing that hits the financialmarket is the fact that we had an asymmetric toward ease directive, Idon't think that would be received very favorably in the financialmarkets at all. So, I believe the case for a symmetric directive isquite strong. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I could support an asymmetricdirective if it were toward tightness and I could accommodate myself-40-5/19/92to a symmetric directive as you have suggested. It seems to me thatwe do encounter some likelihood over the coming period that the fedfunds rate might need to be closer to 5 percent than to 3-3/4 percent;and money growth, M2, right now doesn't give us any leeway to makethat move at this point in time. So, symmetric will work for me. ButI just wanted you to know my leanings and also my inability to supportthe asymmetric direction.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. I would support alternative B with asymmetric directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. I support alternative B with a symmetricdirective.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I understand from your logic thatwe should keep our options open. That is a very compelling case. Oneof the first things I learned at my first [Committee] meeting was thatthe "would/mights" were not an insect but in fact inhabit our monetaryhalls. This sounds to me as not a "would/might" situation but a"would/would" situation. I think we want a symmetric directive butwant to keep our options open to indicate that we [are prepared] torespond to economic data. So, in stating my opinion, perhaps I'masking a question: Does your suggestion for symmetry mean a"would/would" directive or a "might/might" directive?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't have a clue!MR. LINDSEY. Then I would recommend the "would/would" as anapproach if we want symmetry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me say this: I will be disinclined,frankly, to support moving lower unless we see some real signs thatthis [recovery] is starting to stall out. And I'd need a little morethan just a vague notion; I'd need a set of data suggesting acumulative process that in my judgment probably would incline thisCommittee toward moving lower even from a symmetric directive. But Iwould be a little cautious if we kept seeing a steady economicrecovery and M2 looked awfully weak. I would conclude from that thatwe have more of a problem with M2 than we have with the economy. Butif we saw both beginning to look rather shabby, then I think it wouldbe incumbent on us to move lower. I would also say that should we geta change in the economic environment, it would be appropriate for usto have a telephone conference and discuss it because, if there is areal change in the economic environment, the group around this tablecollectively would have a good sense of that. If there seemed to besome evidence that this recovery was faltering and it were notconfirmed in the individual Districts, I would question the data. So,even though I'm saying we should keep our options open, I do think weought to be cautious about moving too quickly unless the evidencereally begins to mount. This is a very unusual set of circumstancesand a type of period where we could make the kind of mistakes that-41-5/19/92monetary policy often makes at the bottom of the cycle. I don't knowwhether that's "would/would" or "might/might."MR. KOHN. The Secretary's view is that "might" captures thatthought better than "would."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, following on your last comment, Mr.Chairman, I too favor "B," symmetric. In part, I think we have to becareful not to respond to what we already know--the sense that wecontinue to look at a modest recovery by historic standards.Presumably, that's what we expect. We continue to expect for the nextsix weeks anyway to look at pretty sluggish M2 expansion; that's whatthe Bluebook expects at least. If that isn't acceptable, we ought towant to change policy. With regard to M2, since I didn't weigh inearlier, I might try to muddy the waters a little further right now.Governor Lindsey's point about the volatility of M2 velocity in theshort run is undoubtedly correct. I recall that we ran somesimulations several years ago that said that if we really wanted toapply fairly rigorous confidence intervals to the annual M2 targets,then the ranges shouldn't be 3 or 4 percentage points wide; theyreally had to be 6 to 8 percentage points wide if we wanted to bereasonably confident of achieving them. That tells you that there's alot of short-run volatility in velocity. As to whether M2 is going toor has to bounce back at some point, I must admit I'm gettingincreasingly skeptical. I think we may need to devote a little moretime to that question and the role of that aggregate. If I thinkabout what has transpired recently and what is different, it seems tome that customers of depository institutions today--customers broadlydefined--clearly face a wider range of choices than they did certainly10 or 20 years ago, the time encompassed in the estimation period ofthese models. Clearly, banks and other institutions face a much widerrange of choices when it comes to pricing and other policies than theydid 10 or 20 years ago. And we're also operating for the most part ina lower interest rate environment than we have over a sustained periodof time. Maybe we have to go back to the '60s to find something likethis, at least for short rates. So, as I think about all that, it'snot clear to me that there's going to be some automatic correction inM2 or indeed that a correction in M2 is desirable in thesecircumstances. A lot has changed.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Banks have disappeared; depositoryinstitutions have disappeared. The way we measure some or most of M2almost surely--MR. STERN. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's an interesting question: When doesthis long-term trend we are all forecasting begin to affect the M2data?MR. LAWARE. Congress is working on it! [Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Since you have the floor, GovernorLaWare, why don't you stay with it.-42-5/19/92MR. LAWARE. Well, for all the reasons cited in my earliersermon, I support your recommendation of "B" symmetric although Iwould like to identify myself with Governor Angell's preference forasymmetric toward restraint.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. I always have to translate what I think itreally means when people talk in terms of raising and lowering thefunds rate in the sense of tightening and easing policy. I've come tounderstand that easing in the sense of the funds rate doesn't mean weare more stimulative necessarily and raising the funds rate doesn'tmean we are more restrictive. We have difficulties [not only] incommunicating [that] outside this room, but translating it inside.I was pleased that Governor Lindsey mentioned the 1930s inthat context of easing and tightening because otherwise I would havebeen shy about mentioning something that relates to 60 years ago. Iread that period a little differently in that, first of all, assetprices historically have always risen in advance of output prices andthe reverse, taking the stock market as the measure of asset prices.And, of course, in that earlier period asset prices were falling verysharply; and it turned out to be a good indicator of what was going tobe happening to output prices, deflation. Governor Lindsey mentionedhow money shrank by one-third in that period as interest rates fell,so was policy tighter or easier? I think it was tight. The moneymeasure, though, was a very narrow measure, even narrower than today'spublished Ml. And today the very narrow measures, i.e., reserves, Ml,[unintelligible] are growing extraordinarily rapidly. And I think weinterpret those as biasing our actions in the direction of stimulus tothe point that, if credit demand grows and short-term rates are underupward pressure, a higher funds rate would be interpreted as a tighterpolicy. I would view it as stimulative if we were lagging behind themarket. I think there is a risk going forward as the economy gainsmomentum that we could lag behind the market and our actions would bestimulative while raising the funds rate would have the label "tight"on it. If we should get a good rally in the bond market--something Ihope very, very much for--and a flattening [of the yield curve] fromthe long end, and if that should carry with it downward pressure onthe bill rate on a full-coupon equivalent basis toward a level wellbelow the funds rate, then I think it would be appropriate to lowerthe funds rate and not hold it up artificially. If the bill rate wererallying down we would have to drain reserves and contract monetarygrowth, and I wouldn't like to see that. So, I come down on the sideof symmetric with a bias in the direction of up, especially promptlyup, if credit demands so warrant.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I was right with you absolutely allthe way as you went through your analysis right up until the end. Imust say that although the general tone of the comments seems morepositive now than it was the last time, I do think there are someunusual factors here. And I continue to think that the risks oneconomic growth are on the down side. You said, and I certainlyagree, that in the near term we are more likely to ease than we are totighten. Therefore, it seems to me that the directive ought to-43-5/19/92reflect those possibilities. As a consequence, I'd be in favor of"B," but I'd continue with asymmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I'd favor "B" asymmetric toward tightening. Ithink we've had a stimulative policy in place, no matter how you lookat it, for a long period of time. And, at a minimum, that'sconsistent with recovery and expansion. Consistent with what Jerrywas saying, I also think there's a risk as this expansion progressesthat our policy, in terms of interest rates, is likely to beinconsistent with progress toward price stability. We ought to bemindful of that. I was quite comfortable with what you said inresponding to Governor Lindsey, Alan. Your earlier comments aboutperhaps seeing an opportunity to coax long rates lower worried me alittle. That may be possible at points in time, but I think it's veryrisky business at the level of short-term real rates we have right nowand could well backfire, for what that's worth. Finally, I could livewith your prescription of "B" symmetrical but I'd prefer "B"asymmetrical toward tightening.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think your proposition is reasonable and Isupport it. I must say that it's hard for me to imagine a set ofcircumstances that would be convincing to tighten policy in the nextfive or six weeks, given where the economy has been and where it islikely to go and all the uncertainties about the money supply. Maybe[that view] reflects the fact that Philadelphia is in the northeastpart of the country.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. I would support your recommendation, Mr.Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. "B" symmetric, Mr. Chairman, with yourclarification about your reluctance to move in either direction unlesswe had some confirmation in the real economy as well as theaggregates. I think you're dead right on that and I was going tothrow that [comment] out had you not done it ahead of me. Anotherthing we need to address is this alternative sentence proposed for thedirective. That sentence indicates we are expecting at least amoderate resumption of expansion in the aggregates, and I'd like tosee that in there rather than the old sentence that we had.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The reason for it, obviously, is thatthe original procedure would have given us an odd statement.President Syron.MR. SYRON. I support "B" symmetric. I hope we need totighten before the next meeting; I doubt it. Coming back to language,on this whole issue of symmetry I remember long debates about"would/coulds" and "could/woulds," and I find it very hard to getexcited one way or the other about a consonant. So, in that regard, Iwould go along with what you suggested.-44-5/19/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Well, using Jerry Jordan's model, I would haveto prefer asymmetric toward ease with the T-bill rate well below thefed funds rate. With that model I wonder a bit how we get a clearview of what the Treasury bill rate really is other than a predictionof what we're likely to do next. And I do agree in general with thenotion that we are going to have to think very carefully about realrates as we go through this process. However, I simply don't see theloan demand picking up again. And I don't think it's just M2; it'stotal debt, as the Chairman mentioned, as well. So, I would preferasymmetric toward ease in this environment but I would supportsymmetric along with the stance of monitoring developments as we roarthrough this 2 percent quarter! [Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I certainly would support "B." Asfar as symmetric or asymmetric, my preference would be towardasymmetric. I may have heard some good things about the real economy,but I don't consider it all that much stronger than where we were somemonths ago when we were talking about being willing to live with moneygrowth above the midpoint. And now suddenly we're very satisfied withit being at the bottom [of the range] and are satisfied that [it willbe sufficient] to carry us forward. We're now relying on anaccelerating velocity that we really can't predict. I don't see thatthere is all that much strength going forward. But I certainly canlive with symmetric language given that we would have a consultationif there's other news coming forward.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "B" symmetric is fine with me. Andjust a quick footnote: I don't know when we'll have to tighten; itcould be soon; it could be later. But I'll tell you this: If thatjudgment is reached in a context in which M2 is still on the floor,it's going to present a mighty tricky issue in terms of formulatingthe logic and the public relations to go with it. And it's quitepossible that that could happen.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I know what the solution to that is.Give the job to Don Kohn to get a new set of Ms! Although I will saythis: Unless it's very close by, that would certainly indicate thatM2 is really very far off target. I was quite sympathetic withPresident Hoenig's remarks about how we were talking about M2 earlier.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In the last six weeks to two months Ihave been somewhat dismayed by what has been happening to M2 on thegrounds that it has been a very useful indicator for us. And I amincreasingly coming to the conclusion that something is wrong with themeasure. As I indicated before, whenever you get a measure [thatpreviously] explained several different things like the P*/pricerelationship, the income/velocity relationship, the relationship ofbalance sheets, and all those things [the issue is whether] you couldjust draw a new line and everything would fall back into place. It-45-5/19/92really raises a question as to whether it's the single [measure]that's out of line with everything else.MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, there is active staff work not onlyhere but at the Reserve Banks looking at different measures, and itwill be a topic on the agenda at the Financial Analysis Committeemeeting in St. Louis in June; there is at least one paper on that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Finally, Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. I would prefer "B" asymmetric toward ease, butI'll support symmetric recognizing that we may have to talk again inthe intermeeting period.MR. LINDSEY. I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman, I asked a question butI never stated my view. I'd just like to indicate my preference forthe record, especially since I see that my colleague to my left has medown as favoring symmetric. My preference would be for asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I had put down that your preference isasymmetric.MR. LINDSEY. Okay.MR. ANGELL. Asymmetric in which direction? [Laughter]MR. MULLINS. He's asymmetric to you!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I tried to get a view of the Committee,and it's very clearly heavily asymmetric toward symmetric. [Laughter]Let me say this. I think that Don's recommendation with respect tothe alternate sentence really makes a good deal of sense. Unless Ihear an objection--MR. LINDSEY. Could you tell us where to turn to read thatsentence, please?MR. BERNARD. At the bottom of page 15 in the Bluebook.MR. LINDSEY. I'm sorry, Chairman Greenspan: "Contemplatedreserves conditions..."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The very bottom of page 15.MR. KOHN. I would write in there 2-1/2 and 1-1/2 percent; Idon't like writing 1/4 percent on growth targets.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anybody have any objections to theinsertion of Don's recommended language?MR. ANGELL. I understand the "might" but do you want"somewhat" on both sides?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have not gotten there yet. We're onthe very last sentence, the bracketed sentence.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, if the numbers are 2-1/2 and-46-5/19/921-1/2 percent, I'd question the word "resumption." Are we talkingabout a resumption to 2-1/2?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's a good point.MR. SYRON. No. You're right.MR. LINDSEY. This doesn't make a lot of sense.MR. SYRON. With a resumption of growth in M2--MR. MULLINS. It shows our problem.MR. LINDSEY. We don't have growth in M2, so I suppose we areopen for a resumption.MR. ANGELL. We might take out the words "a resumption of."MR. LINDSEY. So the phrasing would be?MR. ANGELL. "With growth of..."SPEAKER(?). That's better.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Agreed without objection. Will theSecretary read the language?MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. In the context of the Committee'slong-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economicgrowth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, andmonetary developments, slightly greater reserve restraint or slightlylesser restraint might be acceptable in the intermeeting period. Thecontemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent withgrowth of M2 and M3 over the period from April to June at annual ratesof about 2-1/2 and 1-1/2 percent, respectively."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would you call the roll?MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Hoenig YesPresident Jordan YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Lindsey YesPresident Melzer YesGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Phillips YesPresident Syron YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much. Our next meetingwill be a two-day meeting, June 30th and July 1.END OF MEETING-47-