Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 31, 1992A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 31, 1992, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice ChairmanMr. AngellMr. HoenigMr. JordanMr. KelleyMr. LaWareMr. LindseyMr. MelzerMr. MullinsMs. PhillipsMr. SyronMessrs. Boehne, Keehn, McTeer, and Stern, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents ofthe Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and EconomistMr. Bernard, Deputy SecretaryMr. Coyne, Assistant SecretaryMr. Gillum, Assistant SecretaryMr. Patrikis, Deputy General CounselMr. Prell, EconomistMr. Truman, EconomistMessrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis,Promisel, Siegman, Simpson, and Stockton,Associate EconomistsMr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. McDonough, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Madigan, Assistant Director, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Division of Monetary Affairs, Board ofGovernorsMessrs. Broaddus, Lang, Rosenblum, Scheld, andMs. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Philadelphia,Dallas, Chicago, and Atlanta, respectivelyMessrs. Fieleke, Judd, and Miller, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, San Francisco,and Minneapolis, respectivelyMs. Krieger, Manager, Open Market Operations,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMarch 31, 1992CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I wanted to welcome Jerry Jordan to hisfirst meeting of the FOMC, but I understand that he attended his firstmeeting in August 1969. So, I have decided we'd just say: "Hello,welcome back" and leave it at that! The first item on the agenda isalways, of course, the approval of the minutes, and I would seek amotion.SPEAKER(?). So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. The next item on theagenda is the report on foreign currency operations, and I'll call onBill McDonough.MR. MCDONOUGH. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any questions for Mr.McDonough?MR. JORDAN. May I ask one clarification?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Go ahead.MR. JORDAN. Something out of my past struck me here aboutthe BIS. Twenty-odd years ago, in an environment of a weak dollar,the Germans were intervening and acquiring more dollars than theywanted to put into U.S. Treasuries, especially special certificates ofindebtedness, at very low yields. So, they were making deposits atthe BIS for a period and that gave rise to a phenomenon that later waslabeled "rabbits out of hats." When the Bundesbank realized what wasgoing on, they drastically cut their deposits at the BIS, forcing acontraction of dollar credits by the BIS. I would want to be assuredon this that we're not making the same mistake in reverse by puttingDM on deposit there and having them extend the DM credits. They arenot a central bank. I don't know what the full set of transactions isthat they are doing, and it struck me as interesting that we're sortof reaching for yield on our foreign portfolio but not on the domesticportfolio. Every dollar's worth of DM we hold in CDs at the BIS isthat much less U.S. Treasuries that we hold.MR. MCDONOUGH. I suppose, Mr. Chairman, the answer partially[relates to whether] we should reduce further our overall DM holdings.The reduction of DM10 billion this year and the sale of our interestearnings, which I mentioned in my note to the Committee last week, isabout the maximum amount that would lead the Bundesbank to feel thatwe were operating in a friendly manner between central banks. Thatwas about the maximum, in conversations that President Corrigan and Ihad with Mr. Tietmeyer, that the Germans could really go along with.So, that's a partial answer to the question. The shift of the DM6billion was partially to get some additional yield3/31/92With regard to our arrangement with the BIS, just in terms ofour own liquidity, we do have an early liquidation agreement withthem. Therefore, from the standpoint of managing our own affairs, Ithink the move to the BIS is something with which we can becomfortable.MR. TRUMAN. I think the other distinction, President Jordan,between the period 20 years ago and today is that 20 years ago theoperations took place without the concurrence or even the knowledge ofthe U. S. monetary authorities. In this case we're movingto the BIS with the Bundesbank's knowledgeSo, it'sfolded into their monetary policy and they have the capacity to offsetthe temporary effectsThe other side of it is thatMR. JORDAN. But in lieu of other sources funds to the BISwill not [unintelligible] their balance sheets?MR. TRUMAN. The balances moved to the BISCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Mr. McDonough?MR. MCTEER. Yes. I don't have a question on these specifictransactions but as another sort of newcomer here I've been listeningto these reports and I'm never quite sure exactly what the role of theFOMC is in exchange market intervention and what our goal really is ina world of flexible exchange rates. That's not necessarily a questionfor now, but sometime I'd like to hear a discussion of precisely whatwe are trying to accomplish in these kinds of transactions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we ought to have that topic fora luncheon discussion at some point. We have periodically doneprecisely what you're suggesting, but it's probably worthwhile to redoit every once in a while to make certain that we're all still in thesame boat.MR. MCTEER. Well, we have three new presidents and two newgovernors this year, so I think it might be helpful. I know it wouldbe to me.MR. TRUMAN. President McTeer, as the Chairman said, twoyears ago we did have an investigation, if I can put it that way, ofthis matter. Maybe I've been derelict, but I have provided the newgovernors with a copy of that study and, if the new presidents wouldlike a copy of that document, they can get it if it's not already intheir Banks. I think it will be useful as background to this matter.The simple point is that the System has independent legal authority tooperate and we have set procedures that have been in place andreviewed periodically over the last thirty years. We have the abilityto make our own choices about whether we operate with the Treasury ornot. In fact, as Bill has described, this last period very clearly3/31/92illustrates the usefulness both of having our independent authorityand of using it from time to time because it serves in my opinion toimprove the overall character of the policy decision.MR. MCTEER. I don't really question our authority. I'm justnot sure what we're trying to use that authority in pursuit of. I'mjust not really clear on that.MR. TRUMAN. There is a directive that is approved by thisCommittee at least once a year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I think the president is requestingthe answer to the age-old question: Does it work? And this is stilla dubious proposition about which studies go back and forth. I thinkthe great value of the presentation a couple of years ago that Ted wasmentioning was that it really went through the literature and thevarious studies which we have been engaged in and endeavored toconclude in what areas such intervention could be productive and havebeneficial effects and in what areas it seemed unlikely to do so.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that it might besomewhat worthwhile at this point to reassure the new members that in[our review of] this issue two years ago most of us who were on theside of not having as heavy a hand and not building up our foreigncurrency balances have been very appreciative of the fact that theFederal Reserve's position under the Chairman's leadership has been inthe direction that we prefer. I have a great deal of appreciation forthe fact that there's a political question involved here. And itseems to me that our being absent from a significant portion of that[intervention] speaks a lot louder than the $25 million participationthat we did. So, I feel in accord with the direction we're going inand I'm satisfied, but I'm not suggesting that we ought not to havethe review. Mr. Chairman, I'd be very happy to move to ratify thetransactions, if that's appropriate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let's first double check onwhether there were any other questions.MR. MELZER. Just a quick question.MR. MCDONOUGH.MR. MELZER. Fundamentally and technically.3/31/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions? If not, is thereany objection to Mr. McDonough's request for advance clearance for theDM sale? Finally, would you like to make that motion [again], Wayne?MR. ANGELL. Yes, I would. Anything you say, Mr. Chairman![Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I won't tell you what motion you made!MR. KELLEY. He was carrying out the vital function ofeducating his fellow member here on a particular point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. As a somewhatrelated issue, we have an exchange of letters with the TreasuryDepartment. I call upon Ted Truman to elaborate on the subjectmatter.MR. TRUMAN. The Committee will remember--those of you whowere here--that at the last meeting the Committee voted to reduce thesize of the Treasury warehousing facility from $10 billion to $5billion, a level at which it had been for most of the last 15 years.As the Chairman said, in the aftermath of that decision there was anexchange of letters between Treasury Secretary Brady and the Chairman.As I noted at the last meeting, this reduction from $10 billion to $5billion caused a certain amount of anxiety at the Treasury. There wasconcern or nervousness about whether the Exchange Stabilization Fund,which remained pretty [fully invested] on the foreign exchange siderelative to the dollar side, would be available to carry out othervital functions. Secretary Brady wrote to the Chairman expressing hisconcerns to this effect. The Chairman replied making three basicpoints. One was that he could contemplate a wide variety ofcircumstances in which he would strongly support an increase [in thesize of the warehousing facility]. Secondly, he expressed hisconfidence that the Committee would give full, careful, andexpeditious consideration to any reasonable proposal in that regard.[Lastly,] he said he could not guarantee in advance what the Committeemight do with such a proposal. On the second point, just to cleareverything up, we mentioned to the Committee last time that it was ourhope and expectation that the Treasury would unwind the remaining $2billion of DM that they had warehoused with the System. And they areplanning to do that; they are ready to do that effective on Thursday.So, the facility will be wound down to zero effective as of that date.[Secretary's note: Copies of the letters referred to by Mr. Trumanare appended to this transcript.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Ted? If not, let'smove on to the Domestic Desk, Mr. Sternlight.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Sternlight?3/31/92MR. PARRY. Peter, you made reference to the strong demandsfor credit as playing a role in terms of what has happened to interestrates. But the debt aggregates seem to suggest, when you look at whatactually has been new debt, that there really hasn't [been much]; ithas been quite weak. I guess most of it is mainly [unintelligible].Is that really much of a factor?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I'm commenting on it as I see it fromthe market's perspective of enormous Treasury issuance and stillpretty heavy corporate issuance. I realize that if you fold ineverything, including the bank loan demand and so forth, that it'sweak or not all that substantial. But just from the standpoint ofwhat the trading markets are coping with it has been substantial.MR. PRELL. There's probably also some greater volume of netmortgage financing and it's clearly at the long end.MR. PARRY. But when it comes to the debt aggregate it justdoesn't show up as being very strong; it's very weak.MR. PRELL. There's a very modest pickup from the fourthquarter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions?MR. SYRON. Peter alluded to this. Is there any more to tellabout these stories of a squeeze in the 5- and 7-year note areas?MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, as I said, we are following up onthose stories. On the 7-year note we had a rather formal, organizedroundup of additional information and have contacted a number of thedealers to talk specifically about how they are conducting theiroperations in that issue. We've also had several conversations withrespect to the December 5-year issue, which has been a kind of on andoff special. It went off and then in the last couple of days cameback on special. There, too, it has seemed to us that these were theresults of understandable investment decisions by market participants.We don't get any sense of market manipulation activity that, at leastat this point, makes us feel that we have to proceed further in thatvein.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions? If not, wouldsomebody like to move to ratify the transactions since the Februarymeeting?MR. SYRON. So moved.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Sternlight stillhas the floor with respect to the memorandum that he sent out a coupleof weeks ago.MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions or comments?3/31/92MR. SYRON. Peter, I completely agree with the conclusions inyour paper. I have a question on one of the statements in it aboutthe decision that was made some time ago to maintain the liquidity ofthe System's portfolio.MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MR. SYRON. In looking at the reasons to maintain theliquidity of the portfolio, what are the relative weights? Is it[primarily] a concern that if we own [securities] at the longer end ofthe market there are risks for gains and losses as we go in and out oris [the dominant concern] the risk of impacting the longer market morethan we might impact the short market? I was trying to understand.MR. STERNLIGHT. It's more a question, President Syron, ofhaving ample holdings in the very short areas so that if on shortnotice we had to lighten our portfolio by substantial amounts within amatter of months or even weeks we could do that by either running offbill holdings or selling very short-term securities.MR. SYRON. That has to do with the depth of the short marketas compared to the depth of the long market?MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.MR. SYRON. Okay. So, it's the disruption in the market youwould have to deal with. Theoretically, you could still do it on thelong market but you might have a greater impact.MR. STERNLIGHT. There would be a disruptive effect if wesold large amounts in the longer end.MR. SYRON. Okay.MR. KOHN. This first arose when Continental borrowedbillions and billions of dollars in a very short period of time and wehad to offset the reserve effects of that. I think there was aconcern that at a time of financial crisis there is definitely aflight toward Treasury bills and that would be a market that we couldeasily sell into. But we weren't sure what would be happening in thecoupon market. And selling into a market that might already be--MR. SYRON. Tumultuous.MR. KOHN. --treacherous or tender would not be a good idea.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Hold on a second. President Black wasfirst.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think Peter has done an excellentjob of outlining the history of this for us and he has made anexcellent case for a high degree of liquidity. That has been neededin part because we have had to offset reserves supplied through thediscount window and also through foreign exchange operations. Theonly point I would make is that a lot of us have reservations abouthow much we ought to deal in the foreign exchange market. The changesin the discount mechanism and the law that was passed last yearsuggested that we lessen our emergency lending through the discount3/31/92window. So, I think this gives us a little more opportunity afterwe've sopped up the reserves released by the reduction in reserverequirements and through the "encouragement at the margin"--I believethat's the term you used, Peter--toward getting longer-termsecurities. If there is some premium on those rates, this could helpto reduce that premium to some extent, although I don't really buythat argument to any great degree. I think we have a little bettercase now for intervening than we did before but it's only a marginalcase, and I don't feel very strongly about it. We also would earn alittle more from the Treasury if we did more, but who can tell?Maybe, we'd need more liquidity and a further reduction in the reserverequirements. It was a good paper; I thought it was very, very good.MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Peter, let's say we did tilt toward doing moreoperations in longer coupons. I don't know what your reaction wouldbe, but it seems to me that a cynical market observer could questionwhat that implies in terms of the System's long-term commitment towardprice stability. I don't want to carry this too far, but to theextent we are seen trying to jawbone long rates down or conductingoperations that substantively are not going to have a lot of impact,if someone looked at that cynically they could view that as window-dressing to try to hold long rates down while perhaps we were tryingto pursue basic policies that weren't consistent with price stability.Do you see the opportunities for that kind of cynical interpretation?MR. STERNLIGHT. I do, President Melzer. That makes me veryleery of doing anything, as I say, very noticeable in that direction.That's why I would suggest holding any greater effort in that veinvery much at the margin.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the question, however, is: Dowe slow the rate of decline in the average maturity of the portfolio,do we stabilize it, or do we defend against a rise? And despite the$11 billion in Treasury coupon absorption last year, the averagematurity continued to fall. The question is: Do we want to let itcontinue to fall or to stabilize it? I would be surprised if themarkets reacted negatively to our taking actions that tended tostabilize or just slow the rate of decline toward ever shortermaturities in our portfolio. I think the argument is that if weswitch from [slowing the] decline to a rise, that could very easilyturn out to be a counterproductive activity on our part. But I gatherfrom what Peter's memorandum is suggesting that the issue isessentially [whether] to slow the decline.MR. STERNLIGHT. And I think it would have that effect. Thatparticular statistic on the average maturity is very dependent on howwe handle not so much our market purchases but our rollovers andquarterly refundings. We've tilted those quite strongly toward theshort options. That was what we had outlined as a plan to theCommittee in the mid-1980s, following the discussions that Don alludedto. And by virtue of steering our holdings very strongly toward thethree-year option each time, that has tended to work, just as a factorin itself, to bring down that average maturity.3/31/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The purpose then was to increase theliquidity of the portfolio for fear that it might not have beenadequate in the event of some really significant problems with some ofthe larger banks?MR. STERNLIGHT. Right.MR. KOHN. That refunding action itself has no effect on thematurity of the debt held by the public because our allotment is justan "add on" to Treasury auctions.MR. MELZER. My point, Alan, was that there's probably noproblem doing what [Peter is] suggesting, but it's probably better forus if it's just done quietly than if for some reason what we doattracts publicity. That's my point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't think Peter is recommending thatwe--MR. MELZER. No, I know.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Well, I agree with President Melzer andChairman Greenspan on this issue. The pattern has been one of[average] Treasury maturities increasing since the '70s and Systemholdings decreasing in maturity. And that means the public holdingshave increased substantially [in maturity]. Now, I don't think it'san especially good idea to wander around in maturity issues, whetherit's our holdings or Treasury issues. So, I think there's a strongargument to figure out where we want to be. I'm not very comfortablewith discretionary action or anything that could be perceived asdiscretionary action to move along the maturity structure to affectrates, especially in this environment. One only has to look at theway the markets responded to this innocent little reserve requirementcut we did a few weeks ago to document Tom Melzer's assertion ofcynicism in the market. So, I think it would be a bit difficult topull off here, and we ought to be very careful. It's hard tocommunicate what we're doing. But I think it would be useful to stopthe wandering and determine what makes sense as a maturity structureand implement that. And I think that's what Peter's memo does.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.MR. CORRIGAN. I think there really are two issues here. Oneis this question of what should be our strategy as a whole with regardto demands on the portfolio itself. I think that's fundamentally whatPeter's memorandum addresses. For the reasons that a couple of peoplehave already cited, including Don Kohn, it seems to me that thepremium should in fact be on liquidity even though we may need it onlyonce in ten or twenty years. When we need it we better damn well haveit! I think what Peter is suggesting is quite consistent with that.I don't have a great deal of allergy to the average maturity goingdown a little more or slowing down. What Peter suggested seems to meto make a lot of sense.Of course, the other question that looms in the background,which I think is different than a coherent longer-term strategy to3/31/92portfolio management, is this question of whether the System, bybecoming more active in the long end of the market, could or should dosomething of a one-time nature to help somehow or other to tilt theyield curve down. I don't think that issue [unintelligible]. On thatpoint, I have to say that I am increasingly skeptical. I think Petercaptured it right: That the great danger here is that this holds outmore than it could possibly deliver. I ask myself again the questionof why the long rate is so high and so sticky. Peter gave the usualmenu of explanations. Now, I think they're all relevant, but I amcoming more and more to the view that maybe it's not all thatcomplicated. The Treasury is selling $100 billion, give or take, ofnew debt into the market per quarter. It doesn't matter whether someof it is cyclical deficit or RTC financing; it's still $100 billion aquarter. And it's in a context in which for the past year to 18months--this is Bob Parry's point--private credit demands have beenvirtually nonexistent, net. I think part of what we're seeing now is[the realization that] if the economy starts to pick up and if thecredit crunch is about to have run its course and private creditdemands begin to increase even a little when we still have the $100billion a quarter hanging over our heads--and in a context in whichthe appetite of the Japanese for American securities and Treasurysecurities in particular has changed very significantly and is notlikely to reverse itself in the near term--the deck is stacked againstus. In those circumstances, I'd have to say that any overt effort touse our own portfolio management tactics and strategies to wigglearound the long-term rate would run a very sizable risk of backfiring.I would be most reluctant in these circumstances to get ourselves backinto that kind of position.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further comment or questions? Igather from that that there is a general acceptance of the philosophyand thrust of Mr. Sternlight's memorandum with respect to this issue.If that is the case, I think we can move on to the economic situationand call on Messrs. Prell and Truman.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for either gentleman?MR. FORRESTAL. Mike, I'm curious to know why exactly youthink that long-term rates are going to come down over the next year?Is it basically inflationary expectations?MR. PRELL. Well, we do think that the outside world isperhaps overestimating the inflationary effects of this moderategrowth and underestimating the effects of what is generally perceivedto be a continuing fairly sizable amount of slack in the economy. So,I think the possibility of diminution in the markets' inflation fearsis a significant one. Also, as people perceive that only moderategrowth--if we are right--is ahead, that will ease some people's fearsthat we might be opting to do something that could close the margin ofslack more rapidly. I have the sense that perhaps long-term rateshave moved up into the range in which they have been fluctuating for awhile without a particularly sound basis and that we can simply havesome reversal. But I think the fundamental factors are the moderate3/31/92course in the expansion we see and the continuing slack that should bebringing the inflation rate down, not stabilizing it or pushing it upas most outside forecasts have it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Ted, two characteristics of the usual forecastare what was mentioned: the downward trajectory for long-term ratesand also a flat dollar. What are the interest rate developmentsinternationally that are assisting in bringing this about? Forexample, in our model we almost have to constrain it from pushing thevalue of the dollar down in that kind of environment.MR. TRUMAN. I'm not sure what you assume about rates abroad,but on the interest rate side we have essentially the same [amount] ofdecline in long rates. We're assuming that ultimately the Germanswill get things under control and bond rates will drift down as well,though maybe not quite with the same timing as U.S. rates, by about 50basis points over the projection period.MR. PARRY. Japan?MR. TRUMAN. And that includes Japan, though the timing mightbe a little different for German and Japanese rates.MR. PARRY. Would more conventional linkages among ratesproduce a decline in the value of the dollar when one uses the model?MR. TRUMAN. Well, it all depends on the model. Exchangerate models that use longer real interest rates essentially produce anunchanged dollar using these rates.MR. PARRY. They produce an unchanged dollar?MR. TRUMAN. Yes, an unchanged dollar, given our inflationforecast and given our interest rate forecast. We mentioned in theGreenbook that there is one qualification that one might introducehere and that is the issue of what is expected either here or abroad.One can tease out of some of this yield curve information andcertainly out of T-bill futures a view of U.S. interest rates that isdifferent than Mr. Prell's, if I can put it that way. And to theextent that Mr. Prell's true view becomes clear to the markets, onemight argue that that would put downward pressure on the dollar. Ithink the only question is whether there is an analogous error ofjudgment about interest rates abroad. So, there is some downward riskcoming from that disconnected light at the end of the tunnel that hereferred to.MR. PARRY. The Prell factor! Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mike, I have a lot of sympathy for your view ofthe importance of inventories and trying to understand this whole areaof inventories and the risks on either side. There's no definitiveanswer to this, but I was wondering: What is the central tendency ofopinion on how close we've come to the end of this process of [firms]3/31/92changing their optimal, if there is such a thing, inventory/salesratios? Do you see that as a process that is still going on?MR. PRELL. I feel reasonably confident that it is a processthat is ongoing. Certainly, to the extent that there is any evidence,formal or informal, companies indicate that they would like to havelower inventory/sales ratios. In manufacturing, while there has beensome considerable progress, firms still are redesigning theirproduction processes, their relationships with suppliers, and theiroverall inventory management, to trim inventories. And as we notedbefore, we've yet to see the benefits of inventory managementtechniques and utilization and so on in the retail and some wholesalesectors that we might have hoped for, and we think there's potentialthere as well. But, certainly, the consolidation of the retailsector, if that continues, ought to work a bit in that direction. So,there's still likely to be a trend movement and it's inherent in ourforecast. We have a very modest rate of inventory accumulation; latein 1992 and in 1993 the inventory/sales ratio is drifting down [in ourforecast]. We're drawing our lesson much more from the trends of thelast long expansion than from what one might have seen in earliercyclical upturns. So, in a sense it's either a cushion or we'vecaptured a trend that's probably continuing.MR. SYRON. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Mike, would you elaborate a bit on this issue ofpent-up demand that you mentioned in passing with regard to theconsumer spending situation?MR. PRELL. That is obviously hard to assess. It's to someextent a matter of gauging what people's desires are and those couldchange over time. A simple examination of what happened, particularlyin the motor vehicles area, is that we look for trends in motorvehicles per household. The trend in the stock of motor vehicles hasvaried in constant dollars. We look at the equations that we have forautomobile demand, such as they are, which estimate a desired stockgiven operating costs, interest rates, and those sorts of things. Allof these seem to point toward some shortfall. We're not sure how muchit is. Drawing some trend lines we get something like 1-1/2 to 2million units at present. We are aware of the forecasts within theindustry, which are based on the notion that there may be a 3 millionunit shortfall--pent-up demand as it were. Basically, our forecast isone that, given the basic replacement needs, doesn't really make anysubstantial progress in overcoming that. Again, one might view thisas possibly a small upside risk: That as this expansion proceedspeople will want to replace some of those cars which are now, in termsof median age, considerably older than people used to live with.Maybe the cars are better; maybe we don't need to return [to trend];but there does seem to be some possible backlog of demand there.Other areas we don't see so clearly. There has been a verysharp downturn in expenditures on other durables and on somenondurable items that one might think of as lasting some span of time.Conceivably, there's some backlog of desired spending there. Wehaven't built it in; it isn't readily visible in other data on stocksfor durable goods, for example. The past year or so has been a period-11-3/31/92of extraordinarily weak consumer spending and we think there's somebacklog and buildup.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions? If not, wouldsomebody like to start our Committee discussion? [Does the silencemean the answer to] that is a no?MR. FORRESTAL. The last couple of--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think Bob Parry signaled me first.MR. FORRESTAL. I yield to my colleague.MR. PARRY. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, the Western economyappears to us to be moving sideways, although I must admit there are afew encouraging signs that have emerged since the last meeting. We doa survey of business leaders and ask them their views about futuredevelopments. One of the questions that we ask them is whether theyexpect any declines in output in the next two to four quarters. InJanuary, more than 30 percent indicated that they did. In the mostrecent survey, that number was a little over 10 percent. We also haveseen a bit of a change in the residential real estate market. InCalifornia, for example, the number of existing homes sold has risenin each of the last four months, and the gain that we saw in Februarywas the sharpest month-to-month gain in five years. Moreover, retailsales don't seem to be deteriorating the way they were. One majorretailer on the West Coast indicated that in the month of February hissales were up 8 percent from the year-ago period and another majorCalifornia retailer indicated that sales were about 10 percent aboveyear-earlier levels. One recognizes that there were some specialfactors, including the extra day in February and also the war-relatedweakness that occurred the year before.I'm sure you've heard about or are familiar with thebenchmark revisions going on with regard to employment data. On anegative note, the California benchmark revisions for employment areexpected to show a falloff of 4 percent since July of 1990, which ismore than double the decline that we've been working with in thepreliminary data.If I can turn briefly to the national outlook, it certainlyseems clear to everyone that final sales have picked up rathersignificantly in the first quarter. As a result of thesedevelopments, it would seem to me that the risks to the outlook aremore symmetrical than they were at the time of our last meeting whenthe downside risks seemed to dominate. Our forecast is very similarto that of the Greenbook. Both forecasts include a downward path forlong-term interest rates, which to me seems consistent with thefundamentals of a moderate expansion. Such an outcome for rates,however, as we've mentioned a couple of times, does not accord withmarket expectations. My own view is that if we do get those kinds ofrates, it's conceivable at least that we'll see the dollar declinerather than remain flat. Finally, it would seem to me, given thecurrent low level of economic activity and also the prospect of amodest expansion, that the Greenbook's basic outlook for a gradualdownward trend in underlying inflation certainly makes a lot of sense.Thank you.-12-3/31/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I'm happy to say that economicconditions in the Sixth District have definitely improved since thelast meeting. The information that we have for the six states in ourDistrict suggests that activity is improving in all those areas withthe exception of Louisiana. And more importantly, the forecast seemsto be that this improvement is going to continue. This generalimprovement has been confirmed by our directors and other businesscontacts that I've talked to over the past several weeks. They'reexpressing guarded optimism, but the tone is certainly a lot betterand there seems to be an uptick in consumer confidence. On the otherhand, bankers are continuing to report very soft loan demand. Ifthere's any strength at all in loan demand, and it's very marginal,it's on the consumer side, not in business lending. We've recentlyseen modest expansion in orders, production, and shipments byproducers of apparel, household goods, and construction materials.And there is a parallel development of improvement in the retailsector as well, although durable goods retailers are reporting ratherweak sales. But the nondurables and services are doing better. Autodealers, on the other hand, are talking about increased traffic butnot increased sales.Housing, as in other parts of the country, has improved,although realtors are becoming more and more concerned about increasesin mortgage rates. We've had increased permits for single-familyhomes, and I guess associated with that lumber prices have moved up alittle and builders are [now] anticipating price increases for otherconstruction materials as well later on this spring. On thecommercial side, leasing rates for commercial properties havestabilized and this market seems to be in the very early stages of arecovery. Another positive factor in our District is that we're nothearing of any new projects coming on stream, which is certainly aplus. Tourism and business travel continue to be a bright spot forour District. Convention bookings are up in several cities andFlorida is seeing a quite significant increase in visitors fromabroad. The improved health of many of the Latin American countriesis reflected in increased export sales to many of those countries.Those are the positive aspects of the ledger.Obviously, we have some weak spots as well. State and localgovernments throughout the District are still wrestling with theirbudget problems, and I don't really see any light at the end of thattunnel. The energy sector has also been very hard hit by the mildwinter, which has added further downward pressure on natural gas andoil prices. And in February the rig count was down 41 percent inLouisiana from a year earlier; that compares to a decline of about 32percent in the nation as a whole. And, of course, layoffs arecontinuing apace in that sector in Louisiana.In addition to those price pressures for constructionmaterials that I noted earlier, many manufacturers are anticipatingsome higher input prices in the second half of this year. Labormarkets on the other hand are still quite soft and wage pressures arequite steady; in effect, there are no wage pressures.With respect to the national economy, our forecast for realGDP is quite similar to the one in the Greenbook. We're not quite as-13-3/31/92strong in the first quarter, but after that we virtually converge withthe Greenbook. We do have unemployment coming down a little fasterthan the Greenbook, but our biggest difference is on the inflationside, where we see inflation moving up more rapidly than in theGreenbook. Our forecast in 1993 is for inflation, as measured by theCPI, of about 4 percent. In general, it seems to me that the risksare much more symmetrical than they were when we last met; they'remuch more balanced. Obviously, as Mike indicated, we could haveanother false start as we did before. But I personally feel much moreconfident that we're on a path of a more sustainable but modestrecovery. All of this suggests to me, Mr. Chairman, that we don'tneed any policy adjustments at the moment. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With regard to thenational economy, our forecast is very similar to the staff forecastat least in contour. We also show an improving quarterly trend butour growth rates, particularly in the first and second quarters, are abit lower. Our outlook for personal consumption, particularlydurables, is just a little lower than the staff forecast.Correspondingly, our outlook for inflation this year is a bit morepositive. We would think the CPI, for example, by the end of the yearcould be at 3 percent or a bit lower. But these overall differencesare really just differences at the margin.In the District, the modest improvement that I commented onat the time of the last meeting and also on the telephone callcontinues. Certainly, residential housing in the Midwest has been astrong point. Homebuilding has increased significantly and home saleshave also been very active. But I do think weather has been a decidedfactor. We've had the warmest winter in 97 years and I have a hunchthat the seasonal adjustment factors have had an effect on thenumbers. At the distant horizon--and I would emphasize distant--I amhearing a little better tone in the commercial real estate sector.Some investors are beginning to express at least a possible interestin commercial real estate. That's the first time I've heard that inquite a while. Not in any way should this suggest that there's anyinterest in new projects; that's a long way out. In fact, in Chicagowe have a number of fairly sizable projects that are still beingfinished. As a consequence the rental overhang is pretty high and therental terms are very, very tough. Nonetheless, this possibleinterest on the part of investors to come back may be indicative thatwe could be reaching toward stabilization in this very tough sector.The automobile business is a bit better, at least for the onemanufacturer that I talked to. Their first-quarter production, forexample, was 32 percent over last year; last year, of course, was verylow as a comparative period. The second-quarter production will be upabout 8 percent. Encouraging also is the dealer order rate, which hasshown a significant improvement on a week-by-week basis as we've gonethrough this year. Sales have been a little under forecast but thereis a better tone out there. There is a better mix: Fleet sales aredown; retail sales are up. Also, retail pricing for autos has been alittle firmer. In the truck industry, medium truck demand is flat todown a bit, reflecting very tight control on capital expenditures bybusinesses. But the demand for big trucks, the class A rigs, is up abit, and one manufacturer is forecasting a 10 percent increase in-14-3/31/92sales this year for the class A group. Still, in a comparative sense,that is a very modest number.The steel business continues to be pretty reasonable. First-quarter sales will come in at an 82 million ton annual rate. Theindustry is now operating at about 85 percent capacity but the pricingin the steel business is very, very tough. On the retail side, salescontinue to show an improvement. It looks to us as if retail sales inthe Midwest are running about 5 percent ahead of last year on acomparable store basis but the pricing continues to be [verycompetitive]; we see no inflation on the retail side. In theagricultural sector, the outlook for the crop year looks favorable, atleast at this point, despite a fairly warm and a dry winter. Groundmoisture is regarded as being excellent in most of our ag areas.Planting is going to start in two to three weeks and the outlook ispretty positive. There is some concern out there about the [weather]effect; nonetheless, we are forecasting normal crop production thisyear.With regard to inflation, I do think the outlook continues toimprove. Pricing conditions in the marketplace are awfully tough.The big increases just don't stick and in some industries--paper, forexample--prices are continuing to come down. And energy prices justdon't represent anything by way of an inflation issue. On the laborside, the contracts are being settled on very favorable bases. In thepaper [industry], for example, one of our directors reported that acompany has recently gotten a six-year contract, with annual increasesof 3 percent a year plus a one-time premium shift buyout of 3 percent.Two other paper companies got five-year contracts at very, very modestwage increases. So, certainly, those contracts have gone well. Butone labor negotiation that has not gone well, and I've commented on itbefore, is the Caterpillar contract; the strike is now almost fivemonths old. They held the first talk in quite some while last week,but nothing came out of that. In fact, the union rejected what thecompany said was absolutely its final offer. So, the discussionsbroke off and both sides left. The pattern issue is what is holdingthem up. Both sides have said that absolutely under no circumstanceswill they give on that particular issue. In the interim Caterpillar'sinventories are running down to pretty low levels; and currentproduction, of course, is very spotty. I talked to somebody yesterdayThat for the union would be a very tough situation. Theexpectation is that this could get to be pretty vicious before we'reall done.Net, while the anecdotal reports and certainly the datacontinue to be positive in a modest sense, I continue to think therisks are very much on the down side. They are perhaps not as greatas they were a few months ago but, still, I think that's where therisk is. Therefore, in terms of policy response, I think we should begeared to deal with any signs of weakening should they appear. Thankyou.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.-15-3/31/92MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, there has been a marked change inthe degree of optimism in our area, which seems to be very similar towhat is happening in the rest of the country. For example, in ourrecent regular survey of retailers and manufacturers for theBeigebook, we found more signs of optimism, both nationally andlocally, than we had at any time since 1989. Contacts with ourdirectors and others since then have pretty well verified that sort ofsentiment. And we are seeing in the actual figures some pickup inphysical activity. For example, new home sales and residentialconstruction are rising pretty much across the District; and sales andproduction in industries related to housing--like furniture, textiles,and homebuilding products--are also picking up in strength. At ourlast meeting, one of our most astute directors said he sees absolutelynobody who thinks the recession is not over. The way he put it, theonly question in people's minds is what the strength of the recoverywill be.So, against that kind of regional background, and takingaccount of the latest information that we have gotten on a nationalbasis, I think the staff was justified in making the upward revisionin the forecast that it did. The overall profile of the Greenbook isquite close to what we would expect. The key question is where therisk of error lies. And on this we come out a little differently fromsome of the others who have spoken in that we think the risk of erroris on the high side even after these upward revisions in the forecastare taken into account. That is because we continue to believe thatthe easing we put into effect in November and December was prettystrong medicine and that its full potential impacts have not yet shownup and probably are not captured fully in the Greenbook and otherforecasts. But we have less confidence in that now than we didbecause of the weakening in the behavior of M2 in March. One of oureconomists did a simulation that suggested the widespread uncertaintyabout jobs probably was reducing consumption by maybe 2-1/2 percentfrom what it otherwise would be. It's really an interesting study;it's econometric but nevertheless pretty revealing, and it sort ofverifies what everybody assumed was happening.I'm happy to see that the staff still expects that thedisinflation trend will continue and that inflation can be broughtdown somewhere below 3 percent by the second half of this year. Asthe Greenbook notes, this projection is pretty much at odds with mostof the current market expectations. It's also at odds with most ofthe forecasts that we've seen, which call for an early increase ininflationary pressures as the economy improves. But the differencebetween the staff forecast and these other forecasts now is that wecan make ours happen if we play our cards right! And I'm increasinglyconfident that we will.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. The Eleventh District economy has held upthroughout the recession and slow recovery better than most Districts,I think. Our total employment is almost 2 percent higher than it wasin July of 1990, just before the recession started. Initially, oureconomy was supported by improvement in the energy sector, resultingfrom the temporary spike in oil prices. But since about the middle of1991, the energy sector has become a major drag rather than a sourceof impetus. Bob Forrestal already referred to the low gas prices and-16-3/31/92the effect that is having on the gas industry. And the oilexploration and production business is rapidly disappearing in ourDistrict through layoffs and moves abroad. That's a long-run declinethat people are very gloomy about, particularly with the Clean Air Acthaving just passed; that's going to have an impact on refineries aswell as exploration. The gap, though, since the middle of '91 hasbeen largely made up in our District by the reaction of residentialconstruction, single-family housing, to the lower interest rates.We've also benefited throughout this past year and a half from afairly strong Mexican economy and fairly robust exports from theEleventh District to Mexico. The mood in the District seemed toimprove dramatically when we first started hearing reports on retailsales in January and February, before the data were announced. So,things have picked up optimism-wise and that's reflected in ourBeigebook survey as well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. I'm not sure that we have very much to report asfar as the region goes that is different from what people are talkingabout nationally. We have seen some signs even in New England oftentative recovery consistent with what people have talked about[happening] elsewhere in terms of retail sales, housing sales, andsentiment. We've been seeing some increase in employment, which isinteresting because we find that in the current household survey butnot in the payroll numbers. Trying to reconcile the two we find thatthere are a lot of new electrical and gas hookups and new firmsstarting that are not yet picked up in the payroll survey but arepicked up in the current population survey.On the banking side, there are some stirrings of very, verytentative improvement in loan demand though a leveling off, I wouldsay, on the side of asset problems which we think probably havepeaked. I would think that housing prices--not commercial real estatebut housing prices--probably have reached their low point; and that,combined with [lower] mortgage rates, has been stimulating someactivity. As for manufacturing, the paper industry is actually doingquite well and the computer industry is seeing some improvement, butthere is some more recent concern about exports. There is, of course,a lot of variance in this across the region--the defense influence. Iwould have to say, and probably one shouldn't read too much into thisbecause of the problems with seasonals, etc., that in conversationssince the Beigebook--in calling people in the last few days beforecoming to the meeting--both retailers including auto dealers andpeople in the real estate business report some slack in the last 2 to2-1/2 weeks. There may not be too much to that, but some of it isattributed to the rise in rates at the long end.As far as the national economy goes, we share the view thatthe economy is improving. We continue to be worried, though, aboutthe durability [of the improvement] and how [developments] willcumulate. We do have an uneasy feeling, which one can't avoid, aboutvulnerability to swings in mood. Just in talking to people generally--and others have mentioned this--we see a degree of dissatisfactiongenerally and a fragility in people's confidence about the future thatrequire us to stay on our toes. As I say, I pretty much agree withthe Greenbook. I am concerned about two things: (1) the cumulative-17-3/31/92process that I referred to earlier and (2) the possibility of exportsbeing a little softer than we have talked about before.As far as policy goes, I think this leaves us with twoissues. One: Is the economy turning? I think the answer to that isprobably yes. The second issue, though, is: How strongly is itturning? I would say that one place where we might have a slightdisagreement with the Greenbook is that we see the unemployment ratepossibly increasing a little further. Based on work that we've doneon the relationship to claims, we don't really see the unemploymentrate declining until we get claims dropping below 400,000 for a longperiod. So, we still think that the strength of the upturn will be onthe soft side. That is consistent, of course, with our quiteoptimistic view of continued improvement on the inflation side. Wethink that Mike's interpretation of long-term bonds is probablycorrect because if inflation does continue to come in fairly well, itwill tend to convince markets further as we go along.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Developments in our District are broadlyconsistent with what is going on in the rest of the country. There isnoticeable improvement in the residential area, including theconstruction of new houses. The retailers feel better and the salesdata are there. But when they look at their sales it's year-over-year, and last year sales were very weak. So there's concern abouthow these retail sales will look a couple of months from now. Themanufacturing area has shown some strength. In the nonresidentialarea, the District really has a long way to go before it digs its wayout of the hole; I think that sector is just going to be a drag forsome time to come. Bankers report essentially flat loan demandoutside the residential area, although more of them are reporting thatthe share of new financing is rising and the share of refinancings isfalling. I think that's consistent with the data we're getting on theresidential side. Employment growth is still flat to down, and Ithink it will be some months before we see any improvement there. Interms of attitudes, I think "optimism" is too strong a word. I wouldsay "cautiously hopeful" describes business sentiment more[accurately]. I think [business executives] see a turn, but they justare not optimistic yet. In terms of consumers and rank and filecitizens of the District, the mood is certainly not optimistic butmore one of frustration than of pessimism. How that will play out inconsumer sales I'm not sure. But there is this dichotomy, I think,between hopefulness in the business sector and a very deep-seatedfrustration on the part of most other people.As far as the nation goes, I think we do have a modest pickupin the making. The issue, as we've talked about around the table, iswhether it is sustainable. I think the risks are less on the downside now than they were six weeks ago, but on net I still have moreconcern that this modest recovery will peter out rather than besignificantly stronger than the Greenbook forecast. But my forecastwould be very close to that in the Greenbook. I think a modestrecovery is the most likely outcome.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.-18-3/31/92MR. HOENIG. Our District continues to show a mixedperformance on balance with very slow recovery [emerging]. Forexample, our employment in January was up about 0.1 percent over theprior month. As for the positives, one is retail sales. Retailersaround the District tell us that there has been a pickup in sales andthey are, as we've been saying, cautiously optimistic that that willcontinue. Construction-wise, we are still seeing improvement.January was about 12 percent over a year ago for the District, butthat was primarily in residential. Commercial property continues tobe fairly weak, with vacancy rates in Colorado, for example, still inthe 24 percent area and higher than that yet in Oklahoma. So, thatsector is going to remain weak; but residential [construction] hasbeen very strong. Manufacturing is mixed for us. In the autoindustry there are still plans to continue with two shifts, but therehas not been enough optimism for them to reverse [the decision] inprocess of being implemented to lay off 1,000 employees in KansasCity. Also, other manufacturers we talk with are seeing some pickup,but it's very modest and they're not at all convinced that business isgoing to continue strong as we go forward. They're waiting to see.Economic activity is also being dragged down a bit with some defensecutbacks. Martin Marietta in Denver, for example, is laying off 1,000workers; and Allied Signal in Kansas City is laying off about 750. Sothat's a bit of a drag offsetting the anticipation of stronger salesin the auto industry. Clearly, our weak sector is energy. It's stillvery weak. The rig count is down 25 percent from a year ago--not asmuch as in Louisiana, but down. As you may have read this morning,Oklahoma has passed a law trying to restrict production of natural gasin an effort to boost its price; we'll see how successful they are.In agriculture, the outlook is a little mixed. In the grain area,there is some optimism with regard to prices. In the cattle area,there is more pessimism. Land values have remained virtuallyunchanged because of some concerns about pricing going forward. So,our economy is mixed, although people are trying to be optimistic.Nationally, we generally agree with the Greenbook althoughour forecast is not quite as strong. We anticipate and we'reoptimistic that the economy will grow a little less than 2-1/2 percentover the year. However, we differ a little. We think investment willbe a little stronger and consumption a bit weaker than the Greenbookis projecting. On the inflation front, we are also about in line withthe Greenbook in terms of seeing core inflation continue to trenddown. So, that's where we see things right now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. With regard to the national economy first, Mr.Chairman, I'm struck by how much better the readings on the nationaleconomy are relative to what we were seeing as recently as threemonths ago and relative to what we expected to see. I think theGreenbook has the appropriate response to this. I personally ampretty cautious. A quite modest recovery by historic standards isstill what I think we're most likely to get, and that's what isreflected in the Greenbook. So, I'm comfortable with that outlook.But the probability of achieving something like that looks to me to bea good deal higher than we might have expected just a few months ago.At the District level, we've seen modest improvement for sometime. That seems to be continuing. Attitudes have improved. I-19-3/31/92wouldn't say that they're positive necessarily, but the gloom seems tohave lifted. And the expansion seems to be reasonably broadly based.It's evident in housing, of course, retail sales, agriculture, andtourism, so that the District seems to me to be consistent with thenational picture as well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. In our District the statistics continue to begenerally positive. We have modest nonagricultural employment growth;manufacturing employment is down modestly compared to the prior three-month period but that's more than offset by gains in nonmanufacturing.I would say that manufacturing has been bouncing around a little; Ithink I reported a modest increase last time. Both residential andnonresidential construction contracts are quite strong, up about 15percent in each category against the prior three-month period. Andthe banking numbers that I report on periodically have continuedstrong through the fourth quarter. Basically, the question always is:Will those numbers hold up through year-end reserving and so forth?And in our case they did. ROAs are still around 1 percent; ROEs arearound 12 percent; nonperforming loans are flat and also are fullyreserved.On the anecdotal side, I've had three or four contacts withbranch boards or our board and other groups since our conference call,and I would say that the pattern I've heard there supports the morepositive tone that seemed to emerge on that call. I continue to bestruck by people reporting plant relocations, plant expansions, laborcallbacks, and so forth. So, I get the sense that this [better tone]is gradually working its way back into the manufacturing sector. Wehad a group of CFOs in from major St. Louis companies, and I would saythat in general the picture I got from them was not as positive assome of this other information. They still view this as a verydifficult business environment with not a lot of flexibility on theprice side. They are basically either maintaining or increasingearnings through a lot of focus on the cost side. So, that patterngoes on.Nationally, the only comment I would have is that ourforecast generally is in line with the Board staff's in terms of realgrowth looking out to 1993. On the price side, we're not quite asoptimistic and generally are getting increasingly concerned about thestance of policy vis-a-vis what might be shaping up on the real side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.MR. CORRIGAN. Let me just start with a couple of rifle shotson individual points. First of all, I do get the sense from businessleaders and others that things feel better. How pervasive or lastingit will be I think is still a big question. But even among some ofthe CEOs of major companies that are notoriously bearish we do getreports of a quite discernible uptick in activity in orders in thepast couple of months. Upon reflection, I think a lot of what isshowing, at least to date, seems to be directly or indirectly relatedto the pickup in housing activity and the more modest pickup in theauto sector. But for what it's worth, even among the most notoriouslybearish that comes across.-20-3/31/92Just an outlier point, to get back to something that TedTruman mentioned in passing, I have to say, Mr. Chairman, that I'mgetting more anxious about the situation in Japan, both in economicand financial terms. Some of that I think is for the reasons that Tedmentioned or alluded to, but just in the past few weeks I have hadseveral [talks] with private-sector individuals on firemen's visits,and these guys are really bearish. At least in memory, I've neverheard Japanese CEOs from both financial and nonfinancial firms speakwith the concern that comes across. I don't know what to make ofthat, but I do think that situation is probably even more tenuous thanperhaps the numbers themselves would indicate at this point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think there's a lot of whistling inthe dark there, too.MR. CORRIGAN. Well, that's part of what I mean. Closer tohome, as several others have said and as I've said at a couple ofprevious meetings at least about the greater New York area, commercialreal estate in price terms and in rental rate terms does indeed seemto be firming.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Firming, not stable?MR. CORRIGAN. Firming, yes. Now, as others have said, thatdoesn't mean the beginning of new projects. And needless to say, thisOlympia and York [situation] could queer that firming depending uponhow that shakes itself out. My sense of that right now is that whilethere is a lot of international exposure, it's sufficiently widelydistributed and diversified that in and of itself it would notmaterially add to our problem. The larger question is whether[Olympia and York] is having a liquidity problem or worse. I fearit's probably worse. And I think the danger, aside from the obviouspoint about creditor exposure, is that it could reverse the apparentstabilization or slight improvement in commercial real estate in a lotof places, not just in New York or London. That's an uncertainty evenif the credit exposure part of it can be effectively managed.On the banking side, loan demand is still quite clearlyslack. I think it's also fair to say that financial fundamentals dolook slightly better, partly because the real estate situation hasstopped getting worse. Another point that's relevant is that at themoment it's probably fair to say that the fiscal threat is reduced butnot eliminated by recognition of the real dangers of highly recklessfiscal policies.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As recommended by a number of ourcolleagues!MR. CORRIGAN. I was going to say that if we had a few ofthese Nobel laureates under a little better control. I might feel alittle better! Notwithstanding that, the risks there don't look to meto be as bad as I thought they would be.One last point I'd make in terms of the national outlook--and Mike touched on this--is that the employment outlook is veryimportant in our thinking about the forecast, partly for thepsychological reasons that people have talked a lot about. I do thinkthis confidence issue is importantly rooted in uncertainties about-21-3/31/92employment prospects. But beyond that, as Mike said, it would bequite unrealistic to assume that we're going to finance even a modestrise in consumer spending with a decline in the saving rate. In theGreenbook there is a tiny decline over the next couple of quarters.If you look at our own forecast or Mike's forecast--in round numbers,Mike, you have growth of something like 800,000 Q4-to-Q4 in payrollemployment, give or take. Now, that number doesn't sound all thatcrazy; it's 65,000 to 75,000 a month on average. Those are nothorrendously big numbers. And that gives me some confidence in theinternal consistency of the forecast. But I do think that theemployment situation, both for psychological reasons and for income-flow reasons, is going to turn out to be very, very important. Havingsaid all of that and recognizing that there are a lot of crosscurrentsout there, I personally feel that the staff forecast is a good one.Despite all the problems, I think there's a reasonably good chancethat we can see a pattern that looks very much like that over thecourse of the year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I would agree that the staff forecast is areasonable forecast. I would be on the side of slightly lower nominalGNP, if I had any difference, over the coming two or three quarters.I agree with Jerry Corrigan that the circumstances in Japan are reallyclose to being super worrisome. Asset price deflations once underwaymay not respond as well as some may believe to a monetary policyadjustment. And I think we all know about the run-up in real estateprices in Japan. It's not as if it were a magnitude of 2 times or 3times as high as would seem reasonable, but it might be more amagnitude of 5 to 10 times as high as might be reasonable! I guessall of us have had confidence that they will be able to produce a softlanding a lot better than we could, and yet it does seem to me thattheir reluctance to respond to rather low monetary growth doesindicate that the tide among central banks internationally, includingthe G-7, is still pretty conservative. It seems to me that theEuropean community also has its own problems, and driving Europeanmonetary policy by the Bundesbank's particular set of parametersaffecting Germany and not affecting others seems to me to [drivefiscal policy in Europe to] equal in some sense the fiscal policy inGermany, which is out of accord with the Maastrich rules. That is,they're not going to qualify for being a part of the club if theirfiscal policies deteriorate. So, even though I expect some change, asTed Truman suggested, it does seem to me that it will be on theconservative side. And when you look at those European economies andthe amount of subsidies that are there and the pressures that are onthem, it does seem to me that they are not quite in the promised landin regard to the economic growth that one would expect to be a part ofthe Common Market phenomenon. I think we will find more and more thata common economic market without a common political market has a lotof obstacles and they haven't found the way to crawl over all theboulders yet. And there seem to be a lot of boulders.This would then suggest that U.S. exports or net exportswould be even more of a drag than Mr. Truman and the staff suggest.And I suppose my optimism shines forth here in regard to my beliefthat with cost-cutting in U.S. firms, with the exchange value of thedollar where it is and the learning curve that our exporters are on, I-22-3/31/92expect to see us do as well as the staff suggests if not slightlybetter, even with a somewhat weaker foreign economy.Now, it seems to me that the driving force in regard tomonetary growth in the United States is not so much what happens onthe liabilities side of the commercial banks' balance sheets but whathappens on the assets side. When commercial banks have been lookingat spreads between loans and CDs and all of a sudden on the margin theassets they are picking up are U.S. government securities, then in asense the spread that they're chasing is a quite different spread. Sothe only way that they're going to have the kind of earnings theyinsist on is to have CD rates that tend to continue to run lower thanrates on governments, which it seems to me is going to [encourage]disintermediation to some extent and hold up M2 growth as compared toMl and the monetary base. So, in this environment it seems to me weend up with really quite a bit of rope out on the table. And,frankly, I don't think it would make much difference in the growth ofthe monetary aggregates if we had fed funds rates 50 basis pointslower than they are. So, I would still expect the monetary aggregatesto come in at around the midpoint [of their ranges] or below. And ifthe monetary aggregates surprise me and are stronger than that, then Ithink it's probably getting pretty late in the game. My guess wouldbe that once private credit demands increase--and I think the goodnews we are hearing around the table gives some notion that theremight be some increases in private credit demands--if they begin toexpand as fast as we would like them to grow, then we would probablyfind growth of M2 headed toward double-digit rates, though again I'mtalking quite a few quarters down the road, farther than I can reallysee. My guess is that we might have to have an adjustment in the fedfunds rate of 200 basis points to [rein] that in. But I think that'sa long ways down the pike.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. Let me first characterize my thoughts about theeconomy in the last couple of years to put things in the context ofwhere I think we are now. When the economy doesn't expand, I look forthe depressants because I think there's an inherent tendency for theeconomy to expand and that [if it does not], something is eithercausing it to contract or have sub-par growth or preventing very rapidgrowth. Two years ago there were many depressants, but two certainlystood out and are still with us today. One was the cuts in defensespending, and that [depressant] may even be increasing in some localeconomies. The other was the unwinding of commercial construction.That has not been a depressant in the Fourth District but it's stillthere in some parts of the country, though lessening I think. A thirdwas the oil shock, as brief as it was. Nevertheless, I think that wasthe factor that did push us into negative GDP for a couple ofquarters, but that is now reversed. Except to the extent that fallingenergy prices may be a very mild depressant--energy is weak--I don'tthink we're getting any depressing impulse there. The fourth ismonetary policy. There were occasions in the last couple of yearswhen I thought that it was too restrictive. But I don't think thatnow; I think it is adequately stimulative. And the depressant thathas emerged or been reinforced over the last several months is the onethat Jerry Corrigan mentioned also, the fiscal side. I think that isfeeding into the psychology affecting longer-term interest rates inthe bond markets. And concerns about the lack of fiscal discipline in-23-3/31/92this country are either direct threats to the economy or indirectthreats to the actions we can take through monetary policy.Where I come out is that I don't disagree with Mike Prell'sdescription of the economy in 1992, but for 1993 I would be a littlestronger than he is. The arguments for why [growth] is going to slow[over the course of] 1993 I don't find satisfying at this point.At the District level, we held a small business roundtablediscussion and advisory meeting ten days ago. We had twelve bankersfrom around the District. All parts of the District were representedand all but one reported better conditions. They said their localeconomies were improving. One banker in northwest Pennsylvania saidthat the economy was still pretty much flat. The others seemed tothink that their situation had improved over the last few months.There was a general sense of optimism, of things getting better.Residential construction, including even some commercial construction,[was up] and all reported that retail sales were better, though therewas not a lot of confidence that it would continue so. Capital goodsmanufacturing has been quite strong. The recession that we wentthrough a couple of quarters ago was the mildest in Ohio in thepostwar period. Always in every recession before Ohio has had asharper decline in employment than the nation. That didn't happenthis time. So, the contrast between Ohio in my District and Michiganis really dramatic. Ohio didn't have the stimulus of commercialconstruction before so the state didn't have the depressant of itgoing away. And the state had the benefit of good export demand andprobably more importantly import substitution, taking back domesticmarkets previously lost for capital goods industries. The generalmood in that part of the Great Lakes region is very [upbeat]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Well, I guess the consensus is that we have themakings of a recovery with this strong consumer spending. It's niceto see that spending reinforced by the increase in confidence[reported in recent] surveys. This morning the Conference Boardreported an increase in March to 54 from 47 percent, the largest jumpsince the Gulf War. I think the issues that Mike Prell laid out areworth reviewing because we were in this position last year and thingsdidn't work out. Will this year be different? There are a lot ofpositive signs on the durability or sustainability issue. There'sample evidence that we've made progress on this 3-year depressant ofthe deleveraging process with the improvement in corporate balancesheets. Interest coverage is looking more like it did in the mid- orlate '80s than it did in the early '90s. Consumer installment debt todisposable income is down to where it was in 1985, so we've rolledthat back; and we're reclaiming the decade on consumer indebtedness.I think mortgage refinancing has helped a lot. And the banking systemis clearly in much better shape to support [growing] demands shouldthey ever come about. So in this [unintelligible] we seem to bepoised to abate at this time. There is also this issue of pent-up[consumer] demand. Measuring it against the late '80s raises thequestion of how much of that was real demand or conspicuousconsumption, but I guess we'll find out. There's also the possibilityof pent-up demand in business spending--replacement spending andcapital equipment spending that has been postponed. And mostfundamentally from our perspective, what is different this year is the-24-3/31/92fact that rates are much lower now; the fed funds rate since lastsummer has come down 175 basis points. And the dollar, despite itsrecent rise, is still substantially below where it was last summer.On the negative side compared to last year, Governor Angelland President Corrigan and others have mentioned that exports lookless encouraging given the deterioration in western Europe and Japan,and I would share that view. Consumer confidence, despite the recentgains, is still well below levels of last spring. And last year wewere looking at what I thought were lean inventories--of course, onecan never tell until a few months later whether they were lean or not--and now we have a little overhang. And the employment picturecontinues to be weak. There's concern over what we'll see in theupcoming report. So, I think an issue is: Where does the incomegrowth come from for sustainability?A number of people have mentioned the issue of long rates,and that's an important input into the environment. The Board staffhas been doing a lot of work looking at that 30-year bond and tryingto figure out what is causing its yield to go up. One way to think ofa 30-year bond is that it is composed of 30, 1-year forward ratesimplied by the yield curve. That allows us to look at these forwardrates, which we can back out of the yield curve, and see where thepressure is coming from. The Board staff has done this. I thinkthey've come up with some interesting results. The 1-year ratesexpected to prevail 20 or 25 years out in the future haven't changedmuch at all in recent years. In fact, they are about where they werein the early '70s. So, we haven't seen a big shift in long-terminflationary expectations or long-term expectations of rates at least.What has pushed the 30-year bond around has been the movement of theshort- and intermediate-term rates. The first three forward ratesaccount for 25 percent in weight of the overall 30-year coupon, andthe big increase in these 3-year rates has driven up the overall30-year rate. In fact, the increase in the forward rates in the first5 years of the overall 30-year structure accounts for virtually all ofthe increase in the long rate. When you look at it, that increase ispretty dramatic. As you recall, all these rates responded well to ourcut in December and then rates bottomed out in January and started up.Those 3-year forward rates have gone up 150 basis points; and if youlook at the 1-year rate today it's 4-3/4 percent. The forward rate inyear two is up to 7 percent and by year three the market is expectingin some sense an 8 percent 1-year rate. Then it levels out at aboutyear five at 8-3/4 percent. So, the way to think of it is that themarket is expecting very large increases. I don't know if they heardGovernor Angell's talk on this, but they're expecting very largeincreases in rates in the very near future. And the weight of that ispushing up overall long rates as well. I think it's worth asking whypeople would expect that; I think there are three possibleexplanations. First, they expect inflation to increase; secondly,there's this fiscal argument, a fiscal crowding out; and third, theyexpect a recovery that is a lot stronger than perhaps the Greenbookforecast.I think the inflation explanation is not very satisfyingbecause when these rates turned around in early January the dollar wasalso rising and the price of gold was falling off. In the surveyevidence that Mike mentioned, the Michigan survey, inflationexpectations continue to fall. The 1-year inflation expectation in-25-3/31/92March was 3.3 percent whereas last October it was 4.7 percent. Eventhe 5- to 10-year inflation expectation last March in the Michigansurvey was a little over 6 percent and now it's about 4-1/2 percent.So, I think it's hard to ascribe this expected increase in short- andmedium-term rates to a rekindling of inflation.The deficit argument, as President Jordan and others havementioned, is a better explanation. First, if one looks at the timingof these rate increases, they really turned around in early Januarywhen the budget was released and this so-called bidding war started.And as the probabilities of a big fiscal package have gone down, we'veseen some easing of those rates. But what I think has happened isthat in the fall of 1990 many participants in the market saw a budgetagreement that they thought held the promise of a multi-yeardisciplinary mechanism, a pay-as-you-go mechanism that finally wasgoing to work. And that confidence has come unwound this year. Inthis town there's more hopelessness on the deficit issue than I'veseen in years because there's a feeling that these structures--whetherit's Gramm-Rudman or the new structure--simply aren't working. The1990 structure worked flawlessly and we've had no new spendinginitiatives. Despite the fact that pay-as-you-go has worked, thedeficit continues to rise. So, I think that's a major factor. Andthe other factor, which Jerry alluded to earlier, is the interactionof the deficit and the strength of recovery because, with the deficitout of control, there's relatively little private savings left over tofinance a recovery. And that implies that when those demands occur,rates and the dollar have to rise to [accommodate them].I think we can usefully ask what we can do about thissituation if the market is expecting big deficits and any privatedemands to push up rates dramatically. While we can usefully ask thatquestion, the answer on monetary policy fundamentally is that there isnothing that we can offset if the deficit is going to be out ofcontrol. We can't offset the increase in real rates. We couldaccommodate it, and this is the secondary risk that might be includedhere. But I don't think we would do that because we understand theproblems there. So, there is some concern about the contractionaryimpact of this; and certainly at the margin it's something we have tothink about in the overall mix even though fundamentally it's notsomething that monetary policy can cure. I don't think it'sinflationary expectations; rather it's these factors.When you pull all this together, I think we have a positivecast here to the economy. I do worry about it some. Since January anumber of elements have shown at the margin some tightening of[financial conditions], including the increase in the dollar eventhough it's well below where it was last year. Medium-term rates havebeen moving up; the short-term inflation expectation is moving down;and, of course, there's the falloff in M2 growth. We had a couple ofgood months of M2 growth, held up primarily by Ml growth, compensatingbalances, mortgage repayments, and the like. Now, measured from thefourth quarter, we're down to about 4 percent M2 growth which, asGovernor Angell mentioned, is below the midpoint. If we look overlonger periods of 6 months or 9 months or a year, again, we're verylow in our ranges. I had held the expectation that we would be abovethe midpoint for awhile. And we find ourselves here once again inthis position of having to depend upon the velocity increase to bailus out, to make the Greenbook forecast come true. So, I think that's-26-3/31/92something to be a bit concerned about. And as people have mentioned,growth in credit also remains slow. We ought to be sensitive to therisks of a second false start, which I think are fairly substantial interms of confidence, the fiscal actions, and the monetary pressures.On balance, I think the reading is more positive. But because of theconsequences of a second false start and the slowdown in M2 growth, westill need to be sensitive to the down side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, in my still fairly brief time onthe Committee I don't recall seeing as much change in sentiment fromone meeting to the next as has happened between February and now. Inthe last meeting, most people shared a fairly strong consensus thatthe first quarter was going to be flat or maybe slightly up and thatthere was still a substantial balance of risks on the down side.There were some reasons to hope that we might get an upside surpriseand improvement somewhat sooner than expected, but that was a bitweaker case. Now we seem to be having that upside surprise. As wehear this morning--and it began to show up on the telephone callseveral weeks ago--most areas are showing distinct improvement. Andmany sectors of the economy are showing a great deal of improvement.Now the question before us is whether or not this improvement is goingto sustain itself or whether it's going to fizzle again. Certainly,there are forces that cut both ways; Governor Mullins and many othershave run that liturgy and I won't repeat it. There are lots ofconcerns and I have lots of concerns. But [I'd make] two points.First, as Jerry Jordan mentioned a while ago, there's an historicalbias in favor of growth in this economy. I don't think that has goneaway; I think it's still there. And secondly, more times than not--maybe most of the time--momentum creates momentum and trends tend tosustain themselves. I think we're beginning to have a favorable trendhere and the more probable outlook is that it will sustain itself.That would be my best guess, for whatever it's worth. But itcertainly does seem to be too early to be sure of that. At the nextmeeting, or maybe the July meeting, we'll have a firmer feeling aboutit, I would hope, one way or the other. For now it seems to me thatthis is the time to watch and wait.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I'm one who has felt that we werein a genuine recovery for some time, and the current forecast--if itis accurate and I think it probably is--seems to sustain that.Certainly, consumer confidence has improved even though it's notexactly ebullient at the moment. Corporate profits are somewhatbetter, but business confidence is still restrained. The fragility inthe financial system that we have worried over for the last two orthree years seems to be mending, particularly within the bankingsystem, although there are still a number of large troubledinstitutions that command a major share of media attention. And mediaattention, I think, has a psychological effect on these confidencefactors. Bank earnings are certainly much better and the availabilityof capital has improved, and that's encouraging for furtherstrengthening of balance sheets. Banker confidence I believe is stilla problem, and that may be at least partly responsible for the slowpace of growth.-27-3/31/92Having said all that, I think there are still some pitfallsthat could abort or at least sidetrack this recovery. A dollar at itscurrent level, or perhaps even a little stronger, and weaker economiesin our major trading partners could reverse our recent exportperformance, which has certainly helped keep this recent recession ashallow one. I guess I'm politically skeptical enough to believe thatthere is still a possibility that irresponsible legislation to providea quick fix could happen, and it might in fact be counterproductive.Defense cutbacks, I believe, will create long and painful transitionsbecause the laid off workers are going to be permanently displaced,and they will have difficulty relocating in any short time frame. Ithink that effect will be more regional than general and will haveimportant impacts in states like California. As a matter of fact, thecurrent issue of The Economist has a real scare article about theeffects in California, Washington, New Mexico, Connecticut, NewHampshire, Maine, and one or two other states. A further increase inlong-term interest rates could certainly smother the recovery of thehousing market and discourage long-term financing for investment orrefinancing of higher-cost debt. I believe that, properly managed,all of those problems can be limited to a minor drag on the rate ofrecovery. The [interest] rate issue is the most important one in myview, and it suggests a position of vigilance, although I remainskeptical about the ability of further easing of policy to stimulatethe economy or bring down long rates. In fact, further easing mighthave the perverse effect of driving up long rates. I think our stanceneeds to be flexible at the moment. And, as I said to begin with, Ithink the Greenbook forecast looks pretty good.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I must say that in my six yearsin Washington I have never worked with such a modest group of people.We have talked this morning about the improvement in optimism in thelast few months. We've also talked about the derailing of what couldhave been a disastrous fiscal package. I think my colleagues are muchtoo modest; we should have patted ourselves on the back. I think thedecision that was made in December is one of the main reasons for therise in optimism; had that decision not been made, I think we would befacing a much less pleasant fiscal situation today. So, I believe wehave much to commend ourselves for, although you are all too modest tosay it.I'd also like to commend the staff. I think the Greenbookforecast is certainly the most likely outcome and is also one in whichthe risks are about balanced. I also think the conclusion of theGreenbook that the disinflation process is continuing is one that iseasily buttressed by the data--Governor Mullins stated it quite well--the survey data on forward rates, the strong dollar, and commodityprices. Indeed, I would be positively ebullient--in fact I was threeweeks ago--but my concern at the moment has to do with what hashappened recently with M2 growth. It has fallen. It is going tocontinue to fall. Using the projections in the [Bluebook] we willhave had from the fourth quarter through March 4.1 percent M2 growthand through June we will have had 3.8 percent M2 growth. That is wellbelow the midpoint of the target range. I don't think that isnecessarily a disaster, but it is something that raises cause forconcern. I think one has to take into account not only the fact thatthe risks are balanced but also what is involved if we're wrong. M2-28-3/31/92is signaling an economic risk, which is the risk of perhaps anotherfailure of the economy. Confidence would be very severely damaged,and I think we would see a replay of the headlines we saw last yearthat the Federal Reserve no longer has clout over the economy and thatmonetary policy has failed. In reality what I think has happened isthat the desired debt reductions have lowered the effectiveelasticities on monetary policy and, therefore, greater policy actionis needed. I think those elasticities would fall further and monetarypolicy would in fact be weakened if we had a collapse of confidenceagain and a recurrence of recession.There's another factor about which I'd like to speak briefly.Let's put ourselves a year from now and say that the economy in facthas not improved and we are in a second dip or what have you. Weshouldn't look at political risks except with regard to how theyaffect the independence of our judgment. And one concern we shouldhave has to do with changes that are going to come in this election.Yesterday our staff briefed us about the British election and saidthat there's going to be a hung Parliament. I think there are a lotof people who would like to see a hung Congress as well at this point.I don't know whether the devils we're going to come to know are goingto be any better or worse than the devils we now know. But the factis we know those devils and we don't know what the new devils aregoing to do. If we have a turnover of a quarter to a third of theHouse and similar types of numbers in the Senate, we would have to beconcerned about developing relationships with a new group of peoplewho may not know of our independence. In fact, we take a higher risknext year. I would think we'd want to be able to look back and havethem look back on our performance as one that is commendable andbeyond reproach because, while they may get bounced because of rubberchecks, we face some risk in that process as well. Therefore, I thinkwe have to be very concerned about the risks on the down side and weshould probably keep our policy as it was following the last meeting.I think alternative A is probably unnecessary. Alternative B has theadvantages of staying the course, but I do think we have to keep ourguns loaded. The downside losses, should the economy begin to dipback into a recession, could be quite severe not only for the economybut for this institution. And I think the problems in Japan that werementioned by several of my colleagues only reinforce the need to keepour guns loaded. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you. I guess I'm on cleanup again! Ifind myself in a great deal of agreement with what has been saidaround the table. I am pleased that the positive signals seem to bestrengthening in more than just a few parts of the country. At leasttoday we were hearing a little more positive signs from both coasts.Like others, I am concerned about whether this fledgling recovery isgoing to be self sustaining or if we're going to continue to bouncealong the bottom for a while or falter again. I won't go through allof the areas of risks because several folks have elucidated most ofthem. One area I would mention that hasn't been talked about quite asmuch is the question of employment and unemployment: thepervasiveness of the levels of unemployment and how long it's going totake until we start to see something on the unemployment rate with thefirst digit being a "6" as opposed to a "7." And like the Greenbook,I'd be pleased if it didn't get worse before it got better. But-29-3/31/92because corporate America is on an efficiency drive in a recessionaryperiod, I believe the cost-cutting and the drive to cut out layers ofmanagement are creating a situation where it's going to be harder topull out of the unemployment situation. To the extent that occurs, itmay keep us either bumping along the bottom or create a situationwhere it's going to take longer to climb out.The question of restructuring is also an issue I'd like totalk about a bit. We clearly have made a lot of progress, as GovernorMullins mentioned, on the restructuring. The question I wonder aboutis: How much more progress are households and corporate Americalooking to make? I wonder how much longer that restructuring is goingto take and whether that will continue to draw away some of themonetary ease that I do think remains in the pipeline. So, along withthe questions of long-term rates and the vulnerability of exports,there are some [other] areas of risks. I'm not sure that necessarilyindicates that we should change our monetary policy at this point.However, I do think we need to be vigilant. If we don't start to seesome improvement, we perhaps should be prepared to reassess thatsituation. Some of the tightening that has occurred in the lastcouple of weeks that Governor Lindsey alluded to may be the earlysigns of a need to be vigilant. But certainly at this point we haveevery reason to be pleased with the progress that has been made and[with the signs] that the monetary policy steps that were taken lastyear are beginning to bear fruit.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. We've run a little long andas a consequence I've a note from Norm which says that the coffee iscooling. The bad news is that he gave that note to me ten minutesago! Let's find our whether or not it's iced coffee.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Kohn.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.Finally, Mr. Chairman let me briefly update the Committee onthe money supply data received this morning. It's very weak, muchweaker than we expected and than we built into the Bluebook path. Forthe week we're about to publish--and these data ought to be reasonably[firm] by now--we're looking at about a $4-1/2 billion decline in Ml,a $10 billion decline in M2, and a $12 or $13 billion decline in M3.The downward revisions were mostly in demand deposits but in manyother categories as well. The very preliminary data for the week ofMarch 30th show no snapback from that. In fact, they show furtherdeclines. Now, these are based on only 3 days of information, so theycan revise; but they do show further declines, with M2 approaching thelower end of its range if they were to come out that way. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It seems as though we started on a highnote but ended on a low one! [Laughter]MR. KOHN. Don't blame the messenger, please!MR. ANGELL. Well, Don, they are your seasonal adjustmentnumbers!-30-3/31/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me start off in the vein these dataare basically addressing. I think we're all aware that by any of themeasures we use for physical slack--that is, with respect to the GDPpotential--the economy is very loose and has very considerable areasfor improvement shall I say without any [price] pressures beingevident as a consequence. I'm not sure that that is in fact the caseif one defines capacity in a financial sense. The way I would readthat as a concern is to reiterate some of the notions that severalaround the table have mentioned this morning: most specifically, therise in long-term rates in the context of what is really a relativelymild improvement in economic expectations. We're all aware that grossprivate savings is not a particularly large number and we're alsoaware that the Federal government with its extremely heavy demands isabsorbing a very large preemptive part of that. If the economy wererising fairly sharply, one would assume that the net available savingsafter the government takes its preemptive [share] would be modest andthat the demand would squeeze against a small base and drive interestrates fairly significantly higher. What we are looking at issomething which feels that way but it is hard to make the case, evenwith the optimism that is emerging here, that we're looking at a verystrong surge in activity. So, I conclude, granted with very littleevidence, that the base of private savings off which we are running isinordinately low and that very small pressures are creating interestrate responses that could essentially act, for reasons we've alldiscussed, to choke off the recovery.The financial structure also has some of thesecharacteristics in the sense that we are aware that capital restraintshave made the flexibility of intermediation less than we wouldotherwise like it to be. And if we are running into a net savingsproblem and an intermediation problem, which are obviously related, weessentially are saying that we are running up against some financialcapacity problems. I don't know whether or not one could ascribe themost recent weakness in M2 to this phenomenon. Obviously, one canmake the case, but I think it's premature to argue that these numbersmean all that much. We're not really clear as to the structure of M2and what causes it; and even though we ran into a problem last year,it is not clear in retrospect how significant that impact was. So, Ithink we're treading ground at this point in areas for which we haveno really hard evidence but a number of concerns that are suggestiveof the possibility that indeed we might run into another stone walland find that we're having difficulty reaching the [economy] as itrecovers.If that occurs, we could very readily get a pulling back ofcapital investment plans. And we could get some cumulative weakening[in the growth of economic activity], somewhat more than we're lookingat here. That, [coupled with] the external situation--not only Japanbut some questions about Europe--raises some serious questions aboutthe future in the context in which all of the hard evidence we'relooking at today is really quite good. It may well be that this isessentially a short-term housing development, which is drivingappliance sales, auto sales, and the like. There seems to be more init. There seems to be a pickup of profit margins; there seems to be abroader general view of some improvememt in the future; and capitalgoods expenditures do seem to be picking up. And even though we maybe running into a seasonal problem in the sense that six straightwinters, I think, of above normal temperatures may be altering the-31-3/31/92seasonal adjustment factors, it's conceivable that the March data,seasonally adjusted, are going to look weaker than one wouldordinarily expect. Then, we could get this [economy] turning veryreadily.At the moment, I think there is no question that monetarypolicy should stay on hold. However, in view of the variousdevelopments that are occurring, it is probably premature to switchfrom asymmetric toward ease to symmetric. Were it not for thefinancial factors that we're looking at, I would say this is a classicsymmetric case. But until we get beyond the concerns about thebehavior of the financial markets, which we do not fundamentallyunderstand, it strikes me that we should stay asymmetric if for noother reason than that the probability we would wish to tighten overthe next six weeks seems rather remote. And, having had an asymmetrictoward ease directive in the last eight weeks and finding no need toalter policy, I would hope that we may be able to get through the nextsix weeks in the same stance. So, while I must say I would have nodifficulty accepting symmetrical language with alternative B, I wouldmuch prefer to see us stay with the asymmetric language until we getbeyond this period of uncertainties about what all of these datareally mean. I'd be curious to get people's concerns, responses, andviews. Who would like to start off? President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, for the reasons that you have gonethrough, I find myself very strongly supportive of your fairlypronounced preference not to change policy. I think you're right thatit is premature at this stage to switch back to pure symmetry because,while the risks of the outcome in the Greenbook I think are prettywell balanced, the damage that would be done by making a mistake isnot. As for the likelihood that we may have to do something betweenmeetings: While we do think that we're seeing a turn here in a numberof areas, if I weigh the factors that are out there--the concerns inJapan, and some of the concerns in the financial markets which youalluded to related in turn to the real estate problems, etc.--I findit hard to think that we're going to be in a situation where theprobability is equal that we're going to have to tighten betweenmeetings as compared to [easing]. That to me says that we're in aclassical "stay asymmetric" [mode]. Also, while I have to confessthat I'm not one of those who think that the Ms mean everything, Icertainly think they mean something. And looking at what we've saidwe intended to do this year--not increasing the range but wanting tocome in at least at the midpoint of the range--though I realize thenumbers are extremely preliminary, I find the trend we're seeing in M2particularly disturbing. So, I think we're in a world, and manypeople agree with this, where we need to remain vigilant. Thelikelihood of having to take action, perhaps because of an unforeseenevent, is greater on the stimulative rather than the tightening side,and I think that is consistent with staying asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I would prefer to be symmetric.It seems to me that the foreign central bankers perceive our policy asbeing easier than it is. And they tend to have this history [ofbelieving] that the United States always sort of leads the way to toomuch inflation. I think we really have a very delicate matter here inregard to the foreign perspective as to where we are, and how those-32-3/31/92central banks feel about us spills over into the capital markets. Ofcourse, I can see that there might be some circumstance--if the Bankof Japan made a significant easing move and the yen became extra weakwhile factors here made it consistent with price level stability--[where it would be appropriate] for us to make a move: I couldunderstand that. And I can vote for a policy that's not my preferencebased upon what I said at the last FOMC meeting. Mr. Chairman, I alsosaid at that time that I had all the confidence in the world that youwanted to meet the same price level stability objectives. I have agreat deal of confidence in that, so I can vote for asymmetry [towardease], but I have to express a little caution when I do.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I need to say one additional thing. Irealize we don't put a great deal of moment in the P* calculations,but we are below trend now in [that calculation]. In other words, wehave brought the money supply numbers down to a point which iscertainly consistent with a noninflationary environment. If anything,we've overshot the mark. So, we actually have some room to respond tothose who are concerned abroad that we would create an engine ofinflation because I think--this is the wrong phrase, but--we havemoney in the bank. The truth of the matter is, it's the sign that'snegative.MR. ANGELL. I guess it's the yield curve problem that Iconsider. And [despite] Governor Mullins's careful analysis of thatyield structure, I don't quite agree with his view that it's thefiscal [situation] that drives it. It seems to me the driving factoris that monetary policy was seen to be eased on the basis of realeconomy data. And the bond markets say that if we ease on the basisof the real economy, then we're going to tighten if the real economyis strong. So, I think it's this anticipation of stronger growth thathas caused the yield curve to falter. So, even though we've got moneyin the bank, in the real bank, I don't think we have much money in theperception bank.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, that's a very important point, Ithink that's true. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I'd prefer "B" symmetric but I can live withwhat you proposed. One of the concerns I have in that regard is thepublic relations aspect of it. I know [our directive] doesn't get[published] for a long time but if we were releasing it today afterthe meeting I think a lot of people would react by saying: "Oh mygod, what are they worried about?"CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the argument for not releasingthe directive. Indeed, I think it would be a mistake for us torelease it.MR. MELZER. Well, I'm not suggesting that it should be.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I meant if we had to release ittoday I'm not sure I personally would recommend going asymmetric.MR. MELZER. Well, I guess unfortunately, I always operate onthe theory--and I'm not commenting on the FOMC in particular but ingeneral--that if I make a decision, no matter how hard I try, it'slikely to become known. So, I frankly worry about that. And I think-33-3/31/92symmetric language gives us every bit of flexibility that asymmetricdoes to respond.Let me just comment about what I touched on earlier when Isaid I was becoming increasingly concerned about the posture ofpolicy. I think M2 over long periods of time is a reasonableindicator of economic activity. I think it's helpful in that regard,but it doesn't tell us anything about the thrust of policy. And I dothink we have to pay some attention to the narrower aggregates whetherit's reserves, the base, or Ml. I'd be ready to admit, as a lot ofother people would point out, that some technical factors very likelyare influencing the growth of Ml right now. But what I worry about,and I've said these things before, is this: In an interest ratetargeting regime like we have, if we have that rate pegged at thewrong level in relation to where policy ought to be given what theeconomy is doing, the only way we're going to keep it there if it'spegged too low is by pumping in more and more reserves. Now, we'veseen short-term market rates in this period move up 20 to 25 basispoints. I'm willing to say in that connection that that probably justreflects wringing out expectations that were built into the yieldcurve that short rates were going to continue to fall--that policywould continued to be eased--and I think those have been washed out.For at least some period of time here, I think the market isdiscounting an unchanged policy. But I would begin to get more andmore concerned if short-term market rates worked their way up evenfurther and we continued to hold the funds rate at 4 percent becausein effect that would be indicating to us that we're having to pursue amore and more stimulative policy to hold it there. So, that's myconcern. But at this meeting, I think there's enough uncertainty interms of what is going on with Ml on the technical side to come outfor an unchanged policy and watch for a while. But what I'm worriedabout is that we may conceivably be getting out of position in alonger-term sense.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.MR. CORRIGAN. I would favor "B" asymmetric. I basicallycome out there for two reasons. First, I think the forecast that's onthe table, as I said before, is fine as a forecast. There are so manycrosscurrents [producing] uncertainties that a slight hedge--that'show I would think of this asymmetry--makes some sense. The otherthing I have to say is that even before I heard Mr. Kohn's latest M2numbers, I was a little nervous about M2, not that I have ever pledgedallegiance to that number. My nervousness is in part because I don'tunderstand it; I can't figure it out. But beyond that, if M2 weresystematically to tank again, it certainly would make our externalrelationships more difficult. So, "B" asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I came prepared to argue for "B"symmetric. I wanted to point out that we could move in eitherdirection but that if the economy did strengthen, as I thought it mostlikely would, then we would look very omniscient to have moved at thisparticular time when this [directive] is released in late May. Butafter absorbing the new numbers on M2 and listening to your othercomments, I come closer to where you are. The only difference I have-34-3/31/92is that your disinheriting the P* model bothers me a little because Istill have a lot of faith in that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I thought I did not disinherit it. Infact, I thought I was stipulating that I thought it was indicatingthat we had a little slack to accelerate M2 without violating ourprice stability goals.MR. BLACK. That part I agree with; you made that very clear.But there was a statement you made in the beginning against giving toomuch credit to the P* model.LAWARE. He was being modest.MR. BLACK. I have a lot of faith in it because I don't thinkwe have any evidence yet that there's not a shift in the secular trendof V2. But I would comfortably--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, frankly, I think it's working.MR. BLACK. Well, I think it is, too. As a matter of fact,if you take M2 at face value and say that we thought we had a reasonto explain its weakness, it has pretty darn well predicted whathappened even without any adjustments. So, maybe it didn't lose someof its meaning. I did think that we would be [tightening policy] andit would be nice to show that we anticipated this a little. But Ihave some more doubts as a result of the behavior of the money numbersthan I had. That being true, I can put that off for another meeting.At the next meeting I hope we will be able to move to symmetriclanguage if events go our way between now and then.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the Greenbook forecast certainly ismore optimistic now than it was at the time of our meeting inFebruary. In addition, it seems to me that the recent data suggestthat the risks are more evenly balanced than they were, far more thanappeared in February. That leads me to have a preference foralternative B and a slight preference for a symmetric directive. Imust admit, though, that I do fear the possibility that we'll see asituation similar to what we had last year. And I certainly don'ttake much comfort from what we just heard about the aggregates. So, Iwould not object to asymmetry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I came prepared to argue for symmetric languageand for alternative B, and I guess the news report from Don Kohntended to sap my courage. I must say that in the first few meetings Iattended here I was puzzled about the lengthy debate over preciouschanges in language or changes in precious language. But I now knowthat the world watches so carefully everything we say and exactly howwe say it and in what order that I guess the debate is worthwhile.And I think probably staying the course and keeping the flexibilitythat's implied by the asymmetric language is appropriate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.-35-3/31/92MR. STERN. Well, I certainly prefer alternative B, and Ihave a mild preference for symmetric language mainly because that's myusual preference. I rather like the thought of just letting theevidence come in and analyzing it as the period unfolds. And I thinkwe have plenty of flexibility and have reacted quickly even withsymmetric directives, but I don't feel all that strongly about it. Idon't know that I understand what is going on with M2 either, but Iwon't let that stop me from making a few comments! I think it's alittle premature to get too worked up about it. For one thing, Idon't know what Don's numbers are precisely, but for the Decemberthrough March period it looks as if M2 still grew at least as fast aswe had expected at the last meeting or two. So, while it bouncesaround a lot month to month, it's still coming in more or less asexpected or a bit on the high side. I'm not sure we're going to learnmuch more in April and May if the tax payments and so forth [distort]the data as they have in the past from time to time. Finally--and Ithink you touched upon this in a way--if our objective is to achieveprice stability, then I've been of the view for a long time that wewant M2 growth at about the midpoint of its range or somewhat lowerover a sustained period of time if we're going to get to pricestability. And that's certainly what I have in mind.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, because the Greenbook and ourforecast agree that the economy is improving and because year-to-date,at least as Gary said, the money numbers are near the midpoint, I'mcomfortable with alternative B. At the same time, I recognize thatthe money numbers that have just come in cause us to flinch. But moreimportantly, I can support the asymmetry [because], although oureconomy is being projected as stronger now than it was in February, itstill remains a very modest recovery by any [historical] comparisonsand it is in my mind still a very tender recovery. Therefore, I feelcomfortable with the asymmetric language toward ease.MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, on President Stern's point, he iscorrect that even with these very weak numbers, we would have growthfor December to March of around 3-1/2 percent, which is what weexpected before. But the other part of that is that we would becoming out of March in a week that is billions and billions of dollarsbelow the monthly average; i.e., the monthly average weakness iscoming in this next number.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR.. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I'm not quite as agile as some ofmy colleagues. I came in prepared to support symmetric and I'm stillthere! To me the risks have become symmetric and that suggests asymmetric directive. I concur with you that an intermeeting changethis time around is fairly unlikely; hopefully that's true. That alsosuggests symmetric. And generally, I think [asymmetric] is intendedto be used when there's a meaningful expectation that there will be amove in a certain direction--a reasonable confidence that that willoccur--and I don't see that here. All of that having been said, I dobelieve that if there should be an occasion to change policy betweenmeetings here, it is far more likely to be on the easing than thetightening side. Also I believe that if we do get a downsidesurprise, the consequences would be quite serious and should be3/31/92guarded against. So, for those reasons I would prefer symmetric butcan accept asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.BOEHNE. Well, I came here supporting "B" asymmetric and I ampleased.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. There's no question in my view that theforecast risks are far more balanced this time. I agree with whatothers have said about the consequences of the downside problem beingmore severe, and I think it's a good idea to be asymmetric with thecurrent uncertainty in the markets and the aggregates. I would alsolike to mention Tom Melzer's point, which is rather interesting, thatlast year it was the Treasury bill rate that was leading the fed fundsrate down and this year it is the reverse. So, I think we have someinteresting times ahead of us. Governor Angell mentioned our problemswith the foreign central bankers. [My response to them] is to pointout our record of very low growth in money over a long period of time.I don't have much success with that!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm surprised that you don't.MR. MULLINS. Well, it's a lingering problem. If you look atthe record--to pick a time let's say over four or five years--it ispretty impressive that there is this lingering suspicion. And onefeels it [in discussions with foreign officials] as we go around theroom. We can look through all the economic fundamentals currently,whether it's commodity prices or slack or the dollar going up, andwe're in pretty good position. Yet this is something we're going toface, I think, for a long time until we wring [inflation] out. And Idon't think it can be wrung out until we go through a recovery andshow at that time that we've come out of this without going too far.On balance, I still prefer to stick with asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, while we are moving through thistransition pretty well and the tone and numbers are a little betterthis time than they were the last time, nonetheless, as I saidearlier, I think the risks continue to be on the down side. I alsothink the inflationary outlook is better than [unintelligible]. To meit would be very premature to make a shift from asymmetric tosymmetric language and, therefore, I'd be in favor of alternative Basymmetric toward ease.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think policy really needs tostay on a steady course at the moment. I, too, like many others, cameprepared to argue for symmetric language because I thought the balance[of risks] was a little more evenly distributed. But I don't have thesame courage of my convictions as does Governor Kelley, so I tippedover to asymmetric during the course of the discussion today basicallybecause I think the vulnerability that we have of missing on the downside is so much greater. If we miss on the up side, it won't be all-37-3/31/92that significant. And I would just say that I would not give a greatdeal of weight to what Don Kohn just said about the Ms at this point.I don't think we ought to be guided too much by one week's moneysupply numbers. So, I would support "B" asymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, all this discussion about thedifference between symmetric and asymmetric makes me think I probablydon't understand the difference well enough. It seems to me that themain difference between the two is a telephone call. And if I'm rightin that, it would seem to me that we ought to prefer symmetriclanguage and talk about it if developments warrant.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I support your preference forasymmetric. I think we want our words to be both precious andprescient, the words I heard earlier. And like Don, I've taken tocarrying my calculator. I have M2 growth through the end of Marchfrom the fourth quarter at 2.3 percent.MR. MULLINS. That's from the fourth quarter base, not fromDecember?MR. LINDSEY. From the fourth quarter base and also it is tothe end of March.MR. KOHN. It's right around 2.5 percent.MR. LINDSEY. It's 2.5 percent? Okay. I think that we willbe both precious and prescient in our words if we keep that in mind.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. I support your proposal of "B" asymmetric, andI appreciate your comments on getting past this period of conflictingdata. I hope that we will start to see better corporate earningsreports coming out following the first quarter so that we can see somesustainability in the equity market that is at a fairly high level.With regard to the Ms, I agree with you, President Syron. I'm notsure exactly what they mean. I know they mean something and maybethey only mean something in hindsight. So, I certainly agree thatit's something we need to pay attention to but shouldn't get rattledby. But there are a number of remaining concerns, so I would supportyour proposal based on them, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. Over the last couple of months we have had thesteepest yield curve in several decades from bills to bonds. Andputting bills on a coupon equivalent basis so we can understand whatit is [and say] anything with any confidence at all about the futurewould indicate that the yield curve tends to flatten as the expansionprogresses so that most likely later this year, or a year from now,we'll get a yield curve that is flatter than it is today. And I hopevery, very much that it comes from the long end. In fact, if I werestill in the private sector I'd probably be willing to bet that that-38-3/31/92flattening will occur at the long end as concerns over fiscal policytend to dissipate and people become comfortable with the idea thatexpansion can not only occur but may even be robust without any kindof inflation. But I am concerned about what has been happening to theyield curve in the last several weeks. The flattening has beenoccurring starting at the long end and kind of rolling down the curve,first with the 10-year note moving up toward the 3-year area androlling down to the 3-year area. And David Mullins's comments aboutthe forward rates I thought were very perceptive [unintelligible]market. So, we have had a flattening from 3 years on out and aconsiderable steepening from 1 year to 3 years, and at the same time ashift up in the 3- and 6-month and 1-year bill rates.I was interested in the go-around on the economy to hearabout the false start last year and concerns that it might happenagain. But one of the differences today is that we have a bill rateabove the funds rate and it has been so for some weeks. That hasn'thappened in a couple of years. If that continues with the flatteningor rolling down of the yield curve toward the shorter end and we getupward pressure on short rates, especially from the bill rates pushingup relative to the funds rate, then I would like to know what theimplications for Desk operations are going to be if the funds rate isheld firm at the 4 percent level. I think, if we're right about theoutlook, that the funds rate at 4 percent is too high as inflationexpectations subside and as the long end rallies back down. But I'dbe concerned about not having the leeway to allow the funds rate to bepulled up if these bill rates start to be under a lot of upwardpressure in the spring months. So, for that reason I'd like to see[the language] symmetric in either direction.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The consensus as I hear it is to supportthe last directive. So, if the Secretary would read it for us--MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, one further point. I'm quite surethat if our staff sat down and had to do money projections right now,they'd probably come out lower than the 3-1/2 and 1-1/2 percent [shownfor] M2 and M3 with constant interest rates. At the same time, if theCommittee were to write those lower, say at 3 and 1 percent, thatwould in effect be allowing and accepting a bit of the undershoot thatis coming, and the Committee may not want to do that. That is, youmight want to stick with the 3-1/2 and 1-1/2 percent, which is stillslipping below the midpoint. But I thought it wise to warn you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I think that is right because theconcerns that we have are [that] it will slip down; and if we saywe're accepting that, then there's no meaning to having it consistent.MR. KOHN(?). That's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If it has any meaning as a goal, weshould have what you originally had in it.MR. KOHN. So, you would stick with the 3-1/2 and 1-1/2percent?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That would be my inclination. Is theregeneral agreement on that?-39-3/31/92MR. SYRON. Well, I don't think we should be in the businessof changing it because the numbers that just came in were weaker,unless we want to change the targets because we don't like the number.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have to be careful about thesenumbers because they are extraordinary numbers.MR. BERNARD. [The directive would read]: "In theimplementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeksto maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. Inthe context of the Committee's long run objectives for price stabilityand sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration toeconomic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly greaterreserve restraint might or slightly lesser reserve restraint would beacceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserveconditions are expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 overthe period from March through June at annual rates of about 3-1/2 and1-1/2 percent, respectively."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Hoenig YesPresident Jordan YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Lindsey YesPresident Melzer YesGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Phillips YesPresident Syron YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Thank you very much, everyone.Our next meeting is on May the 19th.END OF MEETING-40-