Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 22, 1992A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 22, 1992, at 8:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice ChairmanMr. AngellMr. HoenigMr. JordanMr. KelleyMr. LaWareMr. LindseyMr. MelzerMr. MullinsMs. PhillipsMr. SyronMessrs. Boehne, Keehn, McTeer, and Stern, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Broaddus, 1/ Forrestal, and Parry, Presidentsof the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and EconomistMr. Bernard, Deputy SecretaryMr. Coyne, Assistant SecretaryMr. Gillum, Assistant SecretaryMr. Mattingly, General CounselMr. Prell, EconomistMr. Truman, EconomistMessrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey,Promisel, Siegman, and Stockton, AssociateEconomistsMr. McDonough, Manager of the System Open MarketAccountMs. Greene, Deputy Manager for ForeignOperationsMs. Lovett, Deputy Manager for DomesticOperations1/ President-elect.12/20-21/82Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Cross,l/ Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of GovernorsMr. Gemmill,2/ Associate Director, Division of InternationalFinance, Board of GovernorsMr. Kohn,2/ Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Lindsey,2/ Assistant Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Board of GovernorsMessrs. Balbach,2/ Burns,2/ T. Davis,2/ Eisenmenger,2/Mullineaux,2/ Scheld,2/ and Stern,2/ Senior VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Dallas,Kansas City, Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, and Minneapolis,respectivelyMessrs. Broaddus,2/ and Soss, Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of Richmond, and New YorkMs. Meulendyke,2/ Manager, Securities Department, FederalReserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofDecember 22, 1992CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. I think you allknow we have a luncheon for Bob Black that I hope everyone will beable to attend. I'd like to welcome Al Broaddus to his first meetingat this table. We look forward to his joining us on a regular basisstarting with the next meeting as the newly installed President of theRichmond Federal Reserve Bank.There is nothing unusual about the agenda this morning so I'dlike to get started right from the top. Would somebody like to moveapproval of the minutes of the November 17th meeting?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll move it.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Bill McDonough,you're on for the Foreign Desk.MR. MCDONOUGH. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I didn't have a chance to pick up thecause of the runup in the dollar against the DM from 1.57 to 1.58 thismorning. What explains that?MR. MCDONOUGH. A very, very thin market. There was a remarkby [Bundesbank President] Schlesinger, which seemed to give a morebland approach to his view of inflation in Germany, that helped thedollar; and then Bloomberg came in with a story interpreting whatSchlesinger had said in not such a positive view, so the dollar cameoff a little. But we have these very, very thin pre-holiday markets;so if somebody sneezes, the exchange rate moves a half pfennig.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's be very careful about sneezing inthis room! Any other questions? If not, we shall move on to theDomestic Desk, and Joan Lovett will bring us up to date.MS. LOVETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Joan?MR. JORDAN. I've been following this sort of seesaw marketpsychology and monitoring the Call during this last intermeetingperiod, including how we responded to and interacted with thatshifting market psychology. Through the summer and into the beginningof October, the dominant view seemed to be that the economy was weakerthan had been expected. Confirmation of that weakness in the variousstatistics that came out would lead the bond market to tend tostrengthen. We tended to go with that strengthening. Then fromOctober 1st until, say, on or about the first Tuesday of November,there was a significant backing up in market rates. As I understandthat, the psychology was that it was increasingly likely that Clintonwas going to be elected and that we were going to get a fiscal packagethat would be too expansionary and, therefore, it was adverse to themarket. Then something started to shift at that point. I don't know12/22/92whether it was before or after our last meeting. Now we've been in aperiod where even strong economic news does not cause the market tosell off as it was doing before. Previously, any signs of strongnumbers on industrial production or anything that would come out wouldtend to get an adverse reaction in the market. Don Kohn referred tothis one morning on the Call as the "new Clinton effect." The ideanow is that strong economic news means we're not going to get a bigfiscal stimulus package. Therefore, it's a reason to rally whereasbefore it would have been a reason to sell off. If that's a goodcharacterization of what has been going on, how much more potential isthere for that kind of effect if we continue to get strong economicnews going into the new year? Do you think the market is poised for afurther relief effect [based on the view] that we're not going to begetting a massive dose of fiscal stimulus or maybe something worselike a deficit-neutral package?MR. MCDONOUGH. We think the view that Clinton is not likelyto have a bigger stimulus package than the $25 to $30 billion thatJoan mentioned is probably fully in the market. But what we'rehearing now, especially in our morning dealer meetings, is the viewthat the yield curve from fed funds out to about 2 years is too steep.And we are beginning to get views, although not yet reflected intrading positions because of the tight year-end period, that bonds inthe short end of the curve are very good buys. So, if you listen towhat the dealers are saying, the market structure would say that we'regoing to have a very strong economic recovery and that the Fed willtighten about 25 basis points per quarter for the coming year. Butwhen we talk to market participants and ask what they think is reallygoing to happen, they have a view that is very close to the staffforecast. I'd say just in the last 10 days we have begun to hearpeople say that if this is what we believe the economy will do and theyield curve is saying that there's much more economic growth and muchmore Fed tightening than seems to make sense, there ought to be a bondmarket rally. We are just beginning to hear that.MR. JORDAN. The steepening that did occur in that periodfrom October 1st into early November was in the 2- to 3-year range.Most of that has not come back out, whereas at the longer end we'vehad some flattening.MR. MCDONOUGH. Exactly. And that's why people who arebeginning to talk themselves into thinking that there is a greatbuying opportunity are focusing on exactly that part of the curve.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think there's another force that isbeginning to work here that we can see when we unbundle the wholecoupon yield into the 1-year futures. As you are all aware, there hasbeen a very significant decline in [rates in] the 10- to 30-year area;indeed, one is sensing that there is a really fundamental shift in theoutlook as reflected in the various positions along the yield curve.What we may finally be seeing is a downward revision of long-terminflation expectations. There may be a hope--and I underline the word"hope"--that the budget deficit may be addressed in this particularperiod because the only time that it can be [cut] is during the so-called "honeymoon period." I think there's a market expectation thatsomething fundamental may happen and that is being addressed in thelonger end of the market; and even though we're getting this upwardsurge in the short end, it's more than offset on the long end and the12/22/92total effective yield in the 30-year coupon has been coming down. Ithink there is an intermediate cycle of the type that Jerry Jordan istalking about which has been superimposed on that process. If that istrue, then there may still be further downside rate possibilities inthe long end of the market. Indeed, what this is saying essentiallyis that the yield curve is going to flatten and possibly flatten quitesignificantly. If, however, the honeymoon comes and goes and we getthe usual no action, then I think we're likely to see that go rightback where it was, or maybe worse.MR. MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, there's also some play in themarket now because of the view that the new Treasury team may reduceissuance in the 30-year area. So, there is some attractiveness to the30-year bond among those betting that that will happen, and some ofthe higher yield or back-up in the 2-year note is the opposite effect--that there will be more supply at the short end of the market andless in the long end of the market. But I agree with your view of themore basic thing that is happening.MS. LOVETT. It's worth noting that Jerry Powell toldeveryone yesterday that as an outgoing Treasury official for debtmanagement he would advise the transition team not to make thatchange.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Joan? If not,would somebody like to move to ratify the transactions since the lastmeeting?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I move it.MR. SYRON. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Let's now move on toMessrs. Prell and Truman.MESSRS. PRELL and TRUMAN. [Statements--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Did I hear you correctly when you saidthat the gold exports in October appear to have come from the coffersof the Federal Reserve Bank of New York? Has anyone looked lately?MR. TRUMAN. Well, I didn't want to tell too many secrets inthis temple!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Obviously, we knew what happened tothe gold, but I don't think we knew what it did to exports.MR. TRUMAN. What happens in the Census data is that theFederal Reserve Bank of New York is treated as a foreign country.[Laughter] And when a real foreign country takes some of the gold outof New York and ships it abroad, it counts first as imports and thenas exports. However, the import side is not picked up in the Censusdata. So there you get the export side of it.MR. LAWARE. Great accounting!MR. BOEHNE. Great confidence building!12/22/92MR. TRUMAN. That's because you haven't been filling out yourimport documents!MR. ANGELL. Let me run this by again. You mean a countryowns gold and has it stored in the Federal Reserve Bank of New Yorkand if they ship it out, that's an export?MR. TRUMAN. And in the balance of payments accounts it alsocounts as an import, so it washes out.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The Federal Reserve Bank's basement is aforeign country. When they move it out of the basement into theUnited States, it's an import. Then, when they ship it out again,it's an export.MR. ANGELL. That makes sense!MR. TRUMAN. And sometimes when they sell the gold, it mightbe sold into the United States, so it should count as an import. Itdoesn't necessarily always show up as an export.MR. BOEHNE. That really clarifies it!MR. KELLEY. Does it have to get out of your vault at all inorder to be considered an import and an export?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I'm not even going to try toanswer that. In this particular case I know what happened, so I thinkthe description you have is correct.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Ted, I thought the Hooper-Johnson memo wasextremely interesting in a number of dimensions. That shows that[growth abroad] has more of an impact, obviously, in a polar-casesituation on U.S. growth than I would have thought intuitively. It isa polar-case situation, but it shows the importance of exports. Iwanted to ask you to give a horseback kind of guess: If you didn'thave something as extreme as their situation is--which may be based ona probability of less than 5 percent--but you could get to somethingthat had a probability of, say, 30 percent, where would that leave us?Is it halfway between what we have in the Greenbook and what they hadin their note? What would the impact of that be on growth in theUnited States? I didn't know how to interpret this; I don't knowwhether it is a linear interpretation.MR. TRUMAN. Essentially, it's linear. If you want to saythe cutback in growth is approximately half of what we built into thatworst case scenario, the impact on U.S. growth would be roughly half.I do think that memo in a way indicates that the worst case scenariois more probable in 1993 than in 1994 just because, with the passageof time, we are going to get more in the way of positive policyresponses than one would expect, although it becomes increasinglypossible to have two bad years as it is to have one. I was surprisedat that, too, but the basic reason why we get a bigger impact than onemight intuitively have thought stems from two factors. One is thedollar appreciation; that is quite substantial and it has a bigimpact, which one doesn't normally associate with this kind of12/22/92scenario on a sustained basis. Secondly, with income elasticity,generally when you get above 1 you get a multiplication effect; thingsbegin to add up.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mike, I'm a little concerned about the signalswe're going to be getting next year if we have a particular fiscaltwist. If I listen to Little Rock right, what we should be doing ismoving social spending off the government's books and onto the booksof businesses. Let's suppose we did that; say there is $50 billionless fiscal spending but mandated benefits of the same amount. Ithink of that as something like a lump sum labor tax. In my mind themarkets would interpret that as fiscal contraction and rates woulddrop, but at the same time we would be seeing costs rise and perhapswe'd be getting higher inflation numbers as a result. Is that areasonable interpretation of what we'd be seeing?MR. PRELL. I don't want to venture a political judgment,but--MR. LINDSEY. No, it's a "what if" question.MR. PRELL. I can't argue with the direction of what you'resaying. It would look like reduced budget deficits. That might befavorable for the financial markets but they would also perceive thecost-push and worry about it translating, unless monetary policy werevery restrictive, into ongoing higher inflation. So, it's hard to sayhow that would net out as a bond market shock.MR. LINDSEY. Would that cause a net increase in measuredinflation rates?MR. PRELL. I think so. I'm not sure what kinds of changesyou're assuming, but if they are mandated health care, mandatedexpenditures on training--though I gather there may be some signs of abacking away from that--they would enter the cost structure one way oranother and tend to be passed through.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's also another way of looking atit. How that shifting of the net borrowing ex ante from government tothe private sector works its way out in the financial markets is alsorelated to this.MR. LINDSEY. In an ideal world, shouldn't it be a wash?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not if the elasticity of the demand andsupply of funds is different between the two sectors, as it surely is.MR. JORDAN. It depends on its ultimate incidence: How muchis borne by the workers in lower real wages and how much by theshareholders--it could hit the stock market harder than the bondmarket--versus how much is passed on to the consumers as prices. Butwe don't know enough to answer that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Some of those effects] obviously areoccurring today.12/22/92MR. LINDSEY. Bill, I don't see that [issue raised] at all inthe newspapers. It is rather strange. I see references to a chanceof fiscal contraction or $25 billion in extra spending, but I don'tsee that mentioned at all as a possibility.MR. MCDONOUGH. No, and we don't hear it discussed in themarket at all. The assumption is that that which is virtuous on thefiscal side will not be turned into anything negative in the privatesector.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is another possible way of lookingat this. If the federal borrowing requirement is lowered and a costis imposed on the economy or on business, there's also the perceptionthat economic activity will slow in the process. And that would notfully offset the downward pressure on long-term rates that would occuras a consequence of the reduction in the budget deficit.MR. ANGELL. But that again depends upon the elasticity ofdemand for the products.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It depends on the elasticity of demandfor financial instruments and the incidence of the costs and theincoming productivity trends. The net effect of that has to be tolower GNP. It's a tax and its effect really depends on what is done.MR. ANGELL. But it seems to me it's quite different if itoccurs in a period of sustained monetary restraint than if it occursin a period in which that monetary restraint is not in place.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. Any other questions?MR. JORDAN. A couple of questions. First for Ted, regardingyour comments about the effects on [the United States] of [what ishappening in] Europe and elsewhere around the world: Isn't itsomewhat of a recursive process? I saw a press report about OECDraising its forecast for the United States. By the time that groupgets together for the next Working Party Meetings in Paris they willhold up the prospects of a stronger '93, incorporate that in theirnumbers, and raise their numbers.MR. TRUMAN. Yes, our forecast is somewhat weaker than therecent OECD forecast and the IMF forecast released today that I heardon National Public Radio. That is partly because we forecast moreoften and have a faster turnaround in this process.MR. JORDAN. But in their summer and fall estimates, wasn'tit the case that as the prospects of [growth in] the United Statescame down these other countries were revising down their forecasts?MR. TRUMAN. Yes, though I think on balance for all of themincluding the staff [unintelligible] the U.S. story--although itfluctuated up and down within a relatively narrow range over the last12 months--has been their most accurate forecast, whatever consensusone wants to take. The one that has been the most [unintelligible]has been Canada. Whereas the Canadians, if you go back 12 months, forobvious reasons were looking for a faster pickup in the first half ofthis year than they actually had, that was one of the factors thatweighed on their marking things down [unintelligible].12/22/92MR. JORDAN. Let me turn to some questions for Mike about theU.S. economy. I was looking back over the last year--I haven't goneback further--trying to understand the dynamics of the forecasts asthey are put together and the subsequent revisions. A year ago atthis time the prospects were for the first quarter to be very, veryweak. It came in considerably stronger than expected. The changethere, of course, between what had been expected and what occurred wasthe most dramatic--much more so than even for the third quarter--andtended to have the auto-regressive effect of raising the prospects outinto the future. The second quarter then came in considerablystronger than expected. At that time you revised down very sharplythe third-quarter numbers; I think we were all feeling in that August-September period that things were very, very much weaker thanexpected. Now we see that the third quarter came in considerablystronger than those numbers, raising not only the reported number forthe third quarter--what we have so far--but the forecasts for thefourth quarter and the first quarter of 1993, which also have beenrevised up. That worries me a bit. If you look back at the thirdquarter in particular and the reasons for having revised [yourforecast] down sharply, with the advantage of hindsight, were therethings that would have told you that it was still going to be quite astrong quarter despite the news [indicating strength] in the secondquarter? Could that forecasting error have been avoided if we hadlooked at the right things?MR. PRELL. Incidentally, the [revised] third-quarter GDPnumber is 3.4 percent. Maybe there was something; I don't know. Ifthere was, we missed it, obviously. Another possibility is that allthose quarterly numbers will be revised in ways that will alter ourperception of where we went wrong. To be sure, we are trying toforecast numbers that are consistent with the current scheme ofestimation, but there is an erratic quality in this. One wonderswhether the fourth quarter of last year was as low and then the firstquarter as high, and so on, or whether there are some flaws in thenumbers. We pointed out that at this point through the first threequarters of the year--at least before today's revision--there was asomewhat puzzling, growing discrepancy between the income andexpenditure sides of the accounts. All of these things I think youneed to recognize as the [unintelligible] pattern of errors. But Idon't know what magic forecasting tool we missed. I will remind folksthat in May or June you were presented with an analysis of how we haddisregarded the information from M2. It suggested that our forecastshould have been revised down to 1-1/2 percent for the third quarterand for the fourth quarter. So, M2 at that point wasn't the missingforecasting tool, at least applied the way that particular modelpresented it. I just don't know what it was.MR. JORDAN. Let me shift this in a slightly differentdirection. I'm still trying to understand the interaction betweenwhat we do and how that works in your thinking about the economy inthe Greenbook exercise. In the beginning of the Greenbook, the firstpage, second paragraph gives two alternatives. The first one says theupside surprise in the second half is confirmation that cuts in short-term rates can still be a potent stimulative force even in the face ofvarious financial strains and so on. As I understand it, that's kindof a linkage in your model. At an earlier point nominal interestrates rose, representing a restrictive policy. And with a very longlag inflation is coming down. In the meantime nominal interest rates12/22/92also were declining, giving some positive effect on the economy. Butat some point [in your forecast] nominal interest rates stopdeclining, but [for a while] inflation continues to come down so realinterest rates start rising. So, the reason you have 1994 real [GDPgrowth] slowing with the same nominal interest rates or even slightlyhigher nominal interest rates is mainly because inflation continues todecline and real interest rates go up.MR. PRELL. Well, let me say two things. One is that afterhaving lowered the real short-term rate, even stability means that thetime profile of growth rates of GDP will show a bulge and then willcome back down as the level effect peters out. The growth rate effectdisappears and becomes negative. But we've added on to that a rise innominal short-term rates in 1994 plus the further modest decelerationof prices, which enhances the increase in real rates. And, yes, therise in real interest rates in 1994 is a factor in this forecast.MR. JORDAN. But if I read it right, isn't that the primaryfactor slowing real GDP growth in 1994?MR. TRUMAN. The other factor--I hesitate to mention it--isthe appreciation of the dollar, which is partly a function of what isgoing on with U.S. real rates and partly what we assume is going onwith foreign real rates. That's the major factor in the attenuationof growth on the external side, the net exports side, in 1994. Theappreciation building over a two-year period begins to have effects.It's like a tightening in monetary policy, [resulting in] weakergrowth in the short run. The stronger dollar affects '94predominantly.MR. PRELL. Just to be clear on why we've done what we'vedone: Obviously, we need to make some decision about what assumptionto base the forecast on. In this case we're making some judgmentabout where the Committee desires the economy to head. Starting withone rather simple observation, which is that real short-term rates noware very low and lower than we think would be consistent with somesteady state, and secondly that the other financial restraints in thesystem will presumably diminish over time as capital positions offinancial intermediaries improve and so on, it seemed to us that atsome point the short-term rate should go up. We could have postponedthat until beyond 1994, but in our assessment of the trends in theeconomy that ran the risk of overshooting going out into 1995--hittingfull employment and tending to head through it and thus reversing thedisinflation process. We could fine-tune this, but that is the basicsense of what is behind the interest rate outlook.MR. JORDAN. Just to be clear: You have been saying that themodest increase in nominal interest rates you built in or the increasein real interest rates resulting from lower inflation has its dominanteffect in '94.MR. PRELL. Well, the reduction in inflation was less thanthe nominal interest rate change. We notionally put in about 3/4 of apercentage point increase in the nominal federal funds rate. Thedisinflation at that point is progressing at several tenths per year.So, it's a small element in this rise in real rates.12/22/92MR. JORDAN. The reason I ask the question--and I don't knowhow to incorporate the international effects that Ted referred to--isthat there seems to be a crosscurrent in our discussions between theconcept that the economy tends to expand in the absence of variousdepressing forces that are retarding economic activity, and somehowpolicy may work against those adjustment constraints, versus the viewthat the economy tends to stagnate in the absence of stimulus to makeit go forward. I'm trying to get at how, at least in the Greenbookprojections, what we are doing with respect to policy comes to bear onthe forecast.MR. PRELL. Our notion is that, yes, there are naturalequilibration processes in the system. With adequate monetaryexpansion, there are corrective mechanisms through the price systemthat ultimately push the system back toward [equilibrium]. But thosetake time; and it's rather hard for us to define this in terms of somemonetary path, given the uncertainties.MR. TRUMAN. But those could be short-circuited, too. I'llgive an example in a European context--maybe it's a far-fetchedexample: One could argue that in Germany, given what they've set inmotion, if they don't ease short-term interest rates, it essentiallywould be using policy against the natural lubricating forces in theeconomy. So, if policy is too tight for any extended period of time,ultimately maybe the economy could adjust to sustained high levels ofshort-term interest rates of 8 percent or 9 percent, but you'd have totell a very complicated story about how you got to that--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions? If not, who wouldlike to start our Committee discussion?MR. BROADDUS. I'm happy to say, Mr. Chairman, that thelatest information on conditions in our District is quite favorableand actually more optimistic than some of the information underlyingour report for the Beigebook. It seems clear that economic activityin our region is advancing at a faster pace than we had thought to bethe case earlier. There are a number of indications of this. Oneindicator that we are looking at now with respect to the District'soverall performance is the states' withholding tax collections. Theyhave been running ahead of projections in several different states nowthrough the month of October. We don't have full data for November,but in Virginia at least that's continuing through November. Sector-by-sector we're getting very strong reports on Christmas sales inevery District state. There also are signs of greater strength inhousing and manufacturing. And perhaps of more than passing interest,we are beginning to hear at least a few slightly good things aboutcommercial real estate markets in our area. Specifically, we're toldthat markets for both retail space and office space are beginning tostabilize. We have some evidence that office vacancy rates haveactually declined in a few areas in our District and rents appear tobe bottoming out, all of which strikes us as hopeful and broadlyconsistent with the Greenbook projection of some improvement innonresidential investment in the quarters ahead.As far as the national economy is concerned, we think theGreenbook forecast is certainly plausible. While the growth of GDPshown in the projections for '93 and '94 is pretty subdued and theunemployment rate remains quite high at the end of the projection12/22/92period, there is a further decline in inflation. So, all in all, theGreenbook projection strikes us as a reasonably favorable near-termoutcome if we can get it. We could definitely do a lot better, but wecould also do a lot worse. We think there are risks on both sides ofthe projection. We think the biggest downside risk is the possibilitythat both the Japanese and European economies could turn out to beweaker than projected. But there also are upside risks as we see it,both externally and on the domestic side. As Ted Truman mentioned,fiscal stimulus is already in the process of being put in place inJapan. There is certainly a possibility that the Bank of Japan willease monetary policy further in the near term. There is a widespreadexpectation that if conditions in Germany remain weak, we also willsee some easing by the Bundesbank at some point. So, it seems to usthat there is at least a possibility that the external picture may besomewhat brighter than the Greenbook projections as we move into thesecond half of next year and the first part of 1994.On the domestic side, we in Richmond sense a much more solidand more permanent increase in aggregate demand and in both householdand business confidence now than in the other several episodes ofaccelerated growth so far in this recovery. Netting it all out, wethink the overall risk in the outlook has shifted rather decidedlytoward the up side in the last several weeks, and we think it would beappropriate for the Committee to take account of this in reaching itspolicy decision this morning.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, in terms of the District, the levelof economic activity continues to increase. Coming into the lastmeeting, conditions were starting to show signs of improvement and, ifanything, the rate of improvement has accelerated a bit as we cameinto this meeting. And I do think this improvement is fairly broad-based. Auto sales have been a little better. The first-quarterproduction schedules have been set about 15 percent over last year, sothat's a good increase. The auto manufacturers are anticipating animprovement in the sales level next year that is still below what theydescribe as the baseline but it is higher than this year. The heavytruck business has been particularly strong. Sales of Class 8 unitsare up 15 percent this year and are forecast to be up another 16percent next year. The backlog now is some 12 to 16 weeks for theseunits; it's pretty broad-based and is viewed as quite strong. Steelproduction continues at a good level, operating at about 80 percent[of capacity]. Steel producers also are reasonably optimistic aboutnext year. And certainly the international trade cases that arecurrently going on ought to be beneficial to the industry. Betweenthe subsidy constraints and the dumping constraints--and I think thelatter will be announced later in January--they are expecting thatimports next year will be reduced by 4 to 5 million tons. That shouldalso have the effect of improving the operating levels of the industryby some 5 percent, and they would expect that to occur by the end ofthe first quarter. This ought to provide a better environment forpricing, which continues to be very, very rugged.Retail sales in the District continue at a good pace, but Imust say some of the strength that we saw early in the Christmasseason has eased a bit in the last few days. This is a very toughperiod to judge because the selling season is longer, but I must say12/22/92many of the people that I've talked to who earlier were expecting,say, an 8 percent increase this Christmas season now are talking morein the area of 4 to 5 percent. We have particularly strong [sales] incommunications equipment. Orders for communications equipmentbottomed out in mid-1991 and have been increasing rapidly at annualrates of 20 to 25 percent. The expectation for next year is thatgrowth will be a little lower but still some 15 to 16 percent ahead of1992. Even in the agricultural equipment business, there is a littlebetter tone, or at least it's not worse. One major manufacturer isexpecting a 5 percent increase in unit sales next year, but that isafter a 12 percent decline in '92 and a 9 percent decline in '91. So,it's an improvement from a pretty low level. I will say, though, thatinherent to the better outlook for '93 is the expectation that an ITCtax will be enacted, which will be beneficial to agriculturalequipment.The inflation news continues to be very good. To hold downtheir cost of purchases, large companies are exerting tremendouspressure on their suppliers with very good results. More than a few,in fact, have achieved reductions in the average cost of theirpurchases this year and they are expecting equally good results nextyear. Competitive conditions in the marketplace make it awfully toughto increase prices. Labor contracts continue to be negotiated onfavorable terms, and certainly this continuing drumbeat of layoffs andplant closings has an effect on labor expectations. The fact that ofGM's 28 planned plant closings 12 so far have been in Michigancertainly is unsettling to employment conditions in that state.Turning to the national economy, while I do think the outlookhas improved--certainly we have no reason to question the staff'sforecast--I must say that I continue to have at least lingeringquestions as to the underlying strength and sustainability of therecovery. The employment numbers that will be coming out over thenext few months I think will give us pretty good indications as to howthings will work out next year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, economic conditions in most statesof the Twelfth District are improving, but deterioration continues inCalifornia. In District states outside of California, employment grewat an annual rate of 3-1/2 percent in October, and employment in thesestates is now roughly 0.9 of a percent higher than it was a year ago.Employment growth is consistent with anecdotal reports of strongretail sales and renewed consumer confidence in much of the West.However, contacts in the state of Washington report widespread concernabout the area's future due largely to Boeing's announcements ofcancellations and delays of aircraft orders and resulting layoffs.Despite these concerns, many contacts report that current businessconditions in the state of Washington are actually quite good, andemployment in Washington actually picked up smartly in both Septemberand October. In contrast, there is no sign of improvement inCalifornia, a point that I'm sure you've read about in severalarticles so far this week. Employment continued to decline inNovember, bringing the decline to 155,000 jobs or 1-1/4 percent,compared with a small rise in the national economy. Defense cutbacksand commercial real estate problems will continue to be a drag onsouthern California's economy for some time, and budget problems will-11-12/22/92lead to cutbacks in levels of state and local government spendingthroughout the state.Turning to the national economy, recent economic dataactually have been encouraging. It's possible that a moderateexpansion may finally have taken hold. Although we are not quite asoptimistic as the Greenbook concerning economic growth next year, wehave raised our forecast moderately to about 2-1/2 percent in 1993,assuming no change in policy. Most of the pickup is likely to comefrom interest-sensitive sectors: consumer durables, housing, andbusiness equipment. Consistent with this moderate growth, theunemployment rate is likely to decline only moderately over the nextcouple of years and we would expect the CPI inflation to come insomewhat lower than that forecast by the Greenbook. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I'm happy to say that theoutlook for the Sixth District looks much more positive than it hasfor some time, and the improvement that we're seeing seems to bepretty much across the board. The Christmas surge in retail saleslooks quite promising; it looks to us as if the South may very welllead the nation in this area. Spending is the highest in four yearsand is broadly based. Home furnishings and durables in particular aregenerally quite strong. Retail sales are beginning to spill over intomanufacturing. Inventories were quite light at the beginning of theseason and now manufacturers and transporters are reporting unusuallyheavy activity for this late in the season. Both home furnishings andwhite sales have a disproportionate representation in regionalmanufacturing and employment [growth] as a result. The pickup inhousing nationally is seen as well in the District; the buildingassociated with Hurricane Andrew is helping the Sixth District. Oursurvey of manufacturing plants was also more positive this time. Thatsurvey suggests that capital goods orders are likely to increase overthe next six months. Moreover, more than 40 percent of therespondents expect to add workers over the next six months as comparedto about one-third last month. The anecdotal information that we'regetting from a variety of sources suggests that consumer and businessconfidence has shifted noticeably since our last meeting. We'vepretty much stopped hearing negative remarks even from our smallbusiness advisory council members, and we are now confronted by whatseem to be overly optimistic expectations--most frequently reported byretailers. So, I think the pendulum has swung from perhaps overlynegative to perhaps overly optimistic. The inflation news continuesto be relatively good in the District.To be sure, there are some negatives to report, although Idon't think they are likely to tip the balance the other way. Inparticular, on the employment side, just when we thought we had seenthe end of the consolidation and cost cutting, we are now hearing ofnew layoffs and cutbacks, particularly by Delta Airlines, whichobviously is a major employer in our District. Many of our stategovernments are doing better than they had been, but Louisiana andFlorida still face financial pressures. Finally, the energy sector isstill in very poor shape, and that affects the Gulf areasparticularly. But clearly, as I said at the outset, the situationlooks much better than it did even at the last meeting, and theoutlook seems encouraging.12/22/92Looking at the national economy, over the entire forecasthorizon our forecast is very similar to the Greenbook although we havegrowth [turning up] a little sooner. Both consumer and businessspending on durables is higher in the Greenbook forecast than in ours.And the Greenbook sees relatively more of these durables consisting ofimports than we do; as a result we have a less negative outlook fornet exports even though the export growth rates are fairly close. Wehave a lower unemployment rate throughout the forecast. A differencethat I've been reporting for some time is in the inflation numbers,where our forecast for inflation remains somewhat higher and isprobably closer to the Blue Chip forecast. When I put all of thistogether, it does seem to me that the expansion has greaterpossibilities for being sustained this time around, and I think therisks to the economy are more symmetrical than they have been for sometime.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. The District is generally better both in toneand activity but still is lagging the nation. There's something aboutthat Mason-Dixon line which seems to make things go faster below itand more slowly above it!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Excluding California.MR. BOEHNE. Right. The shift in tone is more pronouncedthan in activity. I agree with someone else's remark at the tablethat people are more optimistic relative to activity than they werebefore when in my view they were too pessimistic given the level ofactivity. In terms of the sectors, manufacturing is up and retailsales are up--I don't think as much as in the Atlanta District, butour retailers are generally happy about the Christmas season. We hearmore comments about improvement in residential activity. And bankerskeep talking about improvement in loan demand--if not in loans bookedat least those in the pipeline. But having said that, there still aresome clear areas of weakness. Job growth is generally quite soft inthe District. The reports from heavy industry, notably steel, arequite weak. I haven't really done this in any scientific way, but itseems to me that if we have a group of small and medium-sized businesspeople and a group of big business people, the big business peopledon't share the same kind of better feelings that the smaller businesspeople have. The commercial real estate market is still quite flat.I had a group of people from that industry in and I suggested it mighttake three years, perhaps five years, to get the District turnedaround, and I was told that that was considerably too optimistic.They were talking well out into the decade.On the national scene, I think the key issue--and it has beenunderscored already--is whether we now have a self-feeding moderaterecovery going. I feel better that we do have one going at thispoint. I would put the risks at about even on the up side and thedown side. The key continues to be employment growth. If we get somemoderate employment growth in the months ahead, then I think [therecovery] will be self-feeding. If we do not--and I think that ispotentially the weakest link--then we could still have somedifficulty. Also, the downward pressures on inflation rates continue.It is difficult to make price increases stick. The layoffs that arereported in the newspapers help keep wage increases down. And I-13-12/22/92suspect we may do better on the inflation front than the Greenbooksuggests.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I'd like to make three comments on the nationaleconomy. First, just as a lesson for the future, I'd like to remindus all that as recently as two meetings ago we couldn't see thestrength that was unfolding in the second half. That isn't acriticism of the Greenbook forecast. It wasn't in our forecast; itwasn't in other forecasts; and it wasn't in the anecdotal reports. Wewere standing right on top of it and we couldn't see it. That's justan important lesson to remember going forward. It's not a question inmy mind of whether we made mistakes in the forecast. It just pointsout how difficult it is to do that and really use it as a basis formaking policy decisions. Secondly, I realize that Mike has to make anassumption with respect to what policy is going to be, but it's justinconceivable to me that we'll get through 1993 without an increase inthe funds rate. The real issue may be that we are probably lucky tobe getting out of 1992 without making one; I think it's somethingwe're going to have to be thinking about a lot sooner than [thestaff's] assumptions might imply.The final point I'd like to make, and it relates to thesecond one, is that it troubles me greatly when I read pieces in thepaper--I don't hear it around this table--about how we need to havemore economic stimulus, whether it's fiscal stimulus or monetarystimulus, to increase the rate of employment growth. In my mind, thereason that we're seeing sluggish employment growth is that we'regetting good productivity gains, and that's what one would expect atthis stage of the cycle. Those gains are going to provide the basisfor increased output and income and eventually employment down theroad. To jeopardize this basic setting we have of declining inflationor to jeopardize the progress that we're making toward price stabilityin order to try to increase employment gains would be a mistake. Thefinal observation I'd make on that particular issue is that justbecause of demographics and slower labor force growth, we won't beseeing the kind of employment gains that we've seen in otherrecoveries. That's an important factor in that.With respect to the District, my comment would be that inemployment basically we're seeing a pickup in momentum. For a gooddeal of the months during the middle part of this year, I wouldn't saywe were lagging but the pace had slowed to that in the rest of thecountry. I'm seeing increased momentum in the most recent three-monthperiod in relation to the last year and significantly higher gainsboth in the last three months and over the last year than for thenation as a whole. So, we have another one of those situations wherethere are very significant regional differences that are somewhatmasked in the overall numbers.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, our District continues to improvemodestly, although we would note that the anecdotal evidence is muchstronger than the statistics are showing. Our energy activitycontinues to improve, especially in gas drilling. Our agriculturalarea is sound, with improving livestock prices offsetting some of the12/22/92negatives from the lower grain prices. But overall, our agriculturalincome is still solid. Construction activity generally is improving alittle more modestly, but the single-family housing area is verystrong, particularly in the western part of our region. Inmanufacturing, although we continue to hear about expansion plans byFord Motor Company in our area, that expansion has not taken placeyet. Our manufacturing job growth is flat for the time being. Wehear a lot of optimism from our small business groups. They are stillsaying that they would like to expand even more but are having somedifficulty getting credit from banks; that's on their minds still.On the national front, we anticipate growth as we look out to1994 similar to that of the Greenbook, although our path is a bitdifferent and a little more modest inintially. Still, we end up aboutin the same place. We are a little less optimistic on consumerdemand, though. We also see improvements in inflation. We've revisedthat somewhat; it's not quite as favorable as we thought earlier.Overall, though, we think the economy is expanding at a persistentpace going forward into 1993.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I have reported for some time that the Districteconomy was expanding, and it is certainly continuing to do so. Thetone of the anecdotal evidence suggests that there has been somefurther distinct strengthening. In fact, in some ways the anecdotessound like what one would expect early in a recovery, which of courseis not [the case for] this expansion chronologically. In some of thesectors, though certainly not all, people are turning ebullient; I'mtalking about housing, autos, and retail sales more generally.Whether this is just a spike or something that is sustainable remainsto be seen. But clearly, in the District at the moment things aregoing better in terms of expansion and there is still virtually atotal lack of inflationary pressures, at least according to thebusiness contacts we have. So, in most circumstances, things lookquite positive.With regard to the national economy, I don't have anyproblems taking the Greenbook forecast as a base. If I were lookingfor downside risks, I would point to the foreign situation. Businesscontacts in the Twin Cities that do any amount of business in Europeor Japan have reported exceedingly negative results recently. Theysuggest to me that those economies are far worse than I at least hadunderstood them to be. Whether that is a precursor of things to comeis much more difficult to say. But clearly, they report very badconditions and, at least as far as their own businesses are concerned,they are not optimistic [about the outlook for exports]. On the otherhand, though, putting that one risk aside, I would not be at allsurprised to see the national economy grow somewhat more rapidly thanthe Greenbook suggests. My reading of history in the postwar periodat least is that once the economy develops some momentum on the upside--and I think that may be in the process of occurring--we tend tobe surprised both at its duration and, for a time, at its magnitude.While the Greenbook forecast for the most part has a rather nice,steady 2-1/2 to 3 percent growth quarter-by-quarter, if momentum isreally building here, I think for a time we will see more rapid growththan that.-15-12/22/92CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Tom Melzer referred to theregional differences. In listening to what has been said here, I amsomewhat struck by the fact that we do have quite pronounceddifferences--I don't know exactly where the line is--in the north ofCalifornia and in some other parts of the country. In terms ofactivity, I would say that in the New England region nothing is verydifferent than at the time of the last meeting, but there is apalpable improvement in mood and attitude. I don't think there isanyone who is ebullient in New England at this point, but retailersare considerably more optimistic about Christmas. They have seenbetter activity so far and, interestingly, in the nondurables area.There are the usual complaints about margins, with price competitionbeing very severe. Where the final retailing figures will come out inour part of the country is not completely clear because retailers didlose two days with the storm last weekend. They think they will getmost but not all of it back, but that will offset a lot of the extratwo days in the shopping season.The employment markets remain relatively soft with hiringbeing impacted by continued layoffs. In our District that includesIBM and of course the defense sector, which is going to [lay offworkers] for some time. One sector where we do see some improvementis in housing, consistent with what other people have said. Housingprices have stabilized and in fact some isolated markets actually showincreases. We also think it's going to take a long time for thecommercial real estate sector to work out its problems. Our banks saythat they are seeing some improvement in loan demand, with some growthin loans; but that is being offset in terms of the gross figures bypaydowns from other sectors. Like other people, our manufacturershave expressed a great deal of concern about the exports side. Wehave a lot of people who sell things [abroad], including non-price-sensitive high-tech kinds of things, who are seeing a quite pronouncedslowdown in Europe. Perhaps like Richmond, our tax receipts areshowing some improvement; but interestingly they are more on the salesside than on the income-related withholding side, where we reallyhaven't seen improvement.For the nation, I think there has been a definiteimprovement; one can't help but be impressed by the breadth of thesectors reflecting this improvement. I still have concerns aboutsustainability, though I have to say that is something only time willtell, given--to use Don Kohn's phrase--the litany of structural dragsthat we have. I have a real concern about exports, which isparticularly reflected in this work done by Johnson, et. al. Overall,we're somewhat more optimistic on the price side and somewhat morepessimistic on the growth side on a marginal basis than the Greenbook.I think at this point the risks are pretty symmetrical. Things areimproving but the sustainability is not guaranteed at this stage.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. The sharp improvement in tone since the lastmeeting that Bob Forrestal reported for the Southeast occurred onemeeting earlier in the Southwest. The District economy has remainedvery positive during the past few weeks, but it hasn't continued toimprove. We continue to do a little better in the Southwest than the-16-12/22/92country as a whole. During the past year our employment has grown alittle over a percent and a half. At the last meeting, I reportedthat one of the sources of strength in our District has been Mexicanshoppers along the border area. I should mention this time that theMexican authorities have imposed a $50 limit on what may be broughtback duty free in cars and on foot across the bridges.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Didn't that cause something of a riot?MR. MCTEER. There was a riot in Nuevo Laredo over that.It's good to see people rioting because of limits on their importsrather than consumer exports! This has happened before at Christmastime when the outflow of cash has been extreme, but it is causing somevery sharp cutbacks in a lot of our border towns. Some of the Kmartand Wal-Mart stores are showing a drop in sales of up to 30 percentover these past few weeks because of that.It seems that things are going well nationally with the 3.4percent growth in the third quarter and prospects for about the samein the fourth quarter. The risks do seem to have balanced out on theup and down sides. I think policy is in a good position, and the onlything I'm still a little concerned about is the very slow growth inM2. It would have been nice if we could have ended this year at leasttouching the lower bounds [of the ranges] for M2 and M3. That givesme some concern for the future, but for right now I think we're ingood shape.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you have a question, Bob?MR. PARRY. Yes, I just want to comment on something TomMelzer mentioned about regional disparities. I mentioned in my reporton California the decline of about 155,000 [jobs] in the last sixmonths. If we back out California from the statistics, we get almosta completely different picture of what is happening: We see anemployment picture in terms of nonfarm employment where the rest ofthe country is up 300,000 in the last six months. That's not robustbut it is increasing. If we back out California from the civilianemployment numbers, we get an unemployment rate of 6.8 percent, and wewould have started from the same point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are you about to suggest something?[Laughter]MR. PARRY. We are not seceding...yet! What I'm suggestingis that a majority of people in the country are experiencing somethingvery significantly different from what a group of people in one state,or maybe even half a state, are.MR. KELLEY. That has been going on for a long time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What is the difference at this stage asyou see it between northern and southern California?MR. PARRY. There's a significant difference: 80 percent ofthe loss of employment is in southern California. They have about 60percent of the jobs. Parts of northern California--for example, theSilicon Valley--show some strength. Intel has added 1600 jobs in thelast year. We now talk about the United States as being the leader in12/22/92d-ram chips at this point. Biotech is doing quite well. So, thereare signs of relatively robust activity in the north, although I don'tthink they approach what we are seeing in the Dallas District or theAtlanta District. It's very concentrated. Although it's dangerous totake an area out and set it aside, as I said, the national figures insome respects don't give a good indication of what is happening to theoverwhelming majority of people.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. It seems apparent that the economy is strongerthan we had anticipated. I think the question we should be askingourselves is why. Now, it may be that this is a normal cyclicalsurprise, but I doubt it because normally we get a monetary aggregatelike M2 growing at a fairly rapid rate in a recovery period andnormally we get some upward movement in commodity prices as recoveriesbegin. This recovery doesn't have those features and yet we havesurprising growth in the midst of a period in which pessimism was thepredominant view. If we ask why, I think we may ask ourselves whetherwe have underestimated the short-run growth stimulus of getting therate of inflation down. We have decreased the tax rate on capitalgoods by lowering the rate of inflation, and that may have been inplace long enough now to be giving us some real lift. We're alsoseeing a labor productivity rebound which has been as strong as it hasbeen in a normal cyclical [stage] in which employment and output bothwere growing. So, this is something that we ought to keep in mind.The one awesome worry out there is the external situation. Will slowgrowth abroad and will the penchant for protectionism through eithertariffs or subsidies or whatever cause the world's economy to bederailed? That's still a worry even though the U.S. economy does seemto be well on its way to sustained expansion. Now, it seems to methat the price level in the United States is still rising but at adecreasing rate. And it seems to me that the price of gold may befalling at a decreasing rate. Somewhere in here, if the rise inprices levels out at 3 percent, we may be missing a wonderfulopportunity. If short-run growth does respond as well as we mightbelieve to lower inflation expectations, it would be unfortunate if welost sight of the goal of monetary policy at the very time in whichthe field is most fertile for achievement of our long-term goal.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I have a Christmas present for theCommittee! I'm going to spare the Committee my usual comprehensiveand picturesque discussion of the economy sector by sector. I simplywant to make the point that I remain more optimistic than the staffdoes about where we're going and the pace at which we're going. Thething that puzzles me about the Greenbook projection is that therelatively slow rate of growth in 1993 and continuing into 1994 andthe major slack reflected in the unemployment numbers would indicate amore rapid rate of progress on the inflation front than is containedin the Greenbook projection. My own feeling is that the growth rateof GDP in 1993 will probably be up to 50 basis points higher [than theGreenbook forecast] and I think that rate of growth may be consistentwith somewhat lower unemployment numbers and with the Greenbookprojection on inflation. In summary, I feel more optimistic about therate of growth in the economy and the rate of decline in theunemployment rate than the Greenbook. I think the risks in the12/22/92projection are about symmetric with a slightly greater tilt toward theupside risk.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. Well, the situation in my part of the countrybrightened considerably on two occasions since the last meeting whenthe sun came out very briefly. It hadn't happened since September.It did improve the mood of the place.MS. PHILLIPS. Sensitive about this are you, Jerry?MR. JORDAN. Like some others have commented around thetable, the shift in mood is striking. People were reporting their ownsituations as not so bad but we were getting this disparity betweenwhat they saw nationally and how gloomy they were versus their strongorder books, their backlogs, their goods production, and so on. So,at the time of our October meeting when the downbeat mood was sopervasive--including here--I was hearing the same thing from all thebusiness groups and directors and others. That has totally vanished.Nothing has changed in what they say about what is going on in theirown situations. Housing is still good; retailing is good. As SiKeehn reported, [sales of] heavy trucks are very strong--about thebest in five years. We assemble a lot of light vehicles--small trucksand vans that people use as cars--in our District and they are alsovery strong. The gloominess comes from the large internationalcorporations that have foreign operations. The negative commentary isvery, very strong about Canada and Europe. I don't know whether togive more weight--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They are including Canada in that?MR. JORDAN. Yes, they are including Canada because of laborcosts and the political situation; they're still very worried aboutthe cost of benefits. One major manufacturer who has a very largeoperation up there says that by far his most productive, efficientplant in the technical sense is in Canada, but he cannot get contractsin the United States because people do not trust having to depend on aCanadian supplier.Turning to the national scene, I don't know whether to givemore credence to what is now an upbeat note in the outlook than Iwould have to a downbeat note three months ago. My bias is to thinkthat the economy does tend to expand. As Gary Stern was saying, thehistory would say that once the economy starts in an upward direction,revisions tend to feed on themselves, as we've seen this year so far.The numbers come in stronger than anticipated and the revisionsgenerally tend to be in an upward direction. I think that hassustainability. I don't think it's symmetrical; there's a naturalbias in an upward direction. So my own national outlook wouldprobably be stronger than what the Greenbook says.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, as far as the outlook isconcerned, our forecast is essentially the same as Mike's, so I thinkthat's a reasonable point of departure. The export sector probably isthe area that I would worry about most in terms of a conventional12/22/92assessment of the forecast. On the anecdotal side, there are a coupleof things I want to mention briefly. First, in the case of very largemultinational corporations--and I'm not limiting this at all to IBM--it's quite clear to me from the comments I get from CEOs that thisrestructuring process has not run its course. That still has a waysto go. IBM may be symptomatic of that, but I'm getting that from CEOsof other very, very big companies as well. Second, from the anecdotalarea, there is some life in loan demand out there. It's not pervasiveand it's not robust, but it is there. And consistent with a number ofcomments others have made about retail sales and so on, some verylarge credit card issuers, bank and nonbank alike, are telling me thatcredit card usage really is up. Interestingly enough, even thoughusage is up, paydowns continue and payments against usage are comingmuch faster than they have in the past so that among other things thelevels of card usage debt are probably not capturing fully the rate ofcard usage in the past four to six weeks.In the commercial real estate area, I want to echo somethingEd Boehne said earlier. We still are getting anecdotal reports thatsuggest that price declines probably have bottomed out and that rentalrates and concessions are probably bottoming out. However, I havejust heard for the first time over the past couple of weeks that somepeople are adding on to the length of the work-out process. Thereason is because they are becoming more aware of rather large pocketsof space currently under lease that have been essentially vacated asemployment levels have been reduced, in the financial sector inparticular. That means that these various statistics of vacancy ratesaren't telling the whole story. As a result of that there is a bit,not major, of adding on--quarters as opposed to years--in terms of thework-out process. Another thing about this burst of confidence, ifthat's what it is, is that I think the election phenomenon hassomething to do with it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That could be the ending of thecampaign!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think that's part of it, but whathas fed on that a little is that a lot of people, including redblooded Republican businessmen and women, are very impressed by whatthey seem to [observe]. The problem is that if what you get is notwhat you see, that process of feeling good can reverse itself veryquickly. So, I think one has to be a bit cautious about that. My ownsense of the risks [to the economic outlook] is a little hard todescribe because I don't think of the risks in quite conventionalterms. I think there is something greater than a zero possibilitythat all of this could turn out to be another flash in the pan. But Idon't view those risks as high, which is another way of saying that Ithink there is a little more to this, barring a big disappointment onthe fiscal budgetary side, than we've seen in the past. Butconsistent with what Gary Stern and several others have said, it's nothard for me to visualize circumstances in which growth over, say, thenext four or five quarters could be stronger than projected in theGreenbook. I wouldn't bet my life on that, but it isn't hard for meto see circumstances in which that could in fact materialize,especially if this burst of confidence is bolstered by what turns outto be sound national policies, including budgetary policies. So, Ihave a little trouble trying to balance the risks because in one senseI don't think they lend themselves to any kind of statistical-20-12/22/92probability basis; but I certainly would not rule out the possibilitythat the economy could actually turn out to be a bit stronger eventhough, as I say, I do not consider the risk to be zero that it couldfall on its face again.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, 1992 has been a great year andit's too bad we didn't enjoy it until December! But now that we havea President that the Washington Post credited with the upward revisionof the October retail sales data and who has an expansion named afterhim that started in the third quarter of the year before he tookoffice, I think we all should just hang it up and go on vacation! Iwasn't going to say anything, but I'm going to anyway. As a way ofintroduction, Don Kohn talked at the Christmas tree lighting ceremonyabout a tax-free, regulation-free enterprise zone at the North Poleand then introduced me as the Fed's only certified supply-sider and,therefore, the person who should talk about it. So, I'm going to takethat tack.I have to agree with a lot of the comments here that (a)quarter-to-quarter projections are hard to make and that (b) ifanything, we should be biased at the moment toward a slightly fasterexpansion in the quarters ahead. But I'd like to look down the roadjust a little at what I think are some of the problems headed thisway. First, I'll pull out my supply-sider's list of longer-termproblems this economy was facing in May 1990; it is a list that I wasasked to create in my last job before the current recession began.The three that were on that list were: the expansion of OSHA thatoccurred in the Bush Administration; the Clean Air Act; and wetlands.Just to show how important these can be in terms of our hitting abrick wall, I'll relate a story from who comes fromWisconsin. As a biased Easterner, I always think of Wisconsin as aplace where housing inflation should never occur. But he tells oftremendous housing inflation in Wisconsin because of a shortage ofnonwet land to build on. They've had something like 12 to 15 percenthouse price inflation up there, which means that what they are hittingreally is supply constraints. That as well as clean air are going tobe examples of our hitting supply constraints earlier than weotherwise would.The second area of supply shock I see comes from labor marketchanges. I think labor market legislation is made all the easierduring a period of expansion, so I think we're going to see strikerreplacement legislation, an increase in the minimum wage, and evenmore aggressive Civil Rights legislation, all of which are going toput upward pressure quickly on costs in the labor market. Finally, Ithink the chances of a supply shock on the international side arehigh. I agree with the forecast that the dollar is going to rise andthat our trade deficit is going to increase, and the supply-sideresult of that is increased protectionism--probably starting as agame, but one never knows when it will get out of hand. All of thesefactors suggest that, if anything, what we're going to see is anincrease in measured inflation sooner than we otherwise would expect.But what is different about it, and what I hope we keep in mind in1993, is that inflation induced from these factors is not a monetaryphenomenon. It is a one-time increase in costs that will ultimatelybe played out in the form of lower GDP. So, my wish for 1993 is that12/22/92the staff forecast is right; but my fear for 1993 is that, ifanything, we're going to see more inflation sooner than we'd like, andI'm afraid we're not going to react properly to it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. That's the first sour note of the morning,really. The main thrust of what we've been hearing this morning fromthe Districts is highly encouraging, though certainly not totallyebullient and appropriately so. I would suggest that perhaps thecharacter of the progress the economy is making here is not reallychanging that much; we may be seeing basically more of the stop/startkind of pattern that we have seen in the past, hopefully at a somewhathigher level but of the same general character. That would imply thatthere will be downside news along with the upside news. It wouldcertainly appear that we're building upside momentum here, and that'sgreat. But it continues to struggle against these drags that we'vehad for a long time and that certainly haven't gone away: thedownsizing in defense, the real estate situation, the deleveraging,and the restructuring. We know that litany. It seems to me that wemay be seeing the upside momentum struggling against these drags andslowly gaining the upper hand, but perhaps that episode isn't overyet. Where does all of this net out? Well, one senses that the risksappear to be tilting in the upside direction, but it's probably toosoon to be very sure of that; maybe they should be characterized assymmetric. I took very much to mind Tom Melzer's remarks earlier ofwhere we were two meetings ago and what happened immediatelythereafter. I think we'd all agree that gives us all plenty of reasonto be humble when it comes to making projections. I'm struck by thefact that so many people this morning have said that the tone ofthings is leading the statistics. That's probably to be expected; onthe other hand, it's not to be trusted either. So, we undoubtedlyhave challenging times ahead and difficult choices out there. Maybethey will come sooner than we think. They're probably going to be onthe up side, but it's too soon to be totally confident of that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Well, I don't have much to add. I agree withLarry that we've had a great year; we didn't know it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We didn't appreciate it.MR. MULLINS. We didn't appreciate it. We only learned aboutit in the last week or two, but we should take the next week off andcelebrate. I agree with Governor Angell that we should think aboutwhy we had such a good year. It's certainly not money growth; theeconomy has been growing on velocity increases, whatever that is. Andit's certainly not employment growth either; the economy has beengrowing on productivity increases. So, as best I can figure out, theeconomy has been running on fumes so far in '92. I don't think thenumbers have changed much from what we expected earlier in the yeareven with the ups and downs. So far growth for the year is only 2.6percent, which is pretty good; and we probably will do a little betterthan that. I suppose one of the motivating factors could be theelection psychology. One would hope that it would turn out betterhere than it did in the United Kingdom and other places where they'vehad that phenomenon. I suppose there is the upside risk that Jerry12/22/92mentioned of sound budgetary policies at the federal level. I guess Ihave a lot of confidence that that's not too great a risk. [Laughter]We do seem to be lifting ourselves gradually out of the mire. I seenothing robust even in these latest numbers and no real signs yet thatwe may be approaching an overly robust upturn. The risk is that,despite the slack the staff talks about, we don't have nearly so muchslack as after the last recession when unemployment was 10 percent andcapacity utilization was probably 70 percent. In terms ofsustainability, I'll feel a lot more comfortable when we do getemployment growth; also, some money and credit growth would be nice.We probably have had some marginal tightening from the dollar and fromthe increase in short- and intermediate-rates as near-terminflationary expectations have fallen. I also think the reduction inlong rates could well be reversed very quickly once we see thecharacter of Congress's pent-up demand for spending as this processgets started. To me one of the interesting things we're going to haveto face is the coming collapse of M2 growth again. In February, thenext time we meet, we could well have had two months of zero M2 growthand once again be back in that debate over what sort of policy we'refollowing at the time we decide on next year's ranges. I would justconclude by saying that we should take the rest of the week off andcelebrate a job well accomplished!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. The reports that we've heard today and thereports in the last week or so are certainly the strongest evidencesince I've been on the Board that the economy appears to be breakingout of this pattern of fits and starts that have characterized thisrecovery. Still, the persistence of regional differences remains aconcern. I think the signs that are perhaps the most encouragingcoming out of this plethora of news include the steady improvement onthe employment front and in consumer confidence. Maybe it's the factthat we've now had six quarters of positive GDP that is finallydawning on people. Or maybe, as some have suggested, it's the post-election phenomenon. Or maybe people are just plain tired of beingdown in the dumps and generally depressed. We're making good progresson housing; industrial production seems to be on track after a bit ofa swoon in the early part of the third quarter. We're seeing somesmall improvement, some strengthening, on the credit side. It seemsvery tenuous considering the situation that we've seen on businessbank borrowing in December but still there's some improvement there.We have stronger corporate profits. The stock market has been holdingup. The Dow hasn't moved a lot over the year; other indexes haveimproved. But overall, given the rather high PE ratios that we'restill seeing, the fact that the stock market has held in there as longas it has is a good sign. The flattening of the yield curve is agenerally good sign. I hope that is sustained and that it continuesto flatten on the long end. Generally, the financial sector seems tobe in better shape now to support a recovery than we've seen.I'm glad to see that some of our discussion here today hascentered on inflation. There are differing views as to whether or notwe're starting to see a buildup of concerns with respect to inflation.And I was glad to see the extensive analysis in the Greenbook oninflation. Concentrating on a variety of indicators--looking at thePPI components, commodity prices, and the wage indexes as opposed tojust the CPI--I thought was helpful.-23-12/22/92Like others, I have some gnawing concerns as we go into 1993.The trade balance has been mentioned. I wonder if it's not just theconcern about what Europe and Japan as trading partners may portendfor the United States; if they get into bigger problems than might nowbe anticipated, I wonder if there will be some spillover effects thatmight come to our economy. On the employment side we still have aways to go on operating restructuring and defense restructuring, soemployment still seems to be a key to sustainability. I think thefinancial deleveraging has lessened, as [have] the Chairman'sheadwinds, but I'm not sure that we know how much further we have togo yet with respect to financial deleveraging. As a final note, Imust say that I am concerned about the monetary aggregates. We'regoing to have to look very carefully at the M2 deceleration that we'reseeing currently in December and that is projected for the next coupleof months. I think the monetary aggregates bear careful watching.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have coffee out there or will havemomentarily, if it's not there already.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have just learned that the NBER hasruled that the current recovery began in March 1991.SPEAKER(?). It's not a really timely call.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If you think you can match that, Mr.Kohn, you're welcome to try!MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don?MR. JORDAN. This question of when the time is going to cometo change the [funds] rate--especially in an upward direction--and thecriteria for doing so has been on my mind a lot, and I'm sure it hasbeen in everybody's thinking. This is my seventh meeting, and Ithought it was time to go back and review the last year and to look atwhat actually has happened in terms of all kinds of economicindicators--monetary as well as economic indicators, nominal and realindicators--and Committee actions to see if I could deduce an implicitmodel. I read the newsletters, as I'm sure everybody does; and[unintelligible] and I don't see it in the numbers, it's certainly notinflation. It's not the various money measures: Ml, M2, the base, orbank reserves. I don't even think it's real GDP. I put together atable--a big matrix of every forecast for as many quarters out as theGreenbook does it--for every meeting for the last year. What struckme was that it looked as if we were on a de facto nominal GNP target.When nominal GNP is at or above expectations, the funds rate is heldstable; but when nominal GNP comes in below what has been expected, wecut the funds rate. Do you want to comment?MR. KOHN. You can interpret some of what the Committee doesto a certain extent that way. I think it's a difficult question. TheCommittee does not have a nominal GDP target that it announces. It'sdifficult partly for political reasons: The Committee has noauthority to announce a nominal GDP target; and to the extent that it-2412/22/92would imply something about real output and unemployment rates, thatcould get you into some hot water [depending on] how people interpretit. A nominal GDP target has a lot of attractive aspects, I think.You have to think about how to react to unexpected developments orshocks. It implies equal reaction to shortfalls in inflation andoutput, and you might not want to do that; it might be very dependenton where you are in the business cycle. But there are a number ofcaveats, if you think about it. And even a nominal GDP target isimplicitly still a forecasting exercise. It really involves trying tofigure out where the economy is going to be any number of quartersahead of time. So, I don't think that gets around the problems youand President Melzer raised earlier about having to rely inevitably toa certain extent on your forecast of the economy. I don't thinkthere's any way around that.MR. JORDAN. Well, I've read the things that academicianshave had to say about nominal income targeting. Despite some sort oftheoretical appeal to some people, in this context I would beconcerned that what could cause nominal GNP to grow significantlyfaster than currently expected in 1993 would be real output. There'svery little likelihood that it's going to come from the price side.So, to have a de facto nominal GNP target would put the Committee inthe position of being characterized as anti-growth, if it's perceivedthat we're tightening because of faster real growth.MR. KOHN. Well, I think that's the same thing I was tryingto say before about how the Committee reacts. If you do tightenbecause real growth is much higher next year, I think it would bebecause your projection was that this was moving the economy closer topotential and there would be a danger of short-circuiting the downwardtrend of inflation or even accelerating inflation the following year.So, it wouldn't be explainable necessarily just on the nominal GDPterms; it would be looking forward regarding what that implies aboutinflation.MR. JORDAN. But then you have to have a theory or modelabout what causes inflation that's coherent or else you're going torun into some trouble.MR. PRELL. I'd like to establish that in the past theFederal Reserve has shied away from enunciating a view about potentialGDP growth, remaining agnostic and being prepared presumably toaccommodate any positive surprise. If the positive surprise onnominal GDP could be discerned to be a favorable supply shock, thenaccommodating it would be a more natural thing to do than if you feltit was a demand shock which tightened up markets and had inflationaryconsequences down the road. But viewing nominal GDP targeting as yourbasic approach takes some things as given, as being relatively stable.You may view this [approach] as a way of having an automaticstabilizer over time so that it would be natural to react if you'reovershooting, with the thought that you would end up with some pricepressures later [if you don't react].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. If I could pursue what Don said, and maybe theGeneral Counsel would like to comment: Are we precluded fromannouncing a nominal GDP target?-25-12/22/92MR. KOHN. Well, I don't see anything in the Humphrey-HawkinsAct that would preclude us from announcing whatever target we wantedto as long as we still have money and credit targets.MR. MATTINGLY. Right.MR. LINDSEY. Oh, I see. Your view is that we're notmandated by law as opposed to not allowed by the law.MR. KOHN. Sure.MR. LINDSEY. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Jerry, in the discussion about nominal incometargeting it's clear to me that there are some problems associatedwith it. But what is perhaps more relevant is whether the problemsassociated with nominal income targeting are greater or lesser thanthose associated with interest rate targeting. I'm afraid a lot ofthe academic literature would suggest that we probably would reducethe chance of making the kinds of mistakes that we make with interestrate targeting if we followed a nominal income target.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We could actually [target] nominal GDP,but we'd come out awfully [unintelligible] on the policy side. Theproblem I have with that [and a reason we're] not doing it is theforecast, which doesn't readily address itself to this automatically.Look, the whole purpose of money targeting is that it is a proxy fornominal GDP. If we can do it directly, do we need the proxy?SPEAKER(?). Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Well, nominal GDP targeting is really not as badas it might seem in that it does have a heavy price level direction toit. That is, the advantage of using nominal GDP as a target versususing real GDP is that we are saying to other policymakers that ifthey in some sense gear up activities that tend to cause wage ratepressures or other price pressures to take place, then they are votingfor lower real GDP. So, nominal GDP targeting is not that far awayfrom what I think is price level targeting. I think price leveltargeting is better, but we'll see.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. He views it as real and you view it asprice.MR. KOHN. But in the case of a supply shock, a lot of peoplehave advocated nominal GDP targeting. We discussed this actually inAugust of 1990 in the face of supply shocks. It is supportive, asGovernor Angell said, because it has some of these automaticstabilizer-type properties that Mike was talking about; you can'tovershoot too badly on one side or another and you bring aboutcorrective actions, particularly when you're unsure with prices goingone way and quantities going the other way.-26-12/22/92MR. ANGELL. Take the supply-side shock we had in 1973. Thatsupply-side shock with nominal GDP targeting would have produced aboutthe same kind of monetary restraint we would have had if we'd pursueda price level target. A very severe monetary restraint would havebeen induced by that kind of supply-side shock.MR. PARRY. It depends on how flexible our policy rule is, Isuspect. It doesn't have to be [inflexible]. We can take intoaccount special effects. There are supply-side shocks that we maywant to accommodate and some that we don't.MR. ANGELL. Yes, but the problem is that the FOMC in the1970s did too much of that.MR. LINDSEY. The advantage of nominal GDP targeting,especially if we allow a range, is that we're not driven to guessingwhether this is a positive supply shock or a negative one. Jerry, I'ma little surprised by your negative comments on nominal GDP targeting.MR. JORDAN. Compared to what? That is the problem. It'snot that I would prefer interest rate targeting. I'm mainly concernedin this environment that the thing that would cause this Committee toraise the funds rate would be real GNP growing faster, being reflectedin faster nominal GNP in the current environment.MR. LINDSEY. Let's say, for instance, that we had nominalGDP growth over 6-1/2 percent. What would be your policy prescriptionfor such a result?MR. JORDAN. Mine wouldn't be anything. I'd want to look atwhat the money supply was doing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Which money supply?MR. JORDAN. The monetary base. But I would be concernedabout the Committee reacting to that factor--nominal GDP caused byfaster real growth--as though we needed to maintain slack in theeconomy to bring downward pressure on prices. I still would preferultimately a price level check, but we can't control the pricesdirectly by anything that we do.MR. ANGELL. If you had chosen the monetary base, your votingrecord would have been more conservative than Tom Melzer's!MR. JORDAN. I think I can reconcile--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions? Let me start offby first identifying what I consider to be a more buoyant outlook[among the participants] in this meeting than I frankly had expected.It's clearly more buoyant than the Beigebook, which is the closestthing we have to a region-by-region look. And especially, as BobParry points out, if we expunge southern California, things are reallymoving at a surprising pace. I do think, however, that we have to bea little careful about these volatile moves, and that applies in bothdirections. Tom Melzer noted that we were unduly pessimistic lastOctober. I would point out, however, that policy didn't change as aconsequence of that--that the [policy] mechanism does not capturethese swings and I hope it will not. As a consequence, I don't think-27-12/22/92we are about to jump on board the most recent swings until weunderstand what the process is. One of the more interesting aspectsof what is going on at the moment--it's something that a number havealluded to--is that we basically have a productivity-driven recovery,or more exactly arithmetically the gross domestic product increase islargely attributable to the rise in productivity and to a marginalextent to the rise in average hours worked. The outlook for thatparticular variable is really quite critical to a number of the issuesthat have been raised around this table. There is an interestingquestion as to whether, in fact, we can have continued strong growthwithout employment growth. Obviously, theoretically we can. Thequestion really gets to the issue of whether or not this productivitysurge we've been looking at is abnormal or not. It is quiteunprecedented in the context of how little economic growth we have hadsince March 1991.There are essentially two hypotheses about what thoseincreases are attributable to, both of which could turn out to beright. The first is that the level of output per work hour at thebottom of the recession was quite low relative to the inputs of bothphysical capital and human capital. In a sense that's saying that theeconomy was not operating at an efficient level relative to itsinputs. In that case, by just tightening up one can very readilyreduce labor input and create within a certain range a rise in outputper work hour. One presumes that that can continue to increase untilwe run up to the upper edge of that range, meaning that the existingcapital, both physical and human, is being employed at its mostefficient levels.The second possibility here is that the norm of long-termproductivity growth, which is implicit in this concept of a range, hastilted upward. In that case, we're not looking at 1 percent orslightly more than 1 percent [as the norm], but conceivably all of asudden something has occurred which has changed the longer-termproductivity growth [trend]. Some anecdotal evidence suggests thatthere is at least something to that. Jerry [Corrigan], I don't knowif you remember that breakfast where we had a very interestingrepresentation of manufacturing corporations who were raising thepoint that this restructuring that is going on had only really begun,which is the same issue that you were getting from the New York[business leaders]. It strikes me that what may be happening--and Isay "may"--is that we have looked for years and years for thesignificant impact of productivity growth coming off the majorcomputer input in telecommunications and high-tech capital assets and,as you may recall, we got very little of it. I think the reason isthat we did not have the software. Essentially we could not reallyemploy that degree of computational power without a major upswing inthe analytic capabilities in using the equipment. In the last five orsix years, or maybe a little longer, there has been a very dramaticincrease in applicable software. One need only look at the stockmarket price of Microsoft to see the market valuation of thisparticular asset coming on stream. The people Jerry and I weretalking to at the breakfast were talking about [unintelligible]systems manufacturing. I remember one of the people there was an oldfriend of mine from a company called which used toput DC motors into the rolling mills of a lot of the steel operations;that was their market. So, I raised the question: Is the big steelbusiness now basically heavily DC motors? And he said "We don't even12/22/92think that way anymore. What we think of is complete computeroperating systems of manufacturing." If you go around and speak topeople, what you find is that in the last two or three years there hasbeen a major change in the way manufactured goods are created. And ifyou look at the data in the nonmanufacturing area, we are finallybeginning to see some definite quickening in output per work hour inthat area as well.So, what we may well be looking at, and what therestructuring is essentially all about, is the stripping out of bigsegments of employment. Companies are literally taking divisions andjust wiping them out. A lot of that is directly applicable to theinformation systems that are created by the telecommunications-computer matrix. That is, a very large part of overhead has beencommunications overhead, meaning in the extreme form [a situation]where everyone just writes memoranda to each other. But thecommunications managerial systems have improved very dramatically tothe point where people have been washed out of the system at a veryrapid rate.If this is the beginning of something of quite importantsignificance, the question is whether it is in fact saying that ourpotential GDP is being underestimated. Something may be going onhere. The trouble is that we will not be able to know that for awhile. It is quite conceivable that part of the problem that we'relooking at is that the marginal cost of adding new people is so greatat this stage that it may be creating somewhat of an illusion aboutthe relationship between capital and labor; it may be creating anattitude on the part of a number of managers that they just will nothire new people except under duress because the obvious medical costs,employment training, and all the other costs are very large. And thebig upswing in the temporary employment rolls is really quiteimpressive and clearly out of line with what the previous history oftemporary employment has been.So, we may have a technical problem here which is obscuringwhat is going on and may be making it appear to be a much bigger issuethan it is. But what is certainly the case, if the Greenbook GDPfigures are right or if those figures are any stronger than that, isthat we are going to get one of two scenarios. One is that we willget a very marked increase in actual employment growth, because it'sdifficult to imagine the average workweek going very much higher thanit is. And if we are at the upper ranges of productivity growth, thenthe arithmetic of the system basically says that it all falls out toincreased employment. The alternate scenario is that we are badlymissing a major secular change in the productivity trend, in whichcase this is going to work out somewhat differently. It's not clearto me how it will play out in the sense that we do know that without asignificant increase in employment, we will run into problems with howto get consumption continuing to [increase], especially when thesaving rate is as low as it is. And this is a low saving rate despitethe fact that we still have significant debt repayment going on. Thedebt pressures are clearly still there.I suspect the outlook, therefore, is a bit uncertain becauseof secular changes that are occurring, and I'm a little hesitant atthis point to argue that we have a clear view as to how it will comeout. I'm not saying, incidentally, that there are negative elements-29-12/22/92in this. There is, however, as pointed out by a number of you and inthe excellent memo that the International Division put out, a veryclear indication that the rest of the world is in really sad shape.We don't need the published data from foreign statistical agencies totell us what is going on. As a number of you have mentioned, in termsof the general view of the multinational corporations, sometime acouple of months ago the order series for the foreign affiliates ofU.S. corporate manufacturers all of a sudden just went "bang." Therewas a hole and Germany apparently just fell off the cliff. That'strue in a lot of discussions. I was a little surprised at theCanadian [situation], but presumably that's not all that muchdifferent. But there is a potentially fairly significant drag comingfrom the international side, which affects this [outlook] as well.On the positive side, however, there are two elements thatsuggest there is considerable support remaining in this buoyancy thatwe're seeing. The first, which hasn't really been mentioned except byMike in the Greenbook, is that inventory/sales ratios are really quitelow. And if the economy starts to move faster than is generallyexpected, then lead times on production, orders, and deliveries willstart to move out and the desired levels of inventories in the systemwill begin to move up. We could see even with all the computer-basedcontrols and everything else like that, a bigger inventoryaccumulation than is forecast in the Greenbook. There's nothing likeinventory accumulation to feed through to profit margins, which feedsthrough to capital investment, and it would be very easy to turn theGreenbook forecast into a lower estimate. The problem I have withthat is the low saving rate. Mike wrote somewhere that we have a lowsaving rate pending the next revision of the national income accountson what the history is all about. That may be a very prescientinsight. We do know that as existing home sales begin to move up, asindeed they have, we are creating realized capital gains on the salesof homes which in turn are substantially financed by net increases inmortgage debt on existing homes. [The result is] cash to the sellersof homes which is unencumbered cash and is not all thatdistinguishable from disposable income. That means, in effect, thatthere is more income and more household savings--or at least it'sperceived as savings--on the part of the household community. Theybasically look not only at the existing stock of wealth and how it'schanging but also, as is obvious from the data, how it is markedlyaffected by the actual capital gains cash flow which occurs as theturnover of houses increases.All in all, the evidence we're looking at clearly has takenon a better tone and potentially a very significantly better tone forthe longer run if productivity and potentially [favorable factors]that may be emerging are real and not just going to boomerang. On theother hand, I do think we have to be careful about being overlybuoyant because it's very difficult with the extraordinaryglobalization of the world's economies to believe that the UnitedStates can move in any vibrant manner independently of what is goingon in the rest of the world. So, we have concerns, mainly with regardto the rest of the world. We don't have any real insights into whatcould happen in the event there is a major political turnaround inRussia or the Ukraine or elsewhere. These are orders of magnitude, ifthey occur, that would have extraordinary impacts for one on ourdefense budget. Think of what would happen to defense appropriationsif all of a sudden there were a totalitarian swing in Russia. The-30-12/22/92turnaround [in defense spending] could be quite remarkable and,needless to say, would have a very important effect on economicactivity.In closing, I merely want to say, listening to the discussionaround this table, that we clearly have moved away from asymmetrytoward ease and have moved somewhat in the other direction. How farwe go or what is the longer-term future for policy will unfold overtime. But I must say that I am encouraged by what I have heard aroundthis table so far.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, in terms of policy direction, Iprefer "B" symmetrical, and let me mention why. While we study [theeconomy] an awful lot, I don't think that excludes us from a naturalhuman tendency to have expectations and sentiments that swing too farin one direction or the other. I don't think we're exempt from thatgeneral tendency. I'm encouraged that the [economic outlook] isbetter, but I think it's far from certain for a number of the reasonsyou have mentioned. I'm inclined to think the potential is greaterthan we have assumed. But the timing of changes in potential as thesereleased workers, if you want to call them that, become more fungibleand can be absorbed in a different capacity back into the work forceis very, very uncertain and hard to judge. I just don't see in theglobal situation that we will have price pressures in the immediatefuture. I'm not saying that won't happen before long--obviously wehave to be diligent about [monitoring] that--but I don't think thereis a strong concern about that at this time. Also we have this verydifficult situation of the very slow rate of growth of M2, with M2being what we do report to the Congress regardless of my skepticismabout it, and the fact that you are going to have to go up [toCongress and testify]. So, coming from where we've been in anasymmetric stand toward ease, I think it would be premature at thistime not to have at least a way station for some time in terms ofsymmetry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, recent developments suggest that amoderate expansion is underway, and we are seeing numbers in theinflation area that certainly are encouraging. That would lead me torecommend alternative B. Also, since the economy is picking up, Ibelieve we probably should give somewhat less weight to the risk ofstagnant real economic activity and more weight to the possibilitythat it may accelerate more sharply, and that would lead me to asymmetric directive at this point. So, I would favor "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. A couple of comments and thoughts about thefirst part of your remarks: I think these fundamental structuraltechnological things are very, very major. I am concerned aboutwhether the national income accounts conceptually are appropriate forcapturing [what is occurring]. Even the definition of what is outputis going to have to be rethought at some point as is how we measureand assess productivity. One of the fastest growing employers in myDistrict is in Lexington, Kentucky. They've doubled their work force--it's not a big number--from 30 people to 60 people in a year; it ismoving along pretty well. The Lexington area has 4 percent12/22/92unemployment. The problem is finding people who have the skills theywant, so they [attract] them in from southern California or somewhere.I don't think that sort of thing shows up very well in the way we putthese numbers together.During the Little Rock Summit, Governor Clinton raised thequestion of whether it would be desirable policy to have as a goaltrying to move manufacturing employment from where it currently is at16-17 percent [of the workforce] up to 20 percent because our majortrade [partners] often have 30 percent. I think an issue that isgoing to have to be addressed at some point is what is manufacturingemployment. These companies don't want to hire people to get theirhands dirty. They want to buy the software from somebody else. So, alot of economists think public policy is going to have to addressthose kinds of issues.Turning to monetary policy, I want to comment on this issueof money and economic activity and my view of it. Both GovernorsAngell and Mullins in their remarks said that the growth [in GDP] isnot a result of--Wayne said M2 and Dave said money--and I'm not surethat that's at all true. I can interpret what has happened this yearas the lagged effects of the very slow growth we have had in M2 forsome time, which has brought down inflation. Wayne talked about thestimulative effect of lower inflation, but what caused low inflation?I think it's the lagged effects of the much slower growth of M2. Andat the same time we have had very rapid growth in the narrowaggregates. M2 has never been a good indicator of turning points ineconomic activity; it has never been a predictor of real output oreven that good a predictor of nominal GNP. It is an indicator over athree-to-five year horizon of basic inflationary pressures. I stillthink there's validity in the P* model. My emphasis on M2 has beentwo-fold: One is the idea that the long-term objective for themonetary policy part of total financial economic policy is to move toprice stability, and that means we emphasize M2; the second is that M2is what this Committee has been going to the Hill and announcing asour target, worrying about the credibility of the Committee if weannounce the target and then don't take action to try to hit it.But in terms of shorter-term effects on real output orespecially on total spending, nominal GDP, I have always thought thenarrow measures, M1 or the monetary base, are a better gauge of thethrust of our actions. I tend to accept the view that monetary policyas reflected in the narrow measures of money has been countering moreof the headwinds or process of down drafting or it would have beenmuch worse. Monetary policy in fact has been very stimulative, andthe critical thing would be to back off from that kind of short-runstimulus in the narrow measures before we do see the future inflation.I think we can reconcile what has happened to our narrow and broadmeasures just as the Germans have with the opposite situation. Theyhave had extraordinarily slow growth of Ml, until very recently, andvery rapid growth of M2 with high inflation. For them, M3 goes alongwith high inflation. The slow growth of Ml and the inverted yieldcurve and all of that go along with no output growth. So, I thinkthese disparities can be put back together. Currently--being thisclose to the end of the year and not knowing how we're going to rebasethe targets for 1993--I wouldn't have a basis for dissenting on thegrounds of trying to hit an M2 target. There's nothing that we coulddo now that would have any effect on that. So, in the current12/22/92situation I would simply support alternative B symmetric really bydefault--not knowing what else to do.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me respond, incidentally, to DickSyron's body language, which may have occurred because I've beenholding back so far from making a recommendation. Basically I thinkyou are inferring that I would go beyond symmetric. The answer is:That is not my view at all.MR. SYRON. No, I didn't think you would.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. I think "B" symmetric is the appropriatepolicy for the moment. But as we sit in the middle of that directive,I think we have to be very careful to look at both sides of theequation as it were and not give in to the euphoria that I sense isout there among people. On the other hand, we also need to be veryvigilant about the price situation and be prepared to move in theother direction if that becomes necessary. That, it seems to me, isthe challenge that faces us at the moment. But "B" symmetric is finewith me.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The challenge is not now; it's ahead inthe meetings in the future.MR. SYRON. That's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I strongly support "B" symmetric.I have no appetite for asymmetry toward tightness at this point,first, because I think there still are some weak spots out there. Butmore importantly, I see no signs that in this intermeeting period weare likely to need a tightening immediately. I just don't see thatneed right now. Also, I have the feeling that if we do need totighten, 25 basis points is probably not going to be enough; that is,when we hit the point where we need to tighten, we may need to go 200basis points in one nice move. [Laughter] That would help themarkets get out of this habit that they get into every time we havethis kind of circumstance and we move 25 basis points and then 50basis points and the markets say: Well, this is the first of a seriesand the bond market really takes a big hit. It seems to me that wecan't be so lucky that a 3 percent fed funds rate is just exactlyright, but I see nothing now that would cause me to believe that amove is imminent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.12/22/92MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I agree with "B" symmetric. Ifeel that the economy is in a continued modest expansion [phase]. Butthere are some underlying [concerns] that you and others haveidentified, including where we are in the employment picture, thedeficit picture, and the spending picture. So, I think we would bewell advised to stick with "B" symmetric at this point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I'd be in favor of "B" symmetric.It does seem to me that there has been a shift both in fundamentalsand attitudes. But I have a lingering question about thesustainability of that shift, so I think "B" symmetric is appropriateat this point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I'm wondering how I can outdo Wayne here! Iwould favor "B" biased toward tightening, but I could accept "B"symmetric. And just for the video cameras, I once dissented in favorof an easier policy in 1989!Alan, just to pick up on what you were saying, if you'reright about this productivity phenomenon--and I know you weren'tasserting this but just laid it out as an explanation--and we ineffect have greater potential than we realize but temporarily we alsohave associated debt and more unemployment, this goes back to what Iwas saying before: I really don't think it's the job of monetarypolicy to hurry the adjustment [process] along, and I don't think youwere suggesting that. The economy is going to have to absorb that,and we've got to focus on price stability. As I think Don said at theend of his statement, we can't use a pickup in inflation as our signalthat we need to begin to tighten policy. I've heard that suggested,but if we wait until then I think all of us know that we're going tobe way too late--probably by not just a matter of months but by years.The other thing I would say is that [when we were easingpolicy] we said that we would very likely overshoot in terms of tryingto stimulate the economy and get the funds rate too low, but that oncethings turned around--and I know this turnaround has been long incoming and there is still uncertainty about it--we would have to beprepared to pull that rope back fairly quickly. I think we'reapproaching that point. That's what I have to say.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.12/22/92MR.MCTEER. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President-elect Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. We favor "B," and we have a strong preferencefor a symmetric directive, Mr. Chairman. We think it would be amistake not to move to symmetry now because that might send a messageto those who look at these things that we're not going to be vigilantgoing forward if we run into unexpected strength in the economy. So,we would strongly support symmetric language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, if my colleague wants to change200 basis points to get us out of the habit of being at 3 percent, I'mafraid the Dow is going to get out of the habit of being at 3000, too.But "B" symmetric is clearly the right move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I support "B" symmetric and look forward to theHumphrey-Hawkins testimony when this becomes public at a time when wehave had two months of zero M2 growth and are lowering our ranges!But I think, clearly, it's "B" symmetric. We seem to be ascendingtoward an orderly growth path. It's not at all inconceivable to methat the current rate environment is unsustainable. If we do have aperiod of disinflation, bringing inflation expectations down and realrates up, I think it's more likely that we will need adjustments. Andobviously, if European rates come down, the dollar is likely to go up.The ultimate target here is a [sustainable] rate environment. In myview we ought to think about getting ahead of that with some modestadjustment if we see signs of trouble rather than risk waiting, inwhich case I think we really might need what my colleague, Mr. Angell,has suggested. So, "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Wayne, I must admit that you goteverybody's attention! I think we have a fairly uniform position inthis institution and I would ask the Secretary to read a "B" symmetricdirective.MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. In the context of the Committee'slong-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economicgrowth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, andmonetary developments, slightly greater reserve restraint or slightlylesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in the intermeetingperiod. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to beconsistent with M2 growing at a rate of around 1-1/2 percent and M3about unchanged in the period from November through March."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.12/22/92MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Hoenig YesPresident Jordan YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Lindsey YesPresident Melzer YesGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Phillips YesPresident Syron YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Our next meeting is scheduled forTuesday-Wednesday, February 2-3.END OF MEETING