Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 18, 1993A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systemin Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 18, 1993, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneKeehnKelleyLaWareLindseyMcTeerMullinsPhillipsSternMessrs. Broaddus, Jordan, Forrestal, and Parry.Alternate Members of the Federal Open MarketCommitteeMessrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Presidentsof the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,St. Louis, and Boston, respectivelyMr. Bernard, Deputy SecretaryMr. Coyne, Assistant SecretaryMr. Gillum, Assistant SecretaryMr. Mattingly, General CounselMr. Prell, EconomistMessrs. R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, Promisel,Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld, Siegman,and Slifman, Associate EconomistsMr. McDonough, Manager of the System OpenMarket AccountMs. Greene, Deputy Manager for ForeignOperationsMs. Lovett, Deputy Manager for DomesticOperationsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of MonetaryAffairs, Board of GovernorsMr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMr. Small, Section Chief, Division of MonetaryAffairs, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. T. Davis, Dewald, and Goodfriend, Senior VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,St. Louis, and Richmond, respectivelyMs. Browne, Mr. Judd, and Mses. Rosenbaum and White,Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston,San Francisco, Atlanta, and New York, respectivelyMr. Eberts, Assistant Vice President, Federal ReserveBank of Cleveland1. Attended portion of meeting relating to a report on a studyentitled "Operating Procedures and the Conduct of Monetary Policy:Conference Proceedings." edited by Marvin Goodfriend and DavidSmall. This two-volume study has been designated Working Studies 1,Parts 1 and 2, of the Federal Reserve Board's Finance and EconomicDiscussion Series.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMay 18, 1993CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. There are goingto be thunderstorms this morning, but I trust that we can integratethem in an appropriate [unintelligible] that is in sync. Theimpression I get is that the authorities up above, knowing that thisis Jerry Corrigan's last meeting, have decided to let us know they areaware of that. If anyone can read the drumbeat as to whether it's proor con Jerry, please let us know. We, of course, are going to behaving a farewell lunch in Jerry's honor in Dining Room E after themeeting.Let me say before we start: You may recall that a number ofmeetings ago I raised some questions about the security of thisoperation which--to use a kind word--was "dubious" for a while. Ithink our record in recent months, indeed pretty much back to the endof last year, really has been extraordinarily good. I cannot honestlysay that I have seen a comment that I would unambiguously read ascoming out of an FOMC meeting. I think you are all aware that whatwill be going on here today has very considerable interest outside.So, all I would suggest is: Let's not lower our guard. Let's becautious, and I think we can fend off the clever endeavors on the partof a lot of our media friends on the outside who will try to infer howthis meeting came out. I don't request anything new; I think whatyou've been doing is fine. Let's just have an awareness not to letour guard down inadvertently.I will raise some questions [later] in the proceedings whenwe get into our discussions about exchange rates, concerning which Ihave a memo from our colleague, Ted Truman. I'd like to read it toyou so you will be up-to-date on what the issues are. It relatessomewhat to this confidentiality issue but it's not directly in thatcontext, so I'll leave it for later. Shall we start off? I ask for amotion to approve the minutes for the meeting of March 23.SPEAKER(?). So moved.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Al Broaddus, Iassume, is available at the moment to give us a rundown on the veryinteresting work with which his group has been involved.MR. BROADDUS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll be brief andjust give a quick background. Members of the Committee will rememberthat about two years ago at the July 1991 meeting it seemed prettyclear that the economy was beginning to recover. And I think mostmembers of the Committee recognized that somewhere down the road theCommittee was going to be faced with the prospect of rising inflationpressures and the possible need to change the direction of policytoward restraint. In the environment as I remember it, GovernorAngell asked a very reasonable and straightforward question, and thatwas: If and when that time arrived, would such a move be facilitatedby a change in our operating procedures away from the currentprocedure of conducting policy by controlling the funds rate very5/18/93tightly? Would we change perhaps in the direction of a more automaticadjustment of the funds rate in response to emerging inflationdevelopments or other economic developments or perhaps along the linesof the nonborrowed reserve procedure we used between late 1979 andlate 1982? In any case, we got a group of System economists togetherand we produced two volumes as your answer, Governor Angell. It's alengthy response but I think an interesting one.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is he going to have to take an exam onwhat's in those volumes?MR. BROADDUS. I think I may have to take an exam on it atsome point! Actually, a shorter answer was delivered at the nextmeeting of the Committee in August of 1991 when Don Kohn summarized amemorandum that Dave Lindsey had prepared. That memo reviewed severalalternative procedures that might assist in the next change in thedirection of policy. Just very quickly: One set of thosealternatives would have deliberately caused somewhat greater movementin the funds rate in the short run in an effort perhaps to camouflageor disguise when an increase in the rate might be taken; this mightsoften or at least stretch out the market and public reaction to themove. The second set of alternatives would have involved tying thefunds rate, or perhaps a borrowed reserve instrument, in some way todeviations of M2 from its target. The memo also noted that in anautomatic procedure we might want to substitute total reserves orperhaps the monetary base for the funds rate as the operatinginstrument. In any case, at that August 1991 meeting the Committeediscussed all of these alternatives. And, of course, the memorandumpointed out that there were disadvantages as well as advantagesaccording to the tradeoffs involved. The Committee I think alsorecognized that the current unpredictable behavior of M2 might causesome difficulties with some of these alternative procedures that wouldnot have existed so much in the past.In any case, all of this was brought out and in thissituation the Committee mandated a more broadly scoped study, similarto studies that had been done along these lines in the past. We hadone in the early 1980s and another in the early 1970s. This broaderproject was carried out in the second half of 1991 and the first halfof last year. It culminated in a very interesting two-day conferenceat the St. Louis Fed in which 16 papers on this topic, along withformal discussions, were presented. Economists from the Board staffand all of the Reserve Banks participated in this conference. We alsoinvited two prominent outside monetary economists, Ben McCallum fromCarnegie Mellon and John Taylor from Stanford, to participate in theconference--actually to comment on particular papers and in both casesto give an overview. Both wrote papers giving their overview commentson the research and its implications. All the papers prepared for theconference, including the discussion papers and the Taylor andMcCallum papers reviewing the overall conference, are included in thistwo-volume study. You should have received these volumes last week aswell as a summary of those proceedings, which I hope you will have anopportunity to read if you haven't done so already.As the summary indicates, the study did not attempt to arriveat specific recommendations as to alternative procedures that theCommittee should adopt. I think we recognized rather quickly when wegot into this that it would be unrealistic to try to do that in this5/18/93study. What we tried to do was to lay a solid analytical foundationon which such a discussion and decisions could be based. Frankly, weconcluded that we have produced a very solid foundation for that kindof consideration if the Committee wants to take that next step; Ithink we've covered the subject comprehensively. Many of the papersused state of the art research techniques in reaching theirconclusions. In any case, the summary document that you should havedescribes several of the more formal papers in some detail and itpresents five broad conclusions. I'm not going to go through those inany detail but let me just paraphrase them.First, we studied the operating procedures in a number ofother major industrial countries. We found that most of them employprocedures that are similar to those that this Committee uses but wealso found that some differences of detail exist. And if we take thenext step, we might want to consider whether there are any significantadvantages to adopting some of these procedures. For example, I havein mind something like the Lombard facility that the Bundesbank hasavailable.Second, in view of the current problems with the monetaryaggregates as indicators of policy, in this study we looked at a largenumber of alternative indicators of the thrust of policy and futureeconomic developments to see whether we might improve the execution ofpolicy by, in some more systematic way, taking account of some ofthese variables in conducting policy. I have in mind here variableslike bond rates, yield curves, commodity prices, and a number ofothers. Not surprisingly, no single indicator jumps out and says "I'mthe one on which you should focus all of your attention." But we didlearn that certain indicators do seem to do a better job overparticular time horizons than others. So, we did a bit of filteringthat I think is useful there.The third and perhaps the most important conclusion wereached is that a case can be made that the Committee's currentprocedure of adjusting the funds rate in response to a variety ofindicators can be used successfully over time to achieve the principalobjectives of monetary policy. I think a lot of people, like DaveLindsey, suspected that before the study was done. But the studyprovides very important and very solid analytical confirmation insupport of that conclusion. However, and I can't emphasize thisenough, the effectiveness of our current policy regime dependscritically on the maintenance of the credibility of the System'slonger-term policy objectives.Fourth, some model simulations that were done for the studyindicated that a feedback mechanism to guide policy might be of someassistance in improving our results without creating a lot of undueshort-term instability. Several papers in particular looked atfeedback mechanisms where either a funds rate instrument or a monetarybase instrument would be [varied] in some systematic way in responseto deviations of nominal income from a target--for example, theHumphrey-Hawkins projections that we put forth twice a year--thatmight be set.Fifth and finally, research done for the project indicatedthat greater transitory deviations in the funds rate permit targetingthat would characterize some of these alternative procedures but not5/18/93necessarily be transmitted to greater variability in longer-terminterest rates. So, that possibility should not prevent us fromlooking at some of these alternative procedures if we wished to. Inany case, Mr. Chairman, those are the principal conclusions. Again, Ithink this study positions the Committee to take the next step, and itwould be a fairly straightforward step of looking at particularchanges we might make. Let me take this opportunity to thankeverybody who was involved in the project but express particularly myappreciation to Marvin Goodfriend and to Dave Small of the Board'sstaff who did a tremendous amount of work in editing these papers.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you.MR. BROADDUS. I'd be happy to try to answer any questionsanybody has and I'm sure Marvin and Dave could help me with some ofthe more technical ones.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I must say I didn't have a chance toread the fat books but I did read the summary, and it really is usefulin segregating the various types of problems that confront us. I'mnot saying that I feel overly encouraged about different means that wecould employ other than what we are doing. I guess we all hope thatsomewhere down the line we're going to be able to deviate from "fundsonly," if I may put it that way, as a policy. But I think the type ofdata systems that you set up for an evaluation will enable us tocontinue until we can fundamentally come to grips with a view thatpresumably for us [fed funds] continue as our optimum operating policyprocedure.Questions for President Broaddus? [Hearing none,] I guesseverybody has read the two books and all the questions have beenanswered!MR. BROADDUS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for theopportunity to summarize the study.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And thank you very much, indeed. We'llnow move on to Gretchen Greene and operations of the Foreign Desk.MS. GREENE. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much. Let me just addsomething about that intervention episode. It resulted from fairlyclose coordination between the Fed and the Treasury. When we beganover here to see the spillover effects on the exchange rate, on thebond market, and on the stock market, the notion of a deterioration inconfidence became, I think, somewhat more evident than it had beenpreviously. We had been arguing here that we had a necessarycondition to get a response in the market from intervention becausethe market did not expect intervention, meaning it was net short. Andin our discussions with the Treasury we suggested that a two-prongedapproach be initiated that day. One was to intervene moderately inthe market but visibly. This clearly came as a surprise to themarket; just watching the screens one could immediately see a varietyof the shorts begin to cover. Concurrently, we knew that there wereopportunities for both Messrs. Bentsen and Summers to make remarksthat day, considering the fact that in the period immediatelypreceding, the President--and obviously even earlier Secretary Bentsen-4-5/18/93 -5-and Secretary Brown--had made comments which suggested, as Gretchenpointed out, that there was perhaps some concerted American policy tostrengthen the yen. The truth of the matter is that no such policyexisted. These were in the nature of ad hoc comments by commentatorswho were not discussing American policy, but really were observers ofthe scene who concluded that history tells us that if the exchangerate of the yen rises, the Japanese surplus will fall. In fact, weare not certain what would happen. Indeed, my suspicion is that if weactually tried to create changes in exchange rates by consistentintervention, the secondary consequences in the markets, mainly in theexpectations area, would very likely make the correlations which arefairly robust between real exchange rates and current account deficitsbreak down. So, what we were trying to do was to indicate that thesecomments were nothing more than academic discussions aboutrelationships. I think we were about 20 percent successful, which isabout 10 percent more than I would have thought. But it came outpretty well. In fact, I told [my colleagues] that I thought the[outcome] that day was about as good as it gets in this endeavor tointervene in the markets and not to expect that there is an easyprocess here by which one can readily manipulate exchange rates. Tohis credit Larry Summers, who is very knowledgeable about all of this,has been very cooperative with us; he has made certain to keep usfully informed about any issues and discussions that they have beeninvolved in, and we have tried to reciprocate. Hopefully, thatprocess will continue. Any questions for Gretchen? Tom.MR. MELZER. Gretchen, in the [written] report there was acomment about the [market's] vulnerability to the dismantling of theselonger-term investment positions--and you just mentioned it in yourremarks--in Europe in particular. Do we have any sense of themagnitude of that, what dynamics might drive a liquidation, what theimpact of that could be, and so forth?MS. GREENE. Are you talking about intra-European investmentpositions?MR. MELZER. I'm talking about investment positions in U.S.dollars.MS. GREENE. Well, in reading the Greenbook last night Inoted that there have been some persistent foreign purchases of U.S.government securities in the first quarter of the year at the sametime that there has been a continued very high level of U.S. outwardinvestment. So, in effect, one could see this as financing ourcapital outflow. The liquidation that I spoke of--the Japaneseinvestments--will probably at least in the first instance not be U.S.dollars. Nevertheless, it had an effect on the dollar exchange ratebecause they liquidated, let's say, Canadian dollar securities,received Canadian dollars, and converted that to U.S. dollars; thedollar was a means of exchange for getting back into yen. We thoughtthey were relatively easily shaken out of the Canadian dollar market;there was also some Australian dollar intervention by the Japanese.The market has been talking about the Japanese more as a vulnerabilitythan an actuality as far as U.S. bond markets are concerned. Myfeeling is that, with the somewhat better climate that exists now inthe middle of May than existed at the beginning of April, they aremore secure now. But that's just a personal impression. Bill maywant to say something [on this issue].5/18/93MR. MCDONOUGH. Let me just add a footnote. [In the period]before the intervention that Gretchen described and the Chairmancommented on there's no question that the Japanese were not resistingrumors in the market reminding the United States that Japanese lifeinsurance companies held a lot of rather long Treasuries and that ifthey dumped them, the price to the United States would be rather high.As soon as the intervention took place, all of that talk disappeared.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, to what extent is it yourjudgment that the success that day was due to the fact that it waslargely not trade or even capital fundamentals but senioradministration official statements that were driving the market?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you mean before or after?MR. LINDSEY. Well, before having driven the dollar down andthat, therefore, we were successful with our intervention.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, remember, the statements cameafter the intervention. The intervention was a perceived success, ifone puts it in those terms, before the statements were made. But Ithink the statements reinforced it; that in large part turned aroundthe concerns that existed. It was probably not that it moved thedollar higher, but that it may have forestalled an erosion of some ofthe gains that had occurred earlier in the day as a consequence of theintervention.MS. PHILLIPS. I agree.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other comments? Let me just take aminute to fill you in on some comments that I heard at the Basle G-10meeting the weekend before last and early last week. There was quitean extraordinary number of subdued people in Europe; there is anunderlying fear that that system is continuously eroding. They arecontinually revising down their estimates; they are talking as thoughthe upturn is somewhere off in the future, whereas earlier in the yearthey were talking--in sort of government-speak--about the turn beingat hand and the official forecasts were [being revised] up. The moodwas really quite a good deal more subdued last week. They'reparticularly concerned about the shortfalls in revenues impacting ontheir budget deficits. The French were, I think, particularlytraumatized by that. The mood is really very soft--if anything, theworst I've seen this year. The British obviously are feeling somewhatbetter, but even among the Brits a slightly hollow cheerfulness isevolving.In any event, let me turn for a minute to an adjunct on thisexchange rate discussion and read to you three points that Ted Trumanis recommending relative to our discussions about exchange rates. Itcomes basically out of the experience that we've observed first withSecretary Bentsen, then the President, and then Secretary Brown. Itemone: Exchange rates are like interest rates, and if a central bankerdiscusses one, the central banker will be understood to be discussingthe other. The best comment for the Federal Reserve is "no comment."[Item two:] We are going through a delicate period in termsof exchange rates and, any talk, no matter how analytical, is likelyto take on exaggerated importance. Even a "no comment" from someonewho has previously commented is a comment. My answer is that the best5/18/93way to handle that is to ask the reporter "May I go on deepbackground?" Then, when they shake their heads, I say "no comment."Item three: The new Administration, or at least those partsof it with which the Federal Reserve deals regularly, is sensitive tothe fact that talk about exchange rates, loose or any other kind,tends to be unconstructive. While it would be foolish to think thatthe Treasury Department would be able to shut down entirely all othersources of Administration comment on exchange rates, it is somewhatembarrassing if the Federal Reserve becomes part of the problem. Ofcourse, the Treasury from time to time may feel it is necessary tomake an official comment on exchange rates, but we hope that thosecomments are deliberate and well considered. The recent record showsthat the Treasury is prepared to work with the Federal Reserve on suchoccasions. That's the end of Ted's comments and I must say I fullysubscribe to them.Let's move on. We have to ratify the actions taken by theDesk with respect to intervention against the yen. I would asksomebody to move it.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Let's move to BillMcDonough and the operations of the Domestic Desk.MR. MCDONOUGH. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions?MR. BOEHNE. In the context of what the market views as goodnews and bad news and how it might move the market, how would themarket react to a tightening of Fed policy in the near term?MR. MCDONOUGH. Assuming it would happen soon enough so thatwe have the present market conditions--the short end is priced on the3 percent funds rate--the likelihood is that interest rates out to twoor three years would probably go up. I think [a tightening] wouldprobably bring the yield on the 10-year bond down a little because itwould be interpreted as the Fed being both active in fightinginflation and very concerned about the economy. I think you would getthose two reactions. What it would do to the 30-year bond is reallyhard to call. If investors became convinced--making that distinctionI made earlier--that economic growth is likely to be low and that theFed is very concerned about inflation, my guess is that the long bondwould probably go up in price and down in yield. But at the presenttime it's really being played essentially by hedge funds and variousother speculators, and in their hands it could go either way. Itwould depend an awful lot in the longer end of the market on whetherthe investors were back in. If they were, then I think we would get aflattening of the yield curve--short end up and longer end down.MR. SYRON. Bill, what is in market expectations now in termsof the deficit? There has obviously been some change in that, but I'm5/18/93trying to get some view of any likely disappointment or, conversely, apleasant surprise.MR. MCDONOUGH. It has improved a little in the very recentpast by Mr. Rostenkowski getting the bill through the House Ways andMeans Committee in the shape that it did. And I think the marketassumption now is that the House will pass the Ways and Means bill.Then it shifts over to the Senate, and the market is somewhat confusedabout that. There's no doubt that a fair piece of the rally throughMarch [reflected the view] that gridlock was not likely, that therewas a serious effort to reduce the deficit, and that the newAdministration had the kind of political skills that they showed inwinning the election. What has happened is that that view has flippeda lot. The market went from thinking that the Administration could donothing wrong politically to a view that, well, maybe it can't doanything too well either. So, I think one would [unintelligible].But the pricing in the market--the fact that we're in the same tradingrange--in my view would say that the market view is still that thedeficit reduction will happen.MR. PARRY. You indicated that the market reaction to theshortening of the maturity of the debt was muted. Was there muchdiscussion as to the motives for shortening? Has it been receivedwell by the market? I know there wasn't much of a move in rates.MR. MCDONOUGH. The general reaction has been that it wasmotivated by the desire to reduce the deficit.MR. PARRY. Short term.MR. MCDONOUGH. Short term. And since most market experts,or at least so-claimed experts, advised against the move, they talkedto their [unintelligible] and said it was a bad idea. It did not goover well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Bill? If not,would somebody like to move to ratify the actions of the Desk?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So moved.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do I hear a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We now move to MikePrell. Mike.MR. PRELL. [Statement--see Appendix.] Thank you, Mr.Chairman. I apologize for the unusual length.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, this is a very crucial period forus. And even though Mike Prell went on at some length, I'd like toweigh in and add to his comments. Let me just say in looking at thesedata that I come out with the same concerns you do, Mike. The problemthat we're confronting is one in which we have to be able tounderstand what is causing the price movements we are seeing here thathave deviated from our most likely expectations. I think we can ruleout that the usual money and credit phenomenon is pushing inflation.-8-5/18/93We can barely find the figures even though they've come up a bit; wehave a very faint pulse but not much more than that. You raisedinteresting questions about the labor market slack issue and I doagree that there's something there, especially the size of the defenseadjustment that's going on. But there, too, it is rather tough in myview, with the excess capacity especially abroad and the labor marketquestions that we have here, to argue readily that there is somethingof significance working. There are some elements that I think doclarify the issue. One is that profit margins very clearly have beenrising, and rising quite significantly. In the context of coming offrather weak demand, and a cumulative weak demand, it's pretty apparentthat there has been a considerable endeavor to restore margins fromsubnormal levels and that this process is [being reflected in] veryformidable profit figures that continue to emerge not only for theindustrial sector but pretty much across the board. We probablyhaven't run through that process as yet but it's obvious that thehigher profit margins get, the less they can be expected to continueto move higher. And correct me if I'm wrong, Mike, but in the Board'smodel, as margins rise, the pressures on prices fall. The highmargins imply that we will begin to get softer prices as the momentumfrom the rising margins ceases to be able to be carried through. Idon't know if we're there yet, but there is something veryspecifically there.An issue you didn't discuss that I do think is of someimportance, but frankly I don't know the order of magnitude, is theprotectionism that has been emerging very subtly but in a pronouncedmanner. There is no way to describe the steel price increases of lateother than [as a reflection of] protectionism. This is not an issueof there being available supplies from abroad that are pushing ourprices down; but squeezing the amount of imports enables the domesticmills to move their prices significantly higher. Needless to say,they have done so with alacrity. And while [the importance of] steelisn't what it used to be, it's nonetheless enough to have an impact inthe durable goods pricing structure that is visible. Remember thatalmost by definition durable goods means "made with steel." And thatreally tends to spread [the effects] out in a particularly long line.I don't now what the regulatory costs are but as we werediscussing in a Board meeting the other day, I'm sure that theDisabilities Act has had some impact on costs. We view that and theClean Air Act largely in terms of capital costs and equipment. Butremember that on a consolidated basis capital costs become laborcosts. And in a consolidated sense it doesn't matter whether thepressure on the cost structure is from capital or direct labor becausewe consolidate out materials; it doesn't matter one way or the other.If in fact this is the type of inflation we are dealing with, it is astagflation type of inflation except for, of course, the profitmargins, which are very difficult to deal with. My [suspicion] isthat it's part of all this. I do think the issue that was raised withrespect to inflationary expectations may be the most relevantconsideration here if what we are dealing with is a continued increasein the general price level. That's because in all of our analyses ofinflation we endeavor to find the transmission mechanism by which theactions of workers in the wage bargaining process and of managers inprice markups take place. The conventional wisdom in our models isthat [the transmission] is largely induced through changes inpsychology. That is, labor force and economic slack are supposed to5/18/93change people's attitudes. But it's only when those attitudes changeand indeed we get low [settlements in] wage contracts that the anti-inflation process occurs. If we get the slack but nothing happens,all we're saying is that something broke down in the process. Thatessentially means that people--despite the fact that they're losingtheir jobs and despite the fact that unemployment is rising--stillview the outlook as inflationary and they want wage increases. Or,alternatively, it means that the business community--despite what wewould all view as a very weak economy--perceives that in fact theeconomy is really strengthening and that they can get price increases.And if their customers believe it, the price increases stick. But wehave to look at the actions that people are taking. Clearly, when weget a PPI or a CPI we are looking at the end result of actions takenby people. And the question is: What is driving them? At the end ofthe day it doesn't matter what is driving them if in fact they arebehaving in a manner that is bringing the price level up. This issomething that I think we will get into when we get to our policydiscussion. I hope it is where our discussion will take place becauseif anybody seriously believes that we can move interest rates at allin this particular context and [unintelligible] choke off[unintelligible] inflation, I would say that history tells us thechances of doing that are zero short of a 200 or 300 or 400 basispoint rise in interest rates.So, the question really gets down to how we view this otherstructure. Unless we are willing to abandon fully all of our notionsof what has historically created inflation--meaning forget the creditaggregates, forget the slack market issues, forget all of the costpressures that occur as a consequence of regulations--we cannotreadily explain what is happening. Unless we're willing to forget allof those elements involved in our ability to forecast--I don't see howwe can unless we abandon all intellectual rigor--as far as I can seewe cannot explain what is happening other than by this inflationarypsychology [process]. And that, in my judgment, may in part reflectpolitical questions as to whether there is stability in the system andwhat the longer-term outlook is--whether in fact there are reallyserious problems in the long term.I do think the issue that Mike raised about acceleratingdemand may be quite relevant. That is, we were going through thesecond half of last year on an accelerating path and that could verywell have altered the basic expectations of everybody. And theactions we are looking at, remember, are historical. The pricechanges that occurred in April, which are our latest price data,probably were made weeks before as far as planning is concerned. Andthe only evidence that we have since then is that wage rates in Aprilhave softened considerably. That is a somewhat useful costdevelopment. As you may have observed in the Greenbook, the Board'sstaff is reducing [its projection of] the ECI, the employment costindex, for the second quarter; it is down dramatically from the firstquarter. Therefore, the fundamental issue, as I read the Greenbook,is that the essential thrust of this last acceleration is where theinflation expectations are coming from rather than the politics oranything else. If that explanation is true, we should find that outwithin a reasonably short period of time. But I will tell you that atthis stage we are pretty much testing the limits of our theoreticalknowledge as to what the actual inflationary process is really doing.-10-5/18/93There is also the obvious question as to whether the pricedata themselves are creating problems for us. For example, a notinsignificant part of the April CPI is a big increase in ownerequivalent rent, which popped up. If one looks at owner equivalentrent as a ratio to the quality adjusted price of homes--a sort of rateof return estimate--that has been rising fairly significantly of late.And that's not what one would expect in the rate of return; one wouldexpect it actually to be going in the other direction. Now, I don'tput much weight on either the numerator or the denominator of thatbecause, as you all know, the sample that is taken on owner equivalentrent, which accounts for something just short of 20 percent of thetotal index, is dubious and highly unstable. So, it is conceivablethat the implicit price forecast in the Greenbook is right; and thatwould mean that all of a sudden the rate of price increase will slowfairly dramatically. But I will say this: The fact that Mike shows asignificant amount of humility [is] something that I think is relevantto this type of analysis. All I can suggest is that anyone who intheir comments around the table can add anything to what we know aboutthis price process will contribute a great deal to our colleagues'base of information, which as I see it is pretty slender indeed atthis particular stage. Who would like to start off?MR. PARRY. Mike, when I look at the forecast of quarterlygrowth rates for gross domestic product and inflation and compare itto the previous forecast, I see a couple tenths weaker growth ratethroughout the entire period and a couple tenths higher inflation. Italmost seems that a supply shock of some sort would produce thisbecause typically a model is constructed so that if the economy runsinto a slow period [the model] will pull it back--in effect make upfor that [slowing] within a relatively short period. But when thereis a supply shock, that's not necessarily the case. What, in effect,did you have in mind that caused it?MR. PRELL. Well, as I noted, we're trying to understand whythings have been going the way they have. Certainly, supplyconditions [are] a possible explanation. That was something that wasat least in our minds as we were doing this. But basically the biggerdriver in this was simply a recognition that the trends had not beendeveloping as we had anticipated and were carrying through higherlevels of inflation throughout and moderating somewhat further thetradeoff; in a sense, we were getting less bang for the unemployment[buck] from here on. But it's very much a level adjustment that isinvolved here.MR. PARRY. I can see that [you have made an adjustment], butdo you have any particular feeling as to why that tradeoff may havechanged?MR. PRELL. Nothing more than what I suggested. It's notgoing to [unintelligible] a separate matter from the tradeoff if youfeel that in effect the NAIRU has been raised. It is simply that thegap is small--MR. PARRY. Right.MR. PRELL. The tradeoff could be affected if theexpectations formation process is different than the backward-lookingversion that's inherent in a simple Phillips curve model. But again,-11-5/18/93it's hard to say whether that's a level adjustment we're making or atradeoff adjustment. We simply tried to recognize the tendencieswe've seen and to be a shade less optimistic, going forward, about thetradeoff between unemployment and disinflation. These are rathersmall adjustments in a sense.MR. LINDSEY. Thinking of a supply shock more broadly, onewould include in that an upward revision to inflationary expectations;in a sense that would worsen the possible combination of output andinflation.MR. MCTEER. One thing that would account for both higherinflation and a weaker real sector would be weather, and we know wehave had some bad weather. To what extent have you analyzed that andfigured out how many points could be attributed to that?MR. PRELL. Well, we think it's probable that weather chippeda bit off of the first-quarter growth. We could see some disruption,some temporary loss at least, of output in industrial production. ButI don't see a correlation between those output losses and the pricepressures. I see it certainly in vegetable prices. Clearly,agricultural commodities have been affected by the weather and we seeit in their prices. But I don't think the steel price increases thatwere referred to earlier and the medical services price increasesrecently had any significant weather element. So, while it's a nicesimple conceptual analysis to say "Well, we reduced the supply and theprices went up," I really don't think that was what has accounted forthe uptick in the inflation trend.MR. MCTEER. I was under the impression that the foodcomponent was a pretty good chunk of it, though.MR. PRELL. Well, in the overall CPI it was an elementrecently. But we're really focusing on the core CPI, recognizing thatwithin a few months we should move back to normal supplies of fruitsand vegetables and then the price level of food should return to thebasic trend. So, this is not a significant element in our analysis.MR. PARRY. We would really have to have a convoluted impacton inflationary expectations to get the kind of effects that you havewith the weather.MR. PRELL. Indeed. Overall inflation undoubtedly isimportant as well as the core in determining peoples' expectationsabout the future, or what they perceive to be acceptable increases inwages, and so on. But I don't think weather is the story here.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I admit I don't understand the inflation numbersvery well but, in thinking about the discussion on profit margins,maybe there is something there telling us about the degree of slack.After all, those price increases seem to have stuck for whateverreason. And maybe part of that has to do with the internationalsituation. Maybe foreign competition isn't as vigorous as it wasearlier; certainly something of that [nature] must be what is going onin autos I would think.-12-5/18/93MR. PRELL. But clearly we have had an exchange rate movementand slack in the Japanese economy. Both of those things have tendedto boost the prices of Japanese automobiles and have provided anumbrella for domestic manufacturers. They started off the year withrelatively generous incentives that held down the seasonally adjustedprices. They've been able to take those off; they raised a few listprices. And I think this is certainly influenced by the developmentsin the foreign exchange market. As the Chairman noted, in steel therehas been a marked reduction in imports and there has been considerablepressure on supply in some parts of the steel market. There is someuncertainty about whether that's going to persist in the comingmonths. Of course, this will depend in part on decisions that aremade about protectionist measures. Basically, the improvement inprofits has largely conformed to the typical pattern of profits movingup with an acceleration in activity and a related jump inproductivity. I assume we've had a rather typical cyclical pattern inthat respect.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What, incidentally, is the accountingaddition of import prices on the CPI? In other words, to what extentare import prices affecting the CPI and in what direction?MR. PRELL. Well, on net, there probably has not been a verygreat influence to date. The Japanese automobiles are one story, butexchange rates against other currencies haven't been adverse. So,overall import prices have not been rising very rapidly at all. Infact, for the first quarter, non-oil import prices are estimated tohave declined. So I don't think to date that we've seen, overall, amajor unfavorable impact from import prices. In particular areas ithas been a factor.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. In reading the Greenbook for this meeting andlistening to your comments and then thinking back over the analysis inthe Greenbooks over the last 8 or 9 months and the swings in sentimentand developments as reported in various statistical [measures], it'stempting to have a sense of security that we're in a sort of fail-safezone: That in the longer term nothing much can really go wrong eventhough we get surprised in the short run. We entered the fourthquarter with an expectation of a quite weak quarter in nominal GDP andreal GDP with a 3 percent funds rate. And the surprise was that itwas a much, much stronger quarter than expected. During that quarteras we were looking ahead to '93, the first quarter in particular,there was an expectation of fairly strong nominal GDP growth and realoutput growth; the surprise was that real output growth [in the firstquarter] was much weaker than expected. And by some measures priceshave been much higher than expected, yet we still have a 3 percentfunds rate. When I look at your forecast through '94 in terms ofnominal growth, real growth, and inflation it assumes a continuationof the 3 percent funds rate. It is still the right number in spite ofall of these developments. It seems to me--and this is where I'd likeyou to comment on the way your model works--that when we have adevelopment like the first quarter and real output comes in weak andinflation is reported to be much higher, it's not something to beconcerned about because it means that the real interest rate hasfallen or the natural rate or something because of the higherinflation and that will take care of the weakness in real growth. But-13-5/18/93out in the future because of the slack, the gap, the NAIRU orsomething, inflation will decelerate; that will raise the realinterest rate so that no matter what happens it's going to turn outthat the 3 percent funds rate is the right rate. I'd be curious as towhat it would take to persuade you that it's either too high or toolow! [Laughter]MR. PRELL. I think we all recognize the dangers of peggingnominal interest rates. It is not an automatic stabilizer. And ifthe pattern has been relatively stable, it has been because of variousoffsetting factors. I would say that coming into the first quarter weinitially expected growth in the high 2 percent area for the quarterwith a lower inflation path. As things have turned out, we may yetapproach that real forecast but the price numbers clearly have beenunfavorable. Going forward, you are correct that--as we noted in afootnote in the Greenbook--in essence the higher inflation trend andwhat we would take probably to be somewhat higher short-run inflationexpectations than we had been expecting earlier do imply a somewhatlower real short-term interest rate. The question is whether at thatlevel we are providing sufficient stimulus to offset the fiscal dragand other drags in the system now. Or perhaps, on the other side, isthis excessive monetary stimulus? As has been noted, we don't see itin terms of rapid money growth on average. We don't see it yet interms of rapid nominal GDP growth. But in due course it's conceivablethat we would see that this [policy] was excessively stimulative. Oursense has certainly been that as we move along there would likely besome tendency for the real short-term interest rate to rise. But wedo have to recognize that at least out through 1994, if this fiscalprogram is adopted, there is going to be a very large tax increase anda very substantial amount of fiscal drag. So the point at which thisbecomes an unsustainable real short-term rate may not be imminent; itmay be some time down the road. At least that's the implication ofour analysis.MR. JORDAN. Can I follow-up, though, because you mentionedthe fiscal drag. Isn't the argument that if the fiscal program isadopted, we would get a lower inflation premium and more stimuluscoming from private investment and the household sector, even housing,because of lower nominal interest rates than otherwise would be thecase? And thus the net effect of the fiscal action could be presumedto be not restrictive at all.MR. PRELL. The simple analysis might lead you to expectlower real interest rates. But if you believe that inflationexpectations are based on either some primitive notion of how deficitscause inflation or a more sophisticated one about the risks of future[monetization] then, yes, we could get also some narrowing of theinflation premium. In either case we would have had some offset fromthe beneficial anticipatory effects of the fiscal action. We thinkthose are probably already behind us, but I'm not sure. Back to thequestion that Bill addressed earlier, what could happen here would bean important, pleasant surprise that would be a big boost for the bondmarket. At this point, I think people recognize that there's a budgetresolution out there with which they have to contend. Most likely[Congress] will do something that at least nominally meets thoserequirements. No one, I think, is anticipating a vastly larger orvastly smaller deficit reduction than is currently being discussed.-14-5/18/93MR. LINDSEY. Mike, this morning's Wall Street Journal saidthat the health care package would involve a 9 percent payroll tax forextending benefits--7 percent on employers and 2 percent on employees.Assuming this were enacted, how would we think that 7 percent taxwould be reflected in terms of prices versus lower nominal wages?MR. PRELL. Well, as I should remind everyone, ourpresumption has been that even if this were legislated by sometime in1994 the phase-in would be long and the effects within our projectionperiod would be almost solely those based on expectations. Ourpresumption would be that an increase in mandated costs relating topayrolls would be passed on only gradually to the workers in the formof lower wages and that the hit would be primarily on the price sidein the short run.MR. LINDSEY. Why wouldn't that be perceived as a positivedemand shock then? Because it's either higher real compensation ifyou lump workers and beneficiaries together and what you're saying isthat profits would eat it for a while. Why wouldn't that be apositive boost for consumption?MR. PRELL. Well, that depends on whether monetary policyaccommodates that kind of supply-side shock. Clearly, the monetarypolicy response to that, as it would be to any other jump in exogenousforces, is critical. But if this provided opportunities for muchlarger consumption of medical services to people, there presumablywould be some offset on the demand side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mike, I have two questions about inflation.Being as puzzled as everyone else, I'm just wondering if there is anyinformation in the cross-sectoral look at where margins have widenedmost. I'm just wondering whether that's more suggestive of thisregulatory, protectionist argument as compared to an ability to widenmargins because of demand. The other question is whether there is anyinformation on the expectations side--looking at the relativedeterioration of longer-term as compared to shorter-term inflationexpectations.MR. PRELL. I don't think I can give you any useful sectoralbreakdown. On your question of the long-term versus short-termexpectations, could you repeat that one for me?MR. SYRON. When you look at the surveys that show adeterioration in expectations and try to get a handle on what isdriving the deterioration--and I'm not that familiar with the data--I'm just asking whether the deterioration has [been much greater] inthe longer run than in the short run and whether that would beconsistent with the general notion of some kind of politicaldeterioration, if I can call it that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You're talking about expectations ingeneral?MR. SYRON. Yes.-15-5/18/93MR. PRELL. Our indicators of long-run expectations arerather volatile from month to month and my sense is that in generalthey haven't moved much recently. They came down some earlier in therecovery, but recently I don't think there is a particularlydiscernible trend. The Michigan Survey has bounced around in the 5percent neighborhood. A survey that is a successor to the Hoey Surveyshows a similar pattern, except that it's more in the 4 percentneighborhood, but I don't discern a big change there. On the short-term side, what is notable is that we have not had any consistentfurther lowering and there's perhaps a little firming if one wants toread it very finely. But basically it has been a rather stablepicture even as we got into the 3 percent CPI increase area for twoyears. That's the impression I have.Let me go back to Governor Lindsey's question. I suppose ingeneral if people felt that they were more secure because this programoffered them particular long-term care and some other safeguardsagainst their wealth being depleted, then we could have in a sense awealth effect that could be positive for consumption in the short termapart from the fact that the cost of medical services for some part ofthe population might have been lowered.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mike? If not,would somebody like to start the roundtable?MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I'll start with our District,which continues to show a very moderate pace of growth. Inagriculture, winter wheat is in good condition and our cattle feedlotoperations have rebounded from some winter problems. Construction hasbounced back from the winter-related slowdown; it now has strengthenedin all areas. In gas and oil, prices of natural gas have improvedfrom year-ago levels and drilling has leveled off. I would point outthat drilling has not picked up and is not expected to accelerateuntil there is more confidence in the price gains and that thoseprices will be stable. Absent that, they are very reluctant to pushforward on any exploration or drilling. Manufacturing in our arearemains sluggish and it is consistently operating below capacity as wehear from area business leaders. Banking has been extremelyprofitable in our region. Bank earnings are at record levels in thefirst quarter. In fact, in Oklahoma banks have reported returns onassets of higher than 2 percent.Looking ahead for the District, we think moderate growth iscontinuing. Despite some expectations that cattle prices will comedown and wheat prices may also, we still think income in '93 will beat a level close to that in '92. In construction, there is now awhole pipeline of activity that bodes well for the summer in ourregion. In energy, although prices have risen we don't expect a lotof activity unless those prices remain stable [or] rise. Inmanufacturing, the possibility of a turnaround, as I've said before,has been set back by some continued restructuring. As an example,Boeing is laying off about 7,000 people in Wichita.At the national level, we continue to expect moderate growthand moderate inflation as we move through '93. We expect GDP growthof about 2-1/2 percent and inflation of just over 3 percent fourthquarter-over-fourth quarter. I might add that an important reason wescaled back our growth projection is because in talking with business-16-5/18/93leaders around the District we heard a lot of anecdotal evidence[pointing in that direction]. They are thinking about or have put[plans] on hold because of expectations about taxes--particularlyFederal, but even the states are talking about very dramatic increasesin taxes. So businesses are focusing now more than ever on costcontainment and trying to get their profits up. I think this is onereason businesses are raising prices; they want to see if the higherprices can take hold. This has been complicated in the health careindustry because in some sectors, like medical devices, activity hasvirtually stopped because of the anticipated health care program.Also impeding renewed spending is this continued effort by businessesthat we've spoken about for some time to pay down debt and toconsolidate their positions in an environment of increasinguncertainty. If I heard it once I heard it a hundred times in thelast three weeks: Business people are very, very concerned about theenvironment of uncertainty, so they are trimming back or are holdingback a little more than they would otherwise. Having said all this,there is still a willingness to go forward where opportunities showthrough in a strong way, as we're seeing in the western part of ourDistrict. So we pared back our projections--not quite as much as theBoard staff--to the 2-1/2 percent level for growth. Those are mycomments, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. The first-quarter data were quitedisappointing and we have gotten mixed reports for the month of Aprilso far in our District. But, in some contrast to Tom Hoenig's report,I haven't really noticed any major change in attitudes about theeconomic outlook either among our directors or most of our otherbusiness contacts. By and large, I think they still expect continuedmoderate growth both regionally and nationally through the forecasthorizon.I personally subscribe to that view. I was a littlesurprised by the size of the downward revision to the real GDPforecast in the Greenbook this time. I'm inclined to put a littleless weight on current fiscal developments in assessing economicprospects than the Greenbook. It seems to me that the loss of the $12billion stimulus in the President's package is not a really big dealin a $6 trillion economy. And while uncertainty about fiscal policycertainly puts a drag on the economy, it seems to me that this effectis very difficult to quantify. I don't have a sense that theuncertainty about fiscal policy is exerting any greater drag now thanit was at the time of the March FOMC meeting. So, all in all, I stillthink that growth of real GDP in 1993 will be somewhere around 3percent, as forecast in the March Greenbook, rather than the 2.2percent that is currently projected in this month's Greenbook. And Ibelieve I'm right in saying that most private forecasters are stillsomewhere around that number, although they may have revised theirforecasts down a bit in some cases.For me, clearly the most relevant and most disturbing recentdevelopment is the uptick in the reported inflation rate. The coreCPI rate, as I calculate it, now has risen at a 4-1/2 percent annualrate over the first months of the year and that really bothers me. Irecognize, as everyone else does, that temporary factors may accountfor part of this; nonetheless, at a minimum the data strongly suggest5/18/93that inflation is no longer coming down. So we're no longer clearlymaking progress toward our longer-term goal of restoring pricestability and we may have regressed a bit. And as Dave Lindsey andothers have pointed out, I think it's fair to say that inflationexpectations have probably been revised upward at least a little sincethe beginning of the year. That's an interesting point because itimplies that real short-term interest rates are lower than they were.So, in a sense we've had a de facto easing of policy as a result ofthis development in recent months, and I would hope that we would takesome account of that in our policy discussion later in the meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, economic conditions continue tovary in the Twelfth District. In California some evidence hasaccumulated that the economy actually may have hit bottom in recentmonths. We have seen, for example, that payroll employment is alittle higher than it was in December; and taxable sales also appearto have bottomed out with increases experienced in the fourth quarterof 1992 and the first quarter of 1993. Nevertheless, we are facedwith significant further defense cuts, state and local fiscalproblems, and lingering weakness in commercial real estate that makeit unlikely that the California economy is going to grow at any timein the next year. The Seattle area, which until recently wasexpanding briskly, has stagnated in recent months. I must admit thatrecent new orders for Boeing aircraft are encouraging. The economiesof most other areas of the District continue to flourish. Utah,Nevada, Alaska, and Oregon are ranked in the top ten states in termsof employment growth between December 1992 and March 1993. And eventhe eastern Washington economy continues to be strong. Throughout theWest, and this is similar to what Tom Hoenig picked up, many businessleaders have noted to us that uncertainty about federal fiscal policy,particularly tax policy, is delaying investments and other majorbusiness decisions.On the issue of inflation, in general reportlittle price pressure, but there was one anecdote that I thought wasrather interesting.and he reported that they periodically conduct a pricesurvey of packaged and canned goods. Now, this doesn't get into theproblem with fresh fruits and vegetables. At the wholesale level, thelatest survey revealed more widespread increases in the prices theypay for these goods than they had ever experienced before. Theinteresting thing is that he went on to say that he doubts that theywill be able to pass those price increases along. It remains to beseen whether they will or not.Turning to the national scene, it appears at least to me thatthe changes in the Greenbook forecast since the last FOMC meeting arelarge and, I'd have to say, quite disturbing. Real GDP seems to be ona decidedly lower path and inflation on a discouragingly faster track.Our own forecast is also more pessimistic in the short run, but by1994 we have stronger growth than we had before and an unchanged rateof inflation. The change to our forecast reflects the defeat of theClinton stimulus package, general concern about the extent of highertaxes, and slower-than-expected growth in the first quarter as well asthe unexpected buildup of inventories. The change to the Greenbookforecast would appear to result from more permanent influences in-18-5/18/93addition to the factors that I noted. It would seem, if the Greenbookforecast proves to be correct--and that certainly is a possibility--that the policy tradeoffs are likely to be far less attractive thanI'd earlier thought.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, economic conditions in the ChicagoDistrict have been somewhat uneven since the last meeting, but onbalance I think there has been an increase in the level of activity.In a modest context the outlook is reasonably positive. Starting withthe automotive sector: Based on a pretty good April, the industry'sconfidence in their forecast for sales in the second quarter and thefull year is somewhat stronger than it has been. Despite pressreports to the contrary, the inventory levels in their view arecurrently just about right and, therefore, second-quarter productionschedules have been set about 10 percent over last year. And they arepretty confident about those production schedules. I must say themood in Detroit is much more positive than it has been and that isradiating pretty much throughout the dealer organization. The truckbusiness also continues to improve. Orders for the Class 8 units, thelarge units, were strong in the first quarter and that has continuedinto the second quarter. For the full year the industry isforecasting an increase in sales of the big trucks of from 17 to 18percent. Also, and something of a change, there has been a recentincrease in the medium truck category, the Class 5 to 7 units, and forthe full year they are now forecasting an increase in sales of some 13percent for those. Medium truck sales are viewed as something of alagging indicator and, therefore, this turn, which generally occursabout 6 months after the change in the heavy truck category, is viewedas a good sign. But despite the strength in the underlying auto salesrate, I must say that truck prices really have not been increased.The steel business continues to do well and is benefitingparticularly from the improved level [of activity] in the autoindustry. The current order rate for one major company, which theyexpect [to continue] for the full second quarter, is coming in atabout 110 percent of capacity. This is down from the first quarterbut still pretty strong. Some of the order rate they [feel] is due tothe current labor negotiations; nonetheless, the underlying demand ispretty good. And based on this they are now forecasting shipmentsthis year of some 87 million tons, which comparatively is an awfullygood year. We've talked about the steel price increases at previousmeetings and again earlier today. There is, as you know, anotherincrease scheduled for July. They would expect that to stick. But Ido think it's important to remember that these increases do not applyto the major purchasers who are buying the steel on contract. Thoseprices are still very, very tight, and it's particularly true of theauto industry. But for others who are not buying on contract, whenwe're all done here this increase is going to amount to about 12percent.In the agricultural equipment business, sales of tractors andcombines have been higher most recently and production schedules,therefore, have been increased. The large manufacturer that I talkedto expects their production for the full year to be about 9 percenthigher than last year. Also, there has been a recent increase inconstruction equipment; it has been slow to get off the mark but some-19-5/18/93of those orders are beginning to pick up. One very major manufactureris now selling a number of its product lines on back order.Retail sales are uneven and this, I think, is heavily drivenby the terrible weather that we had in March and April. As for car[sales], retailers tell me that their sales this year are up about 5to 6 percent from last year. In the ag sector, as you know, we had avery wet spring and planting, therefore, has been terribly slow. Butconditions looked pretty good last week and they got a lot done; thatis true I will say with the exception of Iowa, which is still verywet. But they're still well behind and for the major states plantingis at about 40 percent of the normal level. Nonetheless, there'senough time left and most people expect that there is a goodopportunity to get a good crop. Perhaps one of the most significantchanges, at least to me, has been a decided change in the attitudeabout lending by banks. People tell me, both borrowers and banksalike, that banks have become more aggressive. They are now activelyseeking loans and are pretty much out looking for business; they havebegun to shave rates, but I am assured that they have not begun toease their credit standards.In a national context, while the improved level of activitymay relieve some of the concerns I've had about the sustainability ofthis expansion, I still think the big imponderable is on theemployment side. Major companies--and I must say everyone I havetalked to in the manufacturing sector--say they will continue toreduce their employment and will produce more products with fewerpeople. At some point it does seem to me that the lines betweenovertime and an increase in demand will cross, but so far they justare not yielding. And almost surprisingly, some of the unions don'twant the companies to hire more people either. But despite thisimproved tone both in the District as well as in the national economy,it does seem to me that at best we are talking about a pretty modestrecovery. If you look at the staff forecast, which is largely in linewith ours, the outlook continues to be positive but in a very, verymodest context.On the price front, in talking to people I just don't sensethe upward pressures that the recent numbers might suggest. Yes,there are some exceptions, such as steel, and for the reasons that wetalked about; but there are some offsets. Raw aluminum prices, forexample, are at the lowest real level in history. Labor contractscontinue to be settled on favorable terms that are, I think, very muchnoninflationary. For example, the steel contract is a long way fromsettlement, but so far the thrust of the discussions has been entirelyin the work rule area and productivity. Companies want to improvework rules to achieve more productivity and they are willing to give alittle in terms of employment security. On the economic side thediscussions really are focused on pensions, not on wages. Therefore,the steel industry hopes that they will come out of this [negotiation]without an inflationary settlement. So, although the recent numbersare a little unnerving, I do think it's far too soon to conclude thatwe are experiencing a basic shift in the outlook for prices. Thankyou.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.-20-5/18/93MR. MCTEER. In case some of you missed it, I'm pleased toreport some good news from south of the border. The government ofMexico has submitted a constitutional amendment to give independenceto the central bank, the Bank of Mexico, and to make price stabilityits overriding objective. The way they worded it was that the mainmandate of the Bank of Mexico over any other objective will be topreserve the purchasing power of the national currency.In the Eleventh District we've seen some modest weakening inthe numbers and some deterioration in the tone of the anecdotalinformation. It's somewhat more negative, primarily surroundinguncertainty over the future. Projects are being put on hold becausepeople are waiting to see what the tax situation is going to be and[what happens regarding] certain government spending situations andalso health care reform. And probably somewhat unique to our area, wealso have some slowdown related to the diminished prospects for thepassage of NAFTA.On the national economy, I really don't have any helpfulinsights to offer. I don't understand this recent split in theeconomy with the real sector seeming to turn down and inflationseeming to pick up at the same time. It's a mystery to me. On thenontraditional source of the inflation, however, and not being able tofind the pulse of money and credit growth, it's probably because we'restill trying to find that pulse on the balance sheet of banks. Whenwe talk about the money numbers and what's going on, I think it'sfairly clear that there is liquidity out there and there is money outthere; it's just not where we used to measure it. I think we haven'tquite made the adjustment when we're talking about inflation torealize that it's probably there in that context as well. That's all.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, things are looking fairly good inthe Sixth Federal Reserve District. Economic activity in the area hascontinued to expand in the early months of this year. And perhapsmore significantly, the expansion is now fairly broad-based since ithas spread to several industries that previously had been lagging,namely financial services, communications, and manufacturing. As theexpansion has become more widespread, a number of long-standing fiscalproblems of the states in terms of their financing have begun to ease,and I think that will have implications as the federal fiscal policyemerges. The manufacturing industry has benefited from fairly goodactivity in single-family housing and the continued surge in activitydue to hurricane rebuilding in south Florida. The auto assemblyplants in the District, especially the Saturn and the Nissan plants inTennessee, are operating at very high capacity. And this jump inmanufacturing activity in the first quarter has led to considerablejob growth in the District. In fact, the Southeast accounted for overhalf of net manufacturing jobs added to payrolls for the nation in thefirst quarter. Even the depressed extraction industry in Louisianahas turned around and, as natural gas prices have increased, activityoff the Louisiana shore has risen to levels we haven't seen since1985. The generally good performance around the District is dominatedby Georgia and Florida, where sales tax receipts have been verystrong; but other states have seen improvements as well. As I'veindicated, even Louisiana is beginning to emerge from the doldrums.So, [the improvement] is not only broad-based in terms of economic5/18/93sectors but geographically as well. Now, this better performance thanthe nation may not continue very long because the activity due to thehurricane rebuilding will begin to slow.The one serious negative note that I've picked up--and it hasbeen referred to before--is the uncertainty about the fiscal andpolitical situation. Tom Hoenig heard it 100 times; I think I heardit 110 times in the last three or four weeks. It's ambivalent in thesense that the business people in the Southeast, as reflected in myreport, are fairly optimistic about their own businesses and whatmight be emerging in the economy. Or to put it another way, they'renot unduly upset about the first-quarter numbers. But thisuncertainty about the fiscal situation may very well begin to bereflected in business investment and employment plans for the rest ofthe year. Business people are telling me constantly that they're notable to begin to do their business planning because of the fiscalsituation and the health care problem.In spite of the good economic activity and in spite of theinflation numbers that have been reported, I don't hear anybodytalking about price increases at all. They're not seeing them at thewholesale level and to the extent that any of them have tried to passany prices increases through--the minimal increases that haveoccurred--they are not able to make them stick. At the same timethere are no wage pressures at all that I can tell.The credit situation seems to be improving. Banks arereporting higher loan demand, particularly in the consumer sector, butthey also are seeing better demand in the commercial area.Looking at the national situation, our forecast shows acontinuation of the moderate rate of expansion that we've had over thelast year. Like many others we've revised our forecast down, based onthe first quarter primarily, and we're looking at growth in real GDPof about 2-3/4 percent for this year, which is about 1/2 percentagepoint lower than our previous forecast. Overall, it seems to me thatthe outlook, despite that reduction, is pretty much the same--with thecontinued working off of imbalances and the slow employment growththat we've referred to before. We see the economy as somewhatstronger than the Greenbook and this divergence continues after thesecond half of the year. The difference for the most part is in thearea of consumption expenditures, where we see more strength; and wesee more inflation notwithstanding slow employment growth. I wouldn'twant to over-emphasize these differences, however. I think ourgeneral path is fairly consistent with that of the Greenbook. Icertainly don't have any insights into the inflation numbers. I'mperplexed, as I guess most other people are. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. The economy of the District continues to improve.There are some signs of life now in nonresidential construction. Alot of it is public construction, but it looks like that sector ispoised for a pretty good year in many parts of the District. Consumerspending appears to be continuing to grow and business out at the MegaMall has held up very well. In agriculture, the livestock business isvery healthy and very strong. With regard to crops, there is theconcern about moisture but, of course, it's always either too dry or-22-5/18/93too wet. This year apparently it's too wet but I have a hunch they'llstill [be able to plant] most or all of their crop. There are alsosome renewed signs of life in the energy business. Exploration andleasing activity in western North Dakota and eastern Montana arestarting to show some signs of life, and iron mining activity innorthern Minnesota is expected to pick up as a consequence of theimprovement we're seeing in the domestic steel industry.The one thing I might comment a little further on is what'shappening to employment. It's something that, of course, shows up inthe data, so I think we're aware of it. But I've heard a couple ofcomments lately that have put this very directly. Employment is up inthe District. And yet if we talk to business people, they say they'reclearly trying to do more--or at least the same--with less when itcomes to employment. Part of that has to do with fringe benefitcosts, such as workers comp and insurance and health care. Part ofit, I think, is expectations in that businesses that used to thinkthey were going to make at least some of their higher incomes overtime through expansion are revising down their expansion plans. Thathas to do in part with environmental restrictions and otherregulations. I think they're concluding that the way to improveprofitability is through very tight cost containment, and they seem tobe succeeding. And that has affected employment, certainly in theDistrict, and perhaps nationwide as well.With regard to the outlook for the national economy, myprincipal concern, as many have commented, is the inflation situation.I am not as sanguine as the Greenbook that inflation is going todecelerate from here. I certainly agree that a lot of thefundamentals we typically look at--slack in the economy, money andcredit growth, and so on and so forth--don't seem to suggest anenvironment where inflation ought to be accelerating. In fact, theysuggest an environment where further deceleration is likely. Yet Iremember from the 1970s that we're always pretty good at explainingaway inflation but those [situations] don't seem to have happyendings. So, I'm very uncomfortable with what we're seeing and I'mnot convinced that what is going on now is simply temporary and willself-correct.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Most of the business people I talk to feeldeprived in terms of price increases. They feel they are owed pricehikes if only they could make them stick. If you look at it from anindividual business person's point of view, their sales growth for themost part has been slow, competition has been tough, they have cutcosts and lowered their break-even point, and they still feel verysqueezed. So it's not surprising that they would jump at whateveropportunity they can to raise prices, whether it's a streak of goodorders or a weaker dollar and foreign competition that isn't quite astough or an attempt to get ahead of the regulatory or tax changes.It's not surprising that that is happening and that that's the waythey feel. The question is whether it is broadly sustainable orcumulative, and I don't think any of us really knows. But my hunch isthat it's not, given the generally sluggish economy, the underlyingcompetitive situation, plus what is going on in money and credit.-23-5/18/93Looking at the District economy, growth is very modest, verymodest indeed. Retail sales are going up negligibly. Industrialproduction, while still advancing, seems to be advancing at adecreasing rate. We have sluggish loan demand, or flat loan demandreally, and slow job growth. And, as has been mentioned almost byeverybody, there is slipping confidence and building anxiety innational leadership and all the uncertainty about taxes. Every day inthe paper some other tax that might [be enacted] is mentioned, andthat has really pulled the rug out from any kind of increases inspending. There is just a strong desire to hold tight and steady andto put on hold everything that one can.My sense on the national economy is that, yes, we are goingto get somewhat more inflation than we thought earlier this year. AndI think we're going to get somewhat less growth. But my basicconclusion is that at this point it's more a matter of degree ratherthan a fundamental shift.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As far as the Districtgoes, the situation remains mixed. I'd say it's soft, but notcollapsing, and to some extent the overall tone is almost improved.In the job market, employment isn't increasing but it's stabilizing;hours are up. Hiring of temporary help is up a good bit, along withall you've heard. We are still having major layoffs, though, in someareas and an overall softness in the employment market. In retailing,like everywhere else, the weather impact was particularly severe.Some bounceback from that occurred but there was some renewedsoftening more recently in retail sales. The same weather patternholds for autos, but auto sales have been making up their losses andremain quite strong. Housing activity, particularly at the lower endof the market, is quite strong, with prices actually rising at thatlower end for houses selling for less than $150,000. The rest of themarket is still fairly soft. The commercial real estate market isflattening with vacancies stabilizing but values are still quite soft.If you want another worry to add to all of this, you can talkto people in the financial services industry, particularly the mutualfunds. They continue to have very, very strong inflows into bondfunds, junk bond funds, and other [investments]. Everyone takes themoney, but at the same time they express continued concern about thesophistication of the investors, particularly that in a lot of casespeople are not really aware that they can lose some capital in thosebond funds. Also, a lot of concern is being expressed about how clearpeople are when they buy these funds in banks that the value of theseinstruments is variable, not just the yield.As far as manufacturing goes, the situation is mixed.Anything tied to autos is doing all right; the same is true ofenvironmental [firms]. But in defense we see more and more of aslide; it's continuously softer. Like everyone else, we hearcontinuous complaints about uncertainty and what is going to happen.I had some people in the other morning and one fellow said his companywas not going to do anything they don't have to do and that every CEOhe knows is absolutely frozen until he can see where things are going.-24-5/18/93Unfortunately, as far as the national economy goes, I'mpretty much in agreement with the tone of the Greenbook that--excusethe colloquialism--it's just a plain lousy situation that we havehere. Like everyone else, I'm very disappointed about the pricesituation. If it was just one month it would be one thing, but it hasbeen longer than that now. I really can't understand what is goingon; I find it hard to believe that the fundamentals don't havesomething to do with this in the longer run. And, if anything, theeconomy right now seems softer than six weeks ago at the time of thelast FOMC meeting, [based on] retail sales control, [initial] claims,and industrial production. But having said all that, I don't have awhole lot of conviction. There is an enormous amount of uncertainty;and to some extent it seems with these concerns about taxes and otherthings that [people] are almost trying to jawbone the economy down,not in a purposeful sense but in the "if" effect it is having. And inthat environment, it's hard to have very strong convictions about theintermediate-term [outlook for] either output or prices.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I have one disagreement with theGreenbook. The Greenbook implicitly has a reduction in inflation froma 4.6 percent rate over the first four months to 2.6 percent in thenext eight months in order to get to the new higher inflationforecast. Again, I respect the talents of the people involved, butthat seems like an awfully steep deceleration of inflation in order toget to the new [forecast of] 3.3 percent for the year. I think thereason that we've had the higher inflation was well argued by you, Mr.Chairman. It is expectations-based. You ran through a better listthan I could: mandated benefits, strike replacement, calls for ahigher minimum wage, re-hiring of workers; that's for labor. Formanagement, there's protectionism, protectionism, and protectionismalong with loan guarantees for our failing industries such asairlines. So, no matter whose side you're on, labor or management,there is Uncle Sam to stand behind you.You asked for another reason why inflation might be there.I'm going to give it to you. I don't mean to say that this is adominant reason. It's not one that people in this room are familiarwith. It goes back to the redistribution of income literature. Idoubt many people in this room are readers of "Nation" or "AmericanProspect." I would hope not anyway. I read this literature someyears ago as part of my research for my doctoral dissertation. Youcan also look up Ira Magaziner's writings on this. The most unspokenpart of the health care plan is its redistribution elements. Rightnow, effectively, health care is a lump sum tax. It's $4,000 perworker on the payroll, paid over to the health insurance company.What is going to change, and the only question is to what degree, isthat it is now going to become what is effectively a proportional tax;it's payroll based. Those are very different because income isdistributed [unevenly]. Now, when we are talking about a shift of 14percent of GDP in the income among various quintiles, that will dwarfwhatever Reagan has accomplished by a big factor, and in reverse.There is a good reason to believe--in fact I can argue fourreasons--that at least in the intermediate term such a redistributionis likely to be inflationary. The first comes from the higher tax onthe wealthy. Now, in the short run at least, we would expect some of-25-5/18/93that higher tax to come out of savings. That might not be true in thelonger run; but certainly in the short run the part from the highertaxed people will come out of savings. On the other hand, for thelower taxed people it's more likely to augment consumption. So on thedemand side the redistribution effect of the burden of health carecosts is liable to increase demand via increased consumption. On thesupply side there are also two reasons to suspect inflation. Thefirst is the "classic" supply side argument that when you move from alump sum tax to a proportional tax what you're going to get is lessoutput. And if you think about both the substitution effects and theincome effects, they're both going in the same direction. I'd assumethat with, God forbid, another 9 percent payroll tax, the typicalworker will be pushing 50 percent as a marginal rate. And people inthis room will probably be at around the 65 percent area for themarginal rate. That is a whopping substitution effect. On the incomeeffect side, if you no longer have to work to service a $4,000 bill,you will get less work on the other end as well. The other supplyside reason why an intentional redistribution is liable to beinflationary has to do with the Keynesian argument about nominal wagesbeing sticky. Effectively, a low cost worker for whom [a firm is] nowpaying $4,000 in health care is entitled to a raise. And the unionsrepresenting that individual certainly will make that point. So, Ithink nominal wages will rise at the lower end. Indeed, it willreverse probably two decades of declines in real wages at the lowerend. On the other hand, for those who are taxed more--who will costmanagement more to hire--[firms] actually would have to force adecline in the nominal wage of those people. That would involve, say,middle management on up. In a 7 or 8 percent inflation environmentthat would be easy. You'd simply hold nominal wage increases down.In a 3 percent inflation environment, you're not going to have nominalwage cuts. So, what you're going to have is a bit of a wage/pricespiral, with rising wages for workers and insufficiently falling realwages for management. So, for all four of those reasons--again, onecan go back in the literature even from the '20s about redistributionand its effect on inflation--it all adds up. Now, I'm not sayingthat's what is causing it. But we all know the health care story ison our minds and it might be one reason at least to explain why,[given] the supply shock, the higher [inflation] expectations mightactually turn out to be rational.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. First of all in terms of the District, theunemployment numbers I'm going to report are really the best numbersI've seen in a good while. We had payroll employment growth in themost recent three-month period, which would be through March, up 3.8percent in the District. Another notable change [is that] we've beengetting marginal growth in employment. And certainly the St. LouisDistrict in general has done better than the nation through therecession. Another shift has been that we're getting more of thegrowth through manufacturing. That was actually up 4.8 percent, withparticular strength in electrical equipment and transportationequipment; it was up somewhat less in nonmanufacturing, 3-1/2 percent.And there is considerable strength in construction. It's somewhatstronger in residential in terms of contracts and significantlystronger in nonresidential for that most recent three-month period.Notwithstanding that, as I talk to people around the District, I don'tget the sense--in terms of the tone of comments--that people think-26-5/18/93we're in any kind of a boom. And I'm hearing the same concerns othershave expressed regarding uncertainty about fiscal policy and othergovernment policies.With respect to the national picture, in thinking back to thesecond half of last year when real growth came in at around 4 percent,I'm struck by the fact--just thinking about where we are now and wherewe thought we were then--that the economy is fundamentally in a lotbetter shape now than it was then. We are getting some job growth nowwhich we weren't getting then. There were considerable uncertaintiesat that time and, indeed, there are uncertainties now. But in someways they were even greater at that time. The whole financialrestructuring process has proceeded further. I think one has toassume that we're in better shape in that sense. And the anecdotalreports we've heard around the table today in general are better. AsMike Prell acknowledges in the Greenbook, there is a possibility ofthe first-quarter GDP being revised up. But I think it's a littledangerous to put too much stock in one quarter's GDP numbers. Wecould actually be surprised in retrospect in terms of how well thingsare going now.As some others have mentioned, notably Al Broaddus and GaryStern, my principal concern is on the inflation side. I, too, amskeptical as to whether or not we will resume the disinflationarytrend we seemed to be on. And I think the experience of the firstfour months of this year has definitely had an impact in terms ofexpectations. In terms of why that could be, it seems to me there isan explanation relating to money and credit, though not one we in thisroom generally put a lot of stock in. We had M1 growth over the lasttwo years through the first quarter at double-digit rates. I guessI'm not prepared to try to translate that into what it may meanexactly in terms of real growth and prices, but I view that as a verysubstantial monetary impetus. As that growth slowed very dramaticallyin the first quarter it gave me some comfort that perhaps the generalthrust of policy had shifted somewhat. But what I'm seeing as far asM1 projections looking forward [concerns me]. Again, this is only amonth or two, but for May we're talking about a possible 25 percentannual growth rate in M1. It may be that what I perceived as asignificant sea change in the thrust of the growth in that aggregatein the first quarter of this year was really only a temporary pauseand that we're still on a very strong upward trend in terms ofmonetary thrust. We're probably not compelled to act now, but ifthese inflation expectations become embedded and the first-quarter[inflation rate] turns out stronger than people perhaps think it isnow and if real growth is stronger, it's just going to be harder tocatch up later. So, my principal concern relates to developmentswe've seen in the wage and price climate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I find the recent indicators of apossible intensification or rekindling of inflation very disturbing inthe context of our stated objective of price stability, which Ibelieve is the proper objective for this institution. The question,it seems to me, is whether this is the time to take the punch bowlaway before everyone but the host gets drunk and the party gets rowdy.The timing of any tightening of policy is critical. It must be earlyenough to stop inflation before it gains momentum but it must also be5/18/93late enough to be based on reality and not just intuition. In thecurrent situation it is hard to make a substantive case, in myopinion, that a real inflationary trend is under way rather than theeffect of simultaneous aberrant one-time influences. By contrast, Ibelieve that a case can be made that the apparent slowdown in growthis a result of collapsing confidence on the part of both consumers andbusinesses in the extremely uncertain environment created by recordhigh proposed tax increases, large proposed [defense] cutbacks, andfundamental change in a health care system that was basicallyestablished in our culture more than 30 years ago. Consumers andbusinesses continue to be more interested in debt reduction than inre-leveraging with long-term commitments. It can't have escaped anyreasonably intelligent observer that the economic proposals that arebefore the Congress right now are essentially contractive. Apremature move to tighten policy against that background could bedisastrous to economic growth and could run the risk of reignitingenthusiasm for fiscal stimulus rather than deficit reduction andbudget discipline. In that scenario the inflation fat would really bein the fire again. It seems to me that this is the time to hold toour present course at least long enough to have a better idea of whatCongress will do with the President's proposals and what the effectwill be on economic growth.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, with the emergence of the mostrecent data, it seems to me that we now have before us about thewidest spectrum of fundamentally conflicting possibilities that I canremember. I have attempted to make a bit of an inventory of whatthose possibilities are and what some of their implications might be,just to help my own thinking along. If we were to make a straight-line projection [based on] the most recent data, we'd wind up withstagflation, which obviously would be a very serious situation. Butthere are a number of other possibilities and each carries a differentset of implications. In the area of real economic activity, I thinkthere may be two basically credible paths we could find ourselves on.The first is that the first-quarter data are signalling an emergingdecline--that things are indeed beginning to go back downhill and thatwe might even be looking at the possibility of a new recession downthe way. That's possible but it seems to me highly unlikely. We havea good bit of momentum going; jobs are being formed net of all therestructuring that's going on; new claims are flat; the credit crunchis easing; the consumer is returning; our competitiveness is improvingthrough productivity, which is the good way, and through a somewhatsofter dollar in some cases, which may not be so good a way.Nevertheless, competitiveness is [improving]. So, I would doubt thatwhat we're looking at is a fundamentally weaker economy that is goingdownhill. But if that is what emerges, then we're going to have toreverse a lot of the thinking we've been doing.What seems to me much more likely is that we've been lookingat some type of a blip in the rather moderate upturn that we've hadfor eight quarters now. I noticed that of the eight quarters we'vehad in succession that have been basically positive, four have beenlower than the previous quarter, which is rather interesting. So, itseems likely that we're looking at a blip. And the question is what'sgoing to happen after that blip.-28-5/18/93The first question, obviously, is: When is the blip going tobe over? It may last a little longer; it may still be going on. Butis the Greenbook basically correct? Are we looking at an extendedperiod of slow or sluggish growth? Is it going to be somewhatstronger than that, maybe a good deal stronger than that? Each ofthese [scenarios], it seems to me, takes us in a different direction.But regardless of which one begins to emerge, there doesn't seem to beany compelling impetus in real economic activity that we can see [ascause] for concern right this minute. I think there will be time tohave this very murky situation begin to [clarify].In the area of inflation there may be three possiblescenarios working here. The first one--which I think all of us hopeis the case and which has a fair probability in my mind--would be thatthe things we've been seeing the last several months are indeedaberrations and that the disinflationary process that we've had isstill more or less in place. I hope that's the case. It seemsunlikely to me that we're in an incipient rising new [inflation]trend, that the game is over and [inflation is] on the way back up.Now, we've been talking about that all morning. And a number ofpossible explanations that would lead one in that direction are outthere. That may turn out to be what is happening, but it's verydifficult for me to see how that can be, given the fundamentals of theslack in the economy. In my mind the highest probability would bethat we're looking at some rough bottoming out process in here, andthat may be the toughest of all to deal with. If we are looking at arough bottoming out process with the kind of economy that we have now,it would really be disappointing to still have 3-1/2 percent or so onthe CPI. And what should be done about it? When we think about whatshould be done about that, if that's the case, we have to have acontext or a view of what is happening in the real economy. If we'regoing to have an economy that will start to accelerate soon andstrongly, then it's fairly clear what we'll need to do as soon as thatbecomes apparent. If the first quarter is the start of a new decline,then we have some very fundamental economic problems that I'm not sureI understand, and maybe nobody understands. What in the world wouldbe going on that would lead us to this kind of configuration? If wehave the Greenbook's economy, continuing sluggish growth, that givesus a nice philosophical policy question to answer. Do we try torestrain this kind of economy in order to push inflation lower? If wedid, would it work? Or as you suggest, Mr. Chairman, are we perhapslooking at some other kinds of problems that appropriately wouldrequire some other answers. It seems to me that this is the type ofquestion that we're going to need to address in the next part of themeeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. As things started to thaw out in my part of thecountry after our last meeting, it seemed like a good time to do agreat deal of traveling throughout the District in large and smallcommunities to hear what people had to say. I found it anincreasingly depressing experience as the weeks wore on. Had I juststayed at home I could have given you a much better report because thenumbers really are not bad. But the mood is totally sour.Our agricultural sector is in good shape. Planting got offto a slow start, but it did dry out and by the beginning of May-29-5/18/93[farmers] were closing the gap on getting the planting accomplished.As of last week they said they were very close to finishing theirseasonal planting. Farm equipment sales--implements of all types--arethe strongest in years but that doesn't seem to be driven as much byconfidence as by fear [that induces people] to go ahead and get itdone. Land prices are up sharply, 10 to 20 percent for agriculture.There is talk of prices up to $1900 an acre, which cannot be sustainedby current [crop] prices.Manufacturing is in good shape if one looks at the numbers;new orders and backlogs are quite good. The metals are strong; autoparts suppliers are in good shape and are taking market share awayfrom imports, especially by selling to the transplant firms but alsoto the domestic producers. Capital goods also are strong both ondomestic sales and [exports]; they feel they are able to take marketshare back from where they dropped before. A telecommunicationsequipment firm also reports very good sales, with good export sales toLatin America in particular. Coal production is down 13 percent inthe first quarter but [our contacts] don't know whether that wasweather-related or not. I spent some time touring these coal-producing areas and mostly they're in a shrinking mode; their strategyis a gradual longer-term exit, with a decline in capacity that isplanned.Employment wasn't too bad in the District, but there is nosentiment to increase employment. The areas where we had been gettingsome increases, especially health care, are totally frozen. Stafflevels are "replacement only" in major communities for health care.One large hospital group said that it had cancelled all openings fordoctors and has no plans to fill the openings it previously hadlisted.Nothing is going on in commercial construction in theDistrict, but in industrial construction there is replacement ofcapacity. No expansion is planned, but [firms] will build where theyneed a facility to replace something that is obsolete. Theresidential sector is pretty strong, both in sales and inconstruction.When I starting hearing about business loan demand picking upat banks, that seemed to be an element of encouragement. But I wasquickly dissuaded from that by bankers who said: "No, it's peoplecoming in whom we haven't seen in a long time saying that times aregoing to get tough so they had better get friendly with their bankerand [arrange] lines of credit because they are going to need themsomewhere along the line."On prices, the two types of firms that are able to get priceincreases are those related to capital goods or motor vehiclecompanies that are experiencing demand. But the others are those thatare shrinking [production]; they feel they're "right sizing" theiroperations. So, it's really a shift of supply and a shrinking oftheir overall capacity. Some of that is defense or aerospace-relatedand some is in electronics.When I think about the national situation, I still cannotpersuade myself that we've entered a period of accelerating inflation[and that] the erosion of the purchasing power of the dollar is-30-5/18/93worsening. [But] I don't know a single person outside this room whoagrees with [me on] that. I've heard over and over again talk aboutinflation, whether people relate it to the deficit or overall fiscalpolicy or health care concerns. To me health care can raise costs andredistribute [income], but I try to persuade people that it doesn'tmean a sustained erosion in purchasing power and money. And peopletend to snicker at me; I have zero credibility. My own daughter wastelling me why she was buying a town house at a fixed-rate mortgage insouthern California and I was trying to explain some things aboutsouthern California's economy. She said I was being totally naive. Iexplained that I'm a central banker and it's important that I talkabout price stability and controlling inflation. She said it was timeI had a reality check! [Laughter] She said: "Why do you thinkinflation is not going up? You're just wrong." And I found this samesentiment among bankers and people in small and large businesses.They have persuaded themselves that inflation is going up and there'snot anything anybody can do about it. So, even though I felt relievedby the March numbers coming in much better than those for January andFebruary and I thought we were okay--and I still have somereservations about how reliable the April numbers are--I don't thinkthat's the issue. The issue is not whether we really have inflation;I think we have inflation psychology. We have people acting on thebelief that future inflation will be higher. That's what we have toaddress no matter what the statistics show.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Jerry, your comments are very much along thelines of my thinking. I learned to fly an airplane very early in mylife; I had a father who was my flight instructor who taught himselfback in 1931. He spent his life teaching me that the best way to be ageneral aviation pilot is to find out what mistakes people make. Andeven though I don't fly very much, I do read very regularly aboutairplane accidents to find out what mistakes pilots make. And it'sinteresting to me that the major mistake that amateur pilots make isthat they get in bad weather and they don't feel the gauges are right.Somehow or other they think the gauges are wrong. It feels as if theairplane is doing this and the gauges tell them the airplane is doingsomething else. We're at the place, in the murky weather, where theold monetary aggregates don't give us much help. In this environment,we have to look at the gauges; we have to look at the instruments.And the instruments tell us that inflation is rising. Clearly,inflation is not going to go down to the 2-1/2 to 2 percent level thatI thought was doable as recently as one year ago. I think theChairman is correct when he says that it's not a question of money orcredit that explains this phenomenon. Clearly, as others have said,it is an attitude question. Now, in December I made some commentsabout a 200 basis point increase in the fed funds rate and, Mr.Chairman, you [went further] when you said that 300 or 400 basispoints really wouldn't work to change the attitudes. Well, I guess Idon't quite agree with that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I didn't say it wouldn't change theattitudes; I said it wouldn't change the--MR. ANGELL. The result.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.-31---the result.5/18/93MR. ANGELL. Here's what I think would happen. I don't thinkwe should increase interest rates by 300 basis points but, if we did,I'm quite certain the price of gold would immediately begin a [sharp],quick [drop]. It would happen so fast you'd just have to go and watchit on the screen. If we made a 100 basis point increase in the fedfunds rate, the price of gold surely would turn back down unless thesituation is worse than I anticipate. If we made a 50 basis pointincrease in the fed funds rate, I don't know what would happen to theprice of gold but I'd sure like to find out! [Laughter] Now, I wantto remind you that monetary policy cannot do anything about growthexcept harm it. Monetary policy can't fix growth; monetary policy canonly harm growth; monetary policy can only cause growth to be worse.I agree that there are some attitude problems out there and somesignificantly held belief by the American people and foreigners thatthe U.S. government budget deficit is out of control. And theybelieve that because it's out of control the Federal Reserve will notbe able to stand firm. They believe that we'll have to give in andthat we will have to inflate our way out of this problem. Now, Idon't believe that. But the American people do believe that,including, I think, your daughter, Jerry. Maybe she doesn't evenunderstand that; she just knows that inflation is going up.We cannot make growth better in the period immediately ahead.We just can't do that. Now, when I look at the first-quarter numbersin the Greenbook, nominal GDP was 5.2 percent. Mike tells us that ifthe trade numbers come in [as projected], if real GDP goes up, thennominal GDP may go up also. Now, we only had two quarters of theeight in the current expansion when that 5.2 percent was exceeded; onewas 6.2 percent and one was 7.1 percent. Of the eight quarters, the5.2 percent is [the third highest] and everybody is sitting aroundwringing their hands about what kind of growth we're [experiencing].Pardon me, but every time I look at GDP quarterly data I seevariations quarter to quarter. I don't know what is going to happenright now, but monetary policy can't fix it. Monetary policy can harmit. Monetary policy is about credibility; inflation is aboutcredibility. Now, if the American people believe that we are notgoing to act, then this phenomenon of inflation attitudes we have willget worse; if attitudes get worse, that means the tradeoff gets worse.We can fix the attitudes about the Federal Reserve very quickly. Andif we fix those attitudes, we will gain stature for our institutionand our political system. Our democracy respects properdecisionmaking. If we do what we need to do, [inflation] attitudeswill improve.At the last meeting I was very concerned about what commodityprices were doing. And as you know, they got lucky again and told usthat the rate of inflation was higher than we thought it was. Now, Iknow there's nothing to it but they did get lucky. I've had plenty ofeconometric studies tell me how lucky commodity prices can get. Itold you at the time that the reason I had not been upset before theMarch FOMC meeting was that the price of gold was well behaved. But Isaid that the price of gold was moving. The price of gold at thattime had moved up from 328 to 344, and I don't know what I was soexcited about! I guess it was that I thought the price of gold wasgoing on up. Now, if the price of gold goes up, long bond rates willnot be involved. People can talk about gold's price being due to whatthe Chinese are buying; that's the silliest nonsense that ever was.The price of gold is largely determined by what people who do not have5/18/93trust in fiat money system want to use for an escape out of anycurrency, and they want to gain security through owning gold. Now, ifannual gold production and consumption amount to 2 percent of theworld's stock, a change of 10 percent in the amount produced orconsumed is not going to change the price very much. But attitudesabout inflation will change it.The longer we go with this situation, the more we'll have toincrease rates and the higher long-term rates will go. The sooner wemove, then the sooner we [will remove] the uncertainty in intermediateand long rates that comes with an increase in short rates. I hopeBill McDonough is correct that a rise in short-term rates will meanthat the 10-year rate will fall. Whether that's the case or not to meis a little uncertain, as I think it was to you. That is, I don'tknow whether people will say: "Oh my goodness, the Fed is worriedabout inflation." If the market's reaction to the first move is thatthe Fed is worried about inflation, then in that environment I wouldexpect long bond prices to improve. But every 25 basis points we giveaway on long bond yields--and we've already given 25 away by notacting when we should have acted--is lost. When we act, when we letthe American people and the capital markets around the world know thatwe care about price level stability--that's our mission--then we willbe well ahead and we will return to falling intermediate- and long-term interest rates, which will help get growth higher. A monetarypolicy step at this time is a win/win. I don't know what is going tohappen for sure. I hope Mike is correct that the rate of inflationwill move back down to 2.6 percent for the remaining 8 months of thiscalendar year. If we make a move and Mike is correct, we could takecredit for having accomplished this and the price of gold will soon bedown to the 328 level and we can lower the fed funds rate at thatpoint in time and declare victory. But if what some of us suspect istrue--that the Greenbook is a little optimistic on inflation--then itseems to me essential that we take a [firming] step. I don't feelvery strongly about it! [Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you. Clearly, I haven't mastered thetiming of when to get my name on the list, having to follow such animpassioned statement. As I listen to the discussion around thetable, I'm always struck, but even more so this time, by the vastregional differences and perceptions. These people are trying tobring some anecdotal evidence that gives us some clues on where we'regoing as opposed to complete reliance on the statistics. So I'mparticularly struck this time by the differences regionally.My own read on the national situation is that I think we'remore than likely returning to a slower, but I do believe sustainable,growth path. And I don't think that this is necessarily bad.Certainly, there are some areas of strength, and Mike pointed out anumber of them. But it does represent a continuation of thisoperating restructuring that we're going through--the defenserestructuring and the balance sheet adjustments. I don't think it'svery clear how long this process is going to take. Six months ago oreight months ago we were trying to make projections as to how faralong it was. [Now] I think it's pretty clear that we probably can'tmake those kinds of assessments. People and businesses are trying toadjust to a new order of technology and more complete world-33-5/18/93integration. In fact, I think the whole inflationary/stable priceargument is clearly becoming a central part of day-to-day businessdecisions. There is the uncertainty that's associated with theClinton economic program. If you think about it, this Administrationhas been in office only four months but we've been on an amazingroller coaster with different thrusts. Some of [the ideas] clearlywere trial balloons, but some of them were certainly put forward withgreat fervor as proposed bills. We are still not sure where all ofthis is going to end up. Nevertheless, all of these arguments doappear to be leading us to more inflationary pressures. So, no matterhow it comes out--even though we didn't get the stimulus bill and Ithink some folks might question whether it was really a stimulusproposal--it is still leading to increased inflationary pressures.I know I have talked about this in the past but I continue tothink--and I'll echo some of Si's comments--that the labor marketsremain a key to the economic environment. The economy is growingenough to produce some jobs but hardly enough, really, to accommodateeven the population growth. I think the unemployment rate does masksome of the adjustments and the turmoil that is occurring in the labormarkets on account of the downsizing, the de-layering, and the changesin employment needs on account of new technology. The huge fixedcosts that are associated with taking on new permanent employees areclearly deterring many businesses from staffing up. I come back tothis whole labor market question continually because I think it's theflip side of what is going to happen with spending and whether or notconsumers are going to be able to participate in the stimulation ofthe economy. So, whether or not this is a setback or a blip, andwhether or not this is a long blip or a plateau, I think it's not thatunexplainable if we go back to this entire question of restructuringthat is occurring.Let me turn to inflation. Like everybody else I'm having ahard time reconciling the recent numbers with the economy. Oneobservation I would make is that we shouldn't necessarily assume orexpect a smooth route of progress on inflation any more than we shouldnecessarily expect a smooth route on a recovery. Some bumps andplateaus are likely. We should expect some experimentation in pricesas folks attempt to see if they can get price increases to stick.We've seen lumber prices shoot way up but we've also seen them comeback down again. In looking at cattle prices, for example, we've seenvery strong prices, and they've finally been reflected in some of themeat numbers in the CPI. Tobacco is another example: We saw strong[price] increases--that was what was driving the CPI--but now we hearthat we're going to have some cuts. I agree with Jerry's argument oninflation psychology. I think we had inflation for so long thatpeople in demanding wage increases confuse growth with inflation. Itused to be that a 6 percent salary increase was nothing. But now thatwould be fairly large. So, I think it's going to take a long time towork through this entire process. I don't think we should lose sightof some of the countervailing pressures on prices: internationalcompetition; weak economies, certainly domestically but alsointernationally; quality improvements; improved productivity; and weakcredit conditions. All of these things may well start to be reflectedin prices, so we will see this movement that's a bit up and down.Having said all of that, the most recent CPI and PPI numbers and someof the commodity price increases are clearly disturbing. But we haveto recognize that we have considerable difficulty interpreting these-34-5/18/93numbers, even the ones that are historical, much less trying toaddress some of the future ones. So, I certainly agree with theChairman that this is an area that we have to address our attentionto. It makes the policy questions that we're going to be facing inthe next round even more challenging.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. With respect to the real economy, my sensecontinues to be that we're on a path of moderate growth. I don'treally see a change in outlook with the mean between 2-1/2 and 3-1/2percent, but with individual quarters ranging from perhaps a bit below2 to a bit above 4 percent. The first quarter is pretty wellexplained, it seems to me, by the weather and the pullback from thesurge in consumption. We had a similar phenomenon last year. As forthe employment situation, I know there is a lot of negativism aroundit; but unemployment has come down from the peak last summer of 7.7percent to 7 percent. And even California's unemployment rate thislast time came down to 8.6 percent; it had been up around 10 percent.When I look at the monthly payroll numbers, I find it difficult to gettoo depressed. The monthly average payroll growth in the thirdquarter [of last year] was 25,000; it was 85,000 in the fourthquarter, 147,000 in the first quarter of '93, and it eased off to119,000 in April. The overtime is at record levels and the employmentgains are running at more than double what they were in the secondhalf of last year. So, I think this bodes well for durability andsustainability. Auto sales seem to be holding up; the housing startsnumbers were good this morning; there may be an inventory adjustment.Confidence certainly has fallen back from the euphoria of late lastyear but it has stabilized at levels well above where it was, say, inOctober. So, I guess people are buying housing and cars. It's hardto become too convinced that we're headed for another serious swoon.On the inflation watch, to paraphrase an old Ronald Reagan TV ad, lasttime the question was: Is there a bear in the woods? As far as I'mconcerned the inflation bear has been sighted--not by our staff Imight add! [Laughter] I think they should not be allowed near thewoods; I fear for their health.Well, it's a curious phenomenon we've been going through thepast [several months]. Perhaps it's a blip; it's a very long blip ifit is a blip. Now, I suppose there are many hypotheses. I won't boreyou with my own personal list. It's not especially useful to havearguments saying this [upturn in inflation] can't happen with this setof economic fundamentals because that's pretty articulately rebuttedby the fact that it has happened and has persisted for a number ofmonths. I feel pretty much the same way about the notion thatbasically the economy has to slow down for inflation to slow down. Ithas been slow and we've had rising inflation. I suspect inflation isdriven mostly by expectations. That's one of the reasons there's notso much talk about it; it's roughly what people expect.I do think we can affect inflationary expectations, at leastin the market. Since I think we have 4 percent inflation, I now see acouple of issues. The first is whether a 3 percent federal funds rateis appropriate in this environment. And, secondly, are we satisfiedwith 4 percent inflation? To focus on the first question, the moreimmediate question, I think no one is proposing instituting arestrictive policy to actually try to get on top of inflation in the-35-5/18/93sense of positive real rates. The only question that I can see iswhether one might partially adjust the nominal rate to reflect thereality of higher inflation, leaving real short rates still lower thanthose prevailing last year. But at some stage we're going to have tothink about whether 4 percent inflation is something we want.I thought in the latter part of last year that there was somechance that if inflation continued to decelerate we could hold a 3percent federal funds rate--that that would be sustainable. Theperception was that inflation was 3 percent and falling. Now I havevery serious doubts as to whether a 3 percent federal funds rate issustainable. It seems out of line; it seems to violate some basictenets of common sense. The last time we had a 3 percent federalfunds rate was in 1963. This is not a 1963 inflation environment.When one looks around the world today, the only other 3 percent shortrates observed in captivity are found in Japan. And their economicenvironment in terms of fundamentals is clearly as sluggish as ours,if not more so. But we are not in a Japanese inflation environment.Their inflation is on the order of 2 percentage points below ours.Obviously, we had a lot of opportunity to choose a federal funds rate1 percent below the inflation rate last year and chose not to do it.I would suggest that the result of the negative real short rates inthe 1970s was not pleasant. So, I rather doubt that anyoneparachuting into this economic environment would choose a 3 percentfederal funds rate. Now, perhaps real short rates don't matter, atleast in a weak economy. We certainly instruct the weak economies ofeastern Europe and the former Soviet Union that the one thing theyhave to do is to get that nominal rate at about, or a little above,the inflation rate. We certainly felt that significantly positivereal rates made a lot of sense in late 1990 and early 1991 [even] withnegative real GDP growth because of concerns about price stability.However, without the aggregates to guide us, I think it's also apretty visible and simple measure which people may focus on. I wishwe had the aggregates to guide us; we don't know what is happening tothe hypothetical, shadow M2. I suspect it may be growing prettyrapidly, given the volume of funds going into the stock market. It istrue, clearly true, that we don't understand the transmissionmechanism well. But I don't believe the lack of thoroughunderstanding should lead us to ignore what seems apparent to me:namely, that 3 percent short rates seem quite a bit out of line. So,I don't have a lot of doubt that we're going to feel that the 3percent needs changing. The question is one of timing, and myargument is for sooner rather than later.The concern is that as people start to look at the recentinflation performance, it stands in direct contradiction to ourpublicly stated objectives. It also stands in visible contrast to theFOMC's inflation forecast of 2-1/2 to 3 percent issued only a fewshort months ago in February. If we stand by while measured inflationshreds our publicly stated convictions and forecasts, the concern Ihave is that the long rate will continue to rise. As Governor Angellmentioned, we've already lost 25 basis points. As inflation concernsfester, I think long rates will move on up. And in my view perhapsthe market needs a signal that we're not going to allow this to getout of hand, that we actually do care about inflation and that thiscaring goes a bit beyond just the rhetoric. We lagged the market onthe way down and I thought that conserved credibility. But in theopposite direction if we wait until we're dragged up by the market, I-36-5/18/93think that will extinguish credibility. A measured response couldlimit the damage on the long end of the market. To me this isimportant not just for long-term concerns but for near-term growth aswell. The only component of the current environment that isstimulative or conducive to growth is the capital market environmentand in particular the long bond rate. My concern is that, with risinginflation unchallenged by the Fed, the long end could deterioratequite rapidly. Ultimately, it's not up to us whether we tighten ornot. The markets are going to tighten on the long end as people focuson the inflation and start thinking about it. And that's going tohave whatever impact on the economy higher long rates will produce.We can't do anything about that. What we can do, and about the onlything we can do, is to try to limit the deterioration in the long endby indicating that we're on the job. I think the long rate wouldlikely move up a bit if we made a measured move. But if credibilitymatters at all, somehow at the end of the day when all the dustsettles the capital market environment and growth prospects should bebetter compared to a situation with Fed inaction.So, I think a lot is at stake: not only the credibility [of]long-term success but the capital market environment [of] near-termsuccess. The risk of waiting too long is that market participantswill start to focus more and more closely on inflation. They willlook back not just to the beginning of the year but to the fourthquarter as well. They will look at our forecasts and our statements,and the market will start to price in concerns and hypotheses aboutFed inaction. And I believe this could do serious damage not only tocredibility but to long rates, [including] mortgage rates, and to thenear-term outlook.To summarize, I do see a changed environment. There is nocompelling evidence of any change in the outlook for growth; I thinkwe're still sort of in the middle there. We have a very differentinflation environment than the one we thought we were in, one in whichinflation has been running much higher. And the question is: Doesthe same federal funds rate of 3 percent make sense with no materialchange in the outlook for growth, which is the way I see it, and anenvironment of much higher inflation? It seems to me that if it madesense in the old environment, it doesn't make sense in the new one.And my preference would be to face up to this sooner rather than waituntil the market takes it out of our hands.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll try to do this in threesentences. First, my instincts about the real economy have notchanged much; Governor Mullins was on the mark there. But as I'vesaid at several meetings running, I still do not have any greatconviction about the future in terms of the real economy. I stillthink it could be stronger, but it could be weaker; I just don't havethat conviction. I want to second very strongly the comment you madeat the outset of the meeting, Mr. Chairman, about the situation inEurope. I was not, as you know, at that last Basle meeting, but thestring of visitors who passed through after the Interim Committeemeeting, both on the official side and the private side, were gloomyacross the board. I mean really gloomy. The third point is that Idon't understand this inflation situation any better than anybody elsedoes. I think we cannot dismiss it as simply broccoli prices and-37-5/18/93other wholly transitory things. On the other hand, I do still thinkthat economic fundamentals matter. And while I probably am not ashopeful as Mike Prell, I don't think I'm quite as gloomy as someothers appear to be in terms of where we are going. But I agree thatit is a changed situation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't know whether the coffee is coldor not, but it's out there.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. David.MR. D. LINDSEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, David. Questions?MR. MULLINS. What's been happening to M2 plus flows tofunds?MR. D. LINDSEY. We have attempted to construct an M2 plusmutual funds. We've tried to define the bond and stock mutual fundcomponent of that aggregate as consistent with M2 by pulling out theIRA/Keogh components of bond and stock funds and also institutionalholdings, which unfortunately are reported to us only once a year.We, therefore, have had to interpolate. The most recent data we havefor this measure are through March. They show that whereas M2 hasfallen since December, M2 plus mutual funds was about flat in Januaryand February before jumping up to a 6.7 percent rate of growth inMarch. As you may remember, M2 growth for all of last year was 1.8percent and growth of this broader measure was about 4-1/2 percent orso.MR. MULLINS. Thank you.MR. PARRY. In alternative C you state that you think theimpact of higher rates would cause the prime rate to go up by 1/2percentage point. How strong are your convictions in light of thishistorically large spread between the cost of funds and the prime andalso the very weak demand for bank credit?MR. D. LINDSEY. Well, they are not absolute but our guesswas that banks would tend more or less as a knee-jerk reaction tomaintain the spread, given the opportunity. Presumably, at some pointthose spreads would come down but I'm not sure it would be tomorrow ifthe FOMC decides to move up the funds rate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions? If not, let mestart off. Frankly, I found this a really interesting meeting in thesense that there is a new view about what is going on out there whichI found quite intriguing. In fact, I think it explains part of whatthe big problem is. It's interesting to go around the table,especially hearing the presidents, and to get the sense of thispolitical pessimism which seems to have emerged. It's a relativelyrecent phenomenon. It's the type of thing that we, of course, havebeen exposed to inside the Beltway to some considerable extent. TheWashington Post has been publishing all this to a large extent. There-38-5/18/93is some evidence in the political polls, which show a deterioration inthe view about where the country is going, etc. What is new is that Ihaven't heard this in the business community at the level that I'vebeen hearing it around here. What this suggests to me is a possibleexplanation of what, indeed, is going on in the inflation area.As I indicated earlier, I don't think one can look toward thefundamentals for an explanation. One of those fundamentals isprotectionism; but even though it is a key factor, it cannot becontributing a large-size impact on inflation at this stage. I thinkthe effects of regulatory changes are real, but again we're talking aminimal effect of .1 or .2 percent. It strikes me that what we aredealing with here are very strong and in a certain sense acceleratingpsychological expectations--pessimism or concern about whether thiscountry has the capability of politically solving the problems whichthe markets have been terribly concerned about. The deficit has beenhanging out there for a long while and it is only very recently that[unintelligible] the current services deficit starts to turn up in thelong run. In effect we've seen in recent years an extraordinary tiltin the yield curve, which is very suggestive of that. The long-termview is one which is scarcely positive.Now, if you superimpose a deep-seated pessimism on theoutlook and if you argue that the transmission mechanisms that we'reall used to are fundamentally psychological, then the reason why slacklabor markets affect wages is essentially that people react in acertain way; they [assess] their prospects and they bid in the marketsaccordingly, and those markets work. And it's true, as I indicatedbefore, in the price area as well. So, the major issue in examininginflation is not to start where we usually do in trying to look atslack markets and money and credit and to watch the transmissionaffect the price level. It's really important for us to recognize inlooking at prices--assuming that prices are correctly calibrated, andthere are problems, so obviously that is a question--that the pricelevels and the wage levels tell us what people are doing. And thenit's up to us to figure out why they're doing it. That they are doingit is without question. The question that we've really got toconfront is: What is the mechanism? I must say, having looked at allof the data and having done all the contemplating that I could, Icannot believe that anything other than inflation expectations isembodied in here. Clearly, actual inflation can run up whollyindependently of the real world for a while; ultimately, the realworld will cave in. The problem, however, is that before the realworld works, the very fact of the price movements themselves has realworld effects. So, we're dealing here with a very interesting problemin which the underlying inflationary expectations can have real worldeffects. We cannot view this type of outlook by stipulating thatthere are fundamentals and then there is the psychology, becausethat's not what happens. What happens is that when interactionsbegin, they basically change the fundamentals.Now, I don't know whether or not this [increase in] inflationis a bubble or a blip as some of you said. I don't know whether it'sdeep-seated and irreversible. It may well be that the President willget his budget passed very quickly and this whole [issue] willdissipate. That's the expectation on the Hill. I frankly don't knowwhether it's true or false. I do know that great certainty at thisparticular stage about what any of these variables is doing is-39-5/18/93probably ill advised. What we have to deal with here is somethingthat I would suspect we have to watch very closely. I think GovernorMullins is right that a 3 percent funds rate is too low. I thinkwe've known that for quite a long while; the issue has never beenthat. The issue is: When do we move? I would suggest that whilethere is a remote possibility that we may not want to move at somepoint in the future, it has to be pretty remote.My inclination for today--and I'm frankly most curious to getother people's views--would be to go to a tilt toward tightness and towatch the psychology as best we can. By the latter I mean to watchwhat is happening to the bond market, the exchange markets, and theprice of gold, and try to sense whether inflation is accelerating ordissipating. It is perfectly credible, having lived through thesetypes of things many times in the past, that this [upturn ininflation] can suddenly begin to deflate. It has happened innumerabletimes in the past. I know that both Governors Angell and Mullins haveargued that there is a 25 basis point ratchet in the long bond. Irespectfully submit that you know, more than anybody, that if youreally seriously believe that that is a ratchet, it can go either way.I must say I agree fundamentally with the philosophy that both of youare raising and the only point I would raise is the rachet issue.MR. MULLINS. It has gone up 25 basis but not entirely due tothis, necessarily.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the point I'm trying to get at.In any event, my initial inclination--and frankly this is a very toughissue and one that has all of us sort of swimming around--would be tohave a tilted directive and to keep a very close eye on the situationand see day by day what is happening. If this [inflationaryexpectations sentiment] simmers down in the marketplace, then I thinkthe next sign post is what actually happens to the price indexesbecause that clearly will have a significant psychological effect. Ialso think this is one of the rare times when we ought to have morefrequent telephone conferences as events evolve. And rather than takeany action today, which I don't think would be desirable for a numberof reasons, I would very much like as a starting point to go to anasymmetrical directive and then just watch developments and perhapshave one or more telephone conferences until we get a better feel onthis. We are in an unstable environment and I think it can go eitherway. That would be my recommendation.I have one other issue I'd like to throw on the table. Ihesitate to do it, but let me tell you some of the issues that areinvolved here. If we are dealing with psychology, then thethermometers one uses to measure it have an effect. I was raising thequestion on the side with Governor Mullins of what would happen if theTreasury sold a little gold in this market. There's an interestingquestion here because if the gold price broke in that context, thethermometer would not be just a measuring tool. It would basicallyaffect the underlying psychology. Now, we don't have the legal rightto sell gold but I'm just frankly curious about what people's viewsare on situations of this nature because something unusual is involvedin policy here. We're not just going through the standard policywhere the money supply is expanding, the economy is expanding, and theFed tightens. This is a wholly different thing. Anyway, I'm most-40-5/18/93curious to get your views in these various respects, so please don'tbe afraid to throw things out on the table.MR. LINDSEY. Just a question.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, last time you argued veryeloquently against an asymmetric directive because of the costsinvolved. I was wondering what has [changed].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Costs?MR. LINDSEY. Well, I can't say it as well as you did lasttime, but the case against an asymmetric directive last time was thatthere are fixed costs in our putting out [such a] directive. And infact you persuaded me actually to dissent. So it's relevant.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm not sure I referred to "fixed"costs.MR. MULLINS. The argument was that it's better to move froma symmetric directive, that there's nothing to be gained from--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, what I was arguing then--rememberthe two-month moving average on inflation then was higher than it istoday and either it was going to come down dramatically or not--wasthat it wasn't going to matter whether we moved from a symmetricdirective or from an asymmetric directive. My impression now is thatwe are truly asymmetric and that we are looking at a process which isdifferent from the one that existed previously. I did not have a viewthat what we were looking at was essentially a risk driven byinflation expectations. In fact, I don't think I raised that issue;my recollection eludes me. This is different. I think this relatesto a large extent to the political-psychological issues. I thoughtJerry Jordan [said] it best: When he looks just at the dataeverything looks fine; when he goes out into the boondocks he seesawful attitudes. I don't know how many of you said it; I didn't writeit down, but there were five or six of you who said that. And it'scertainly very startling.MR. ANGELL. I'd like to ask you a question also. When youmentioned where we are, if the dollar were to weaken somewhat onforeign exchange markets do you think it would be appropriate in thatcircumstance to surprise everyone and not sterilize the intervention?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's another way of saying justraise rates.MR. ANGELL. I know, but it seems to me that the timing wouldbe--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we would confuse the market. Idon't know how they would read that. It would take them a long whileto figure out what was going on. Supposing we intervened for $200million and didn't sterilize; I don't know what it would do to thefunds rate.-41-5/18/93MR. MCDONOUGH. I think people would be so busy trying tofigure out what we'd done that I doubt the funds rate would move. Ithink it would just enormously confuse people.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, that's frankly my impression.MR. ANGELL. You think a $200 million change in reserveswould cause the fed funds rate to move definitely?MR. MCDONOUGH. Our intervention today was a two-day Systemrepo of $3-1/2 billion.MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. MCDONOUGH. The law of supply and demand doesn't getchanged at all by $200 million. So it would be only the signallingeffect, and the signalling effect would be to confuse.MR. MULLINS. We have to tell them what the fed funds rateis!MR. D. LINDSEY. The problem is that there are a lot of otherthings going on. If you held everything else equal and affectedborrowing by $200 million, that would have a big effect.MR. ANGELL. But what I meant was that if we change a path by$200 million, that's quite a few basis points, right?MR. D. LINDSEY. Oh, my goodness! [Laughter] You'reapproaching zero or near double-digits, I think, with that kind ofchange. Maybe that's slightly exaggerated.MR. ANGELL. What other meaning can you give to non-sterilized intervention than a change in the target?MR. D. LINDSEY. Well, around current levels, [we estimatethat a change of] $25 million in the borrowing level will have a 50basis point effect. So, you're talking almost 10 times that much.MR. ANGELL. You could demonstrate the $25 million of foreignexchange intervention--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it's an interesting idea butit's too complex. Why create uncertainty when what we're trying to dois to eliminate it?MR. JORDAN. May I ask a question that relates to thatuncertainty and trying to reduce it? If an action that results in ahigher funds rate, which would be the first increase in I don't knowhow many years--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is the longest period we've gonesince when without changing the funds rate?MR. JORDAN. Well, we haven't changed it since September 4th[of last year].MR. ANGELL. We haven't raised it since February of '89.-42-5/18/93MR. JORDAN. So, if it's the result of an action by theCommittee after a full set of deliberations, I don't know that itwould raise many questions in the minds of people as to what happened.[It would be clear] that this Committee looked at a whole lot ofthings and in its collective wisdom decided to raise the funds rate.But if it's done as a result of an asymmetric directive, whichinvolves discretion, then what it was that triggered the increase isgoing to be very important.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it this way. I would have nointention of acting on that directive without full consultation ofthis Committee because it's a very important move.MR. SYRON. So, would you have a vote?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That depends. The evidence may besufficiently startling that a vote may not be required. The answer tothe question is that I don't like to take votes on the telephone; Idon't think we've had many and I would prefer not to. But this is avery unusual situation, and I'm not sure how I would [do it]. Wecould have a vote in that event.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me important that the Chairman'spowers not be diminished to require a vote. I just don't think wewant to do that at all.MR. BOEHNE. The purpose of an asymmetric directive is togive the sense of the Committee to move in that direction. And ifwe're going to meet frequently, then the notion of tilting it one wayor the other seems to me to lose some of its merit.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's right.MR. BOEHNE. If it's too important a decision to move withoutmaking sure you have the Committee's agreement, then you can decide itthen. We don't need to bias it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is a very legitimate issue, and Iwould be fully willing to agree to that because it does raise aninteresting question as to what the meaning of asymmetry is if we'reeffectively going to go back into a meeting. The Desk can move fromsymmetry as well as asymmetry. But it does raise the interestingquestion as to what would be the appropriate vehicle. I do not feelstrongly on this question and I would yield to whatever the Committeewould be interested in doing.MR. KEEHN. Just to add to Ed's point: If we think theinflation issue is expectations as opposed to real, it seems to methat an asymmetric directive, which no one will be aware of foranother six to eight weeks, isn't going to do anything for us. Anasymmetric directive that won't be known for eight weeks isn't goingto do anything with regard to the expectations issue. If in fact theinflation increases are sustained, then it seems to me we ought tomove in a way that will deal with those issues, and that ought tofollow a phone call. Therefore, I think the asymmetry confuses theissue and doesn't deal with it. My thought is to leave the directiveas is but be very specific that we will have a phone call.-43-5/18/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is a very thoughtful note. That'sthe other side of this argument, and I think it's important to putthat on the table.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, what would be the trigger pointfor the consultation? Are you going to be waiting for the next PPIand CPI?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, not necessarily. It would be ajudgment that something is deteriorating and the Committee mustaddress it. If this simmers down, and I think there's a reasonablygood chance it may do exactly that, then we can remain tranquil until,say, the next PPI/CPI comes out. If that is tranquil, then we canafford to stay where we are, as far as I'm concerned.MR. ANGELL. I think the Committee should remember that thereason for having [an asymmetric] directive is that sometimes thedeliberation/decisionmaking process is facilitated by having theChairman be free to make the moves that need to be made based uponwhat the Committee has said. I guess I thought that's what you wereafter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it to you this way. Mypreference is to have an asymmetric directive on the grounds that, asI listen to the Committee, that's my inference as to what the[consensus] is. However, it's my inclination on a very serious issueof this nature to consult with the Committee--because it's a veryimportant move if we move--and I think the Committee should besatisfied that everyone has had his or her say in this regard. Inthat context, I don't think it's going to look that bad whether thereis a symmetrical directive or not. The question basically is thechoice of the Committee as far as I'm concerned. Vice ChairmanCorrigan, you've been around here for a long time. What's your view?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me make a factual observationand then a comment--not that we should let facts get in the way ofthese things. On this inflation issue, the question, aside from thediagnostics of what is causing it, is really: Where are we? It'sclear that achieving the further progress toward price stability thateveryone is hoping for in 1993 looks a bit remote at this point. Butthe other side of the question is that while we may not be doing aswell as we hoped, are we doing as badly as we think? Of that I'm notso sure, so I think a little perspective here might be useful. Lookat the core CPI in the first and second quarters of the years 1990,1991, 1992, and 1993. In '90 it was 5.3 and 5.5 percent; in '91 itwas 6.5 and 3.8 percent; in '92 it was 4.2 and 3.3 percent; in '93 itis 4.1 percent and--if you take the Greenbook [projection for thesecond quarter], which I'm quite prepared to do--3.3 percent. Now,that's not what we had hoped for. Again, Wayne or David made thepoint that the number reported in the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony asthe central tendency of the Committee was 2-1/2 to 3 percent orsomething like that. So, in that sense things aren't working out aswell as we had hoped. But at least to date I'm not yet quitepersuaded that the genie is out of the bottle. If you look at theexperience at least so far, while there's no question it's not what wewant it to be, I'm not so sure that I'm personally ready to concedethe point that all is lost. I don't think it is.-44-5/18/93Now, on the question of procedure: First of all, under anycircumstance I have always believed that no matter what we do we'vealways got to leave the Chairman with maneuvering room. I don't carewhether the directive is asymmetric or symmetric; to me that'sirrelevant. There always has to be that powerful, powerful prejudicethat leaves the Chairman with flexibility when he needs it. Havingsaid that, and putting aside my own views about policy which will comelater, in my mind's eye one argument for an asymmetric directive thatI don't think has yet been mentioned--it has nothing to do withprocess--is that if it turns out that things do start to look a littlebetter, we're going to look a lot better by virtue of having thatasymmetric directive on the record.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. When you say "look a little better,"look a little better in what sense?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If overall performance starts tolook better in terms of the economy, inflation, or both, and thatasymmetric directive is on the record, I think institutionally thatmakes us look better. In other words the signal is still there thatwe weren't insensitive to what was going on.MR. MULLINS. Yes, we noticed.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, we saw the bear in the woods;he went back to hibernate but we saw the SOB. This seems to me to bea win/win [situation] because if on the other hand it turns out thatthings aren't so good--that the bear is out in the corn field or theback yard--and we have an asymmetric directive that we've utilized,we're better off as well. So, putting aside all of these complicatedquestions of process, I think those arguments should be part of thepicture. As a matter of fact, I think the substantive arguments aremore important in this setting than are the process arguments.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the substantive issue here is acrucial one, and how we want to handle it relates to the secondarypicture of the question. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. I had a question but it was answered earlier.Thank you.MR. MULLINS. I was going to make the point that PresidentCorrigan made. I think an asymmetric directive captures at theminimum where we should be. And I see no down side from it; we canonly look good. If things get better, it says at least that we wereconcerned about [inflation] and were focused on it. It also says thesame thing, as Jerry mentioned, if things get worse. If we don't have[an asymmetric directive], then I think it says that somehow we werenot attuned to or did not recognize the situation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're raising an interesting point.There's a timing question here. Let me just say for the sake ofargument that we move from a symmetrical directive three weeks fromnow because of certain events that are occurring. If we do that, itgives the impression that we are moving because 24 hours beforesomething happened whereas if we--MR. MULLINS. It's event driven.-45-5/18/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It means that there is a process--MR. MULLINS. And I think it's worse if inflation gets betterbecause then, looking back, people will wonder: Shouldn't they atleast have been on watch? Again, I just see no down side. Last timeperhaps there was a down side in the sense of alerting people. Idon't think it affects process at all but instead will communicate,though not for quite a while. But it will communicate the rightthings.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Actually, my view on this just changed 180degrees based on what you said. My original view was that there was acost to going asymmetric and if the economy were to weaken and priceswere also behaving favorably, given the timing of Humphrey-Hawkins--.But I'm persuaded by the point you just raised that if we have to act,it's much better that it be seen that there was an extensivediscussion of this and not that a number came in out of the sky andthat we were acting just on that number. So, I changed my mind 180degrees based on that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I guess I'm persuaded by the arguments forasymmetry. It seems to me that if what we want to do is to deal withinflationary expectations, then the most effective way to do it--interms of when we change the rate--is to do it by vote to show the fullCommittee's participation in that decision. I'd say it would be evenbetter at a meeting, either this one or the next one, but certainly bytelephone if not that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. I have to agree with what President Parry justsaid. If what we have is psychology, we want to deal psychology adeath blow. I think that is [best] done at a meeting and I wouldsuggest now.I think we have another problem. Governor Angell and I mayhave more of a problem than anybody else; on Friday our dissents [atthe March FOMC meeting] will come out. And it will be obvious thatthe Committee considered a move and rejected it again at this meeting.So, I would again say that the best thing to do, if in fact what wehave is psychology at work, is to [vote for] an increase at thismeeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. May I just ask a technical question in referenceto Jerry's point? I haven't had the feeling that the differencebetween symmetry and asymmetry necessarily constrains your ability tomake a move. It seems to me that as the Chairman you ought to havethe ability to make a move under [changing] circumstances as you seefit. Asymmetry means to me that we would go into the intermeetingperiod [ahead] with a very strong bias toward making a change totighten, and I don't think the lack of asymmetry necessarily ought to-46-5/18/93inhibit your ability to tighten if in fact the numbers [develop] in away that makes that seem the appropriate thing to do.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me just say that I'm not surethat whatever happens in the real world over the next period of timeis going to be significantly influencing our decision relative towhether we were symmetrical or asymmetrical. Normally when we talk inthose terms we are talking about real economic variables and we arelooking at whether or not the economy is [weakening] or strengthening.It happens in a gradual way. Remember that when we were asymmetrictoward ease for a long period of time it was because what we wereseeing was a gradually sagging economy. And we could anticipate howwe'd react. This is really quite different. This is almost a bubble.It is either going to go burst and disappear or it's going to buildup. I don't visualize looking at that sort of process in the samemanner. I think how we stipulate our directive is probably irrelevantto how we will want to behave. So, as I said before, I don't considerit a big deal one way or the other. And I don't think it willsignificantly affect what this Committee does or how we do it. Ithink it's strictly a perception question of how we wish to berecorded in this particular meeting and under what conditions. Andthere are arguments on both sides of that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Si, just to emphasize in case Iwasn't clear, I agree with you: There's no question that with orwithout asymmetry the Chairman always has a margin of flexibility. Iwas trying to suggest that on the issue of whether to prefer symmetricor asymmetric--not that they are the only possibilities but justfocusing on those two--the substantive [reason] for having anasymmetric directive is that no matter what happens, if things getworse or if things get better, the Committee is at that point on therecord as having been vigilant and alert.MR. BOEHNE. The cost of an asymmetric directive, I think, isnot insignificant. If, for example, this turns out to be an inflationbubble--if it turns out not to be a problem and goes away--but thereal sector because of all the uncertainty about tax policy and soforth turns out to be a good bit weaker than we [anticipate], we'regoing to look pretty trigger happy. So I think there is a costinvolved. I don't know if it's going to come out that way but we havea very uncertain environment. The situation can go either way both onthe inflation front and on the real growth front. I think we need towatch it very closely and we need to show that we have an open mind asto which direction policy is going to go. If circumstances warrant atighter policy, then let's tighten. I think deeds, not words, speakto expectations. I just don't see that asymmetry buys us very much.There can be a plus to it, but there can be a negative to it. And Idon't think we need to take the chance. We're going to meetfrequently.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me state that we have another tool,which we're not discussing, that can be used here--not as far aspolicy is concerned because I think we've all concluded that policywill be what it is--because we're talking now about the question ofperceptions. We haven't discussed the fact that we do have a policyrecord--I beg your pardon, minutes. And we have the capability inthose minutes, depending on how they are stipulated, to characterizewhat we are doing. And that should readily capture the particular-47-5/18/93problems that we are all addressing here. So, in viewing this I thinkwe ought to try first to find a means by which to separate what policyis and then to discuss the issue of how we wish to be perceived. Ifwe can make that distinction--and from what I can judge I think mostof us would be willing to do that--they should be handled separately.President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. I had started off this year hoping thatinflation would be less than last year; but much more importantly Ibelieved that inflation this year was going to be less than last year.It has already been mentioned that it would take [an inflation rateof] 2.6 percent or something like that for the rest of the year [toachieve the staff forecast for inflation]. But I had been thinkingmore that 2-1/2 percent nominally should be a goal that was doablethis year for the whole year, which would have been an average of .2for every month of the year. Now, if it averages .2 for the remainingeight months, that still is going to hold inflation only at lastyear's level, and I find that unacceptable. So, I think there isalready enough information, that nothing else needs to be learned, andthat an immediate action is warranted.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, we're obviously operating in avery difficult environment and within parameters that may be quitedifferent. I think I could make an argument for easing on the basisof a decelerating economy just as I could for tightening in the lightof the recent inflation numbers. Given the amount of pessimism thatis out there, given the employment situation and the high level ofunemployment--even though it has come down, 7 percent is not adesirable number--a tightening action could well abort the expansionor certainly cause greater deceleration in the economy. And I thinkwe have to be as attentive to that as to the inflation numbers. Now,it may be that we will have to make a move to counter inflation butbefore we do that I think we have to be very sure that inflation isreally on an upward trend. Inflationary expectations may be outthere, but I certainly haven't heard anybody in our area of thecountry telling me that they're concerned about inflation. Maybe theyshould be, but there isn't any concern about it. I agree entirelywith Governor Angell that monetary policy can harm the economy. If wewere to make a premature move, we could harm the economy; and I thinkwe ought not to be doing that. Again, these inflation numbers may betemporary. They may not be but they could be, and I think we have tobe very careful before we overreact to the inflation numbers. So, Iwould not be in favor of any move at this time and I agree with yourprescription in that regard.On symmetric versus asymmetric, in light of my views on theeconomy, I think we ought to have a symmetric directive. The downside of having an asymmetric one is exactly as Ed Boehne described:We could be viewed as overreacting to the inflation numbers if in factthey get better. So, I hope if we have to take action that we do itvery, very deliberatively in light of real information about a trendin the inflationary situation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.-48-5/18/93MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, my inclination is to say thatalthough there is some pessimism, it is fiscal-related. My own biasis that these inflation numbers are bothersome and that tighteningwould be the better path if I were convinced that they were permanent.At this point I am willing to wait and see a little longer. So, Iwould leave [policy] the same. When we do act, though, I think itshould be by vote, so I would also say symmetric for now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to support actiontoday. As far as I'm concerned, the issue is credibility. I thinkGovernors Mullins and Angell made that point very eloquently. Inmatters of credibility there is no substitute for action, so I think agood move today would be to raise the funds rate 1/4 point. Yes,there are risks, but it's possible to exaggerate those risks. Thefunds rate now in real terms is negative. I think it's easy tooverstate the risk to the economy of a small increase [in the fundsrate]. The other point I would make is that if we wait until we'reabsolutely certain and convinced that the inflation trend is upward--we've been down that road before--we may well have waited too long.That would reduce our credibility and it might be quite costly toregain it. So, I would favor action today.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Maybe I'm haunted too much by late 1986 andearly 1987. At that time a lot of regions of our economy really werepretty sick. You could put a football over the map of the UnitedStates and put one end on Phoenix, Arizona and the other end onPittsburgh, Pennsylvania and lay that football out and the economywould really [unintelligible]. Talk about pessimism and talk aboutdepression and talk about the fall in land values from $1700 an acreto $900 an acre and in Iowa from $3100 down to $1400! That pessimismwas strong. It was hard to see then, but we knew what was there if welooked at commodity prices and gold. And yet when we got ready toact, we were so incapable of acting because events got in our way.This speech is about events that may get in our road. One event wasthe Louvre Agreement. When the Louvre Agreement [existed], it didn'tseem appropriate for us to make a move because in some sense that wasa part of what some of us thought was a deal. And then we got intoMay of '87 and the dollar got strong; and I remember Paul Volckersaying: "Well, is this the day we want to increase rates?" And Ifelt that the dollar was strong on that day, [so] maybe we didn't wantto do it then. We didn't do it; events got in the road and all of asudden we found ourselves with the wrong fed funds rate in the fallwhen you came on Board, Mr. Chairman. So, of course, I want to acttoday. I want to raise the rate today. I'd be satisfied with 25basis points. That's crazy when I want 50, but I'm a compromisingperson. [Laughter] I would recommend to you--in a sense I've takenmyself out of the decision--that you stay with the Chairman'srecommendation on an asymmetric directive. I think it's veryimportant that you do that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. My preference would be for no change today butwith an asymmetric directive toward tightening. I think having that-49-5/18/93on the record in the future is more likely to be in our favor thanagainst us for reasons that Jerry Corrigan and Governor Mullinsmentioned. For psychology, I think we ought to get Governor Phillipsto dump her bracelet on the gold market at some point!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I'm marginally persuaded to go with asymmetrictoward tightening. But I must say that I'm rather astonished that BobForrestal is the only one around this table who has even discussed thepossibility that tightening might have a very, very serious effect oneconomic growth. That is what worries me. And the political reactionto a dumped economic growth rate could have much more seriousinflationary implications and also serious implications for the futureof deficit reduction. So, I think we ought to be very, very carefulnot to move until we're really persuaded that there are overwhelmingreasons to do so.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, my earlier comments were reallyobservations and questions. Just to be clear as to where I come outon policy at this point: It seems to me, as we went around the tableand talked about the economy, that the general thrust was that theeconomy is okay but there was a theme that some moderation has takenplace in terms of growth since the last meeting. I didn't hearanybody talk about a growth rate that to me would be high enough tosustain this inflationary trend that we're worried about. It doesseem to me that Ed Boehne makes a very compelling point on this. Inlight of all that, I'd be for alternative B with symmetric language.But I would be prompt to take an action by telephone if something inthe future would warrant that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, just on the issue of policy itself,it seems to me that credibility is a two-way street. It's importantto maintain credibility but I fully agree, as I think everyone does,that we are--using your words--in an unstable environment. I wouldargue that psychology is poor not just on the price front; we heard alot of that. I think we're in a situation where a lot of ourinstitutions look very weak. And the Federal Reserve is oneinstitution that hasn't looked weak so far. So, I'd be prettycautious about running off and doing anything that looks too much likeoverreacting in one direction or another. And for that reason I wouldstrongly feel that now is not a time to do something. Also, on thepsychology front, [unintelligible] even on prices unfortunately themarkets would react with it. I'm not sure Jerry Jordan's daughterwould react right away [in terms of] what she wants to pay for thehouse if we raise the funds rate 25 basis points. For a lot of peoplewe would have to wait until it affects their pocketbooks and they seesome impact from that.On the question of symmetry, I think that's not an enormousissue. It depends an awful lot on whether we end up being wrong,which is at least a 50/50 chance. How would we want to presentourselves in that case? Where is the lesser cost of being wrong? Ithink it probably is to be asymmetric.-50-5/18/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, having heard the conversation here,I think that's the real question. It's not what happens if we'reright, but how we want to appear if we're wrong. Since we are thecentral bank, if we're going to be wrong, we should be wrong on theside of preserving the currency. That's where I guess our bias shouldbe, provided we don't allow that to affect how we are going to--MR. SYRON. One small last point: On the issue ofimplementing policy--and several colleagues have said this--this is animportant enough point that I hope we would have a telephoneconversation. Everything else being the same, I would hope thatpeople could be recorded if this is seen as a critical problem.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I take that as a serious questionand I think it's going to depend to a very substantial extent on whathappens out there. I hate to go out of a meeting with the degree ofuncertainty that we have. But the uncertainty is real; and we're notgoing to change the level of uncertainty by making believe that it isunreal. Let's face that. We happen to be meeting at this particulardate because that is what was on our calendar. If we were meeting ona different date, we'd probably have a greater degree of certaintyabout what is going on. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, we've been around this bush anumber of times now. I would support no change with an asymmetricdirective. The reason I like the asymmetric directive is that I thinkit reflects the fact that this Committee is on top of the situationand is concerned. That is the case and I think we should have anasymmetric directive for that reason. That does not mean that Inecessarily think we're going to use it. If we move to tighten now,it seems to me the reason would be because we have the perception thatinflation has indeed already set in on us and has to be countered now,or maybe it should have been countered sooner. The way to counter itis to tighten money; and the reason we tighten money is to restrainsomething. Well, if we had a strongly accelerating economy, it wouldbe clear that it needs to be restrained. We have something less thanthat--the Greenbook economy or worse. What is it we want to restrain?There are not any excesses that I can clearly find. It seems to methat if we want to tighten, we've got to be very clear why. To simplysay "to counter inflation" really isn't enough. If there's somethingwe want to restrain, let's decide we want to restrain it. If it is amatter of restraining expectations, let's be very express about thatand be very careful that we take a good look at whatever secondaryeffects--in the way of hard effects--we might set off in an attempt tocounter a psychological or soft effect in the area of expectations.Now, that's not to say that we might not need to tighten at somepoint; but I think we ought to be quite careful about tightening inthe face of a perception of an expectation-driven inflation withoutsome other harder evidence to go along with it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. In these circumstances I think we need at aminimum an asymmetric directive toward tightening. A lot of thereasons for that have been covered and I won't belabor them. But Iwould note that we have been shooting for further disinflation andindeed, ultimately, for price stability. That is the long-run targetthat we have committed to, appropriately, and we seem to be drifting-51-5/18/93away from it. I don't think it's fatal if the drift goes on a littlelonger; and I admit that I don't know what the short run--the nextmonth or two of data--may bring. But it seems to me that we have tobe very careful at this point because we're not getting the result weanticipated nor are we moving in the direction of our long-runobjective. So, at a minimum I think we need the asymmetric directivetoward tightening.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I agree with what Gary Stern said. I guess I'mless concerned than Ed Boehne is about the notion that we might beviewed as trigger happy. We haven't been close to a trigger inmonths. This may be temporary, but seven months is a pretty longtemporary time as far as I'm concerned. It is true that we wouldn'tbe restraining anything or countering anything if we moved because Idoubt that we would get ahead of inflation since it has already moved.But at least we might be catching up in the sense of reflecting thehigher inflation in nominal rates. When we talk about moving a smallamount, we ought to be realistic about what sort of potential impactit could have on the economy. I don't think there's anything sacredabout 3 percent rates. The yield curve has been upward sloping forquite a long time now, since people have been expecting higher rates.And the real short rate would still be negative and lower than it waslast year. So, I wouldn't be opposed to moving now. At least weshould be asymmetric. We ought to be clear on the risk of waiting toolong here, and that risk is that we will have to make precipitousmoves down the road. And if you want to think about the consequencesfor the economy and the flak we're going to receive if we wait a bitlong, I think it's useful both for signalling and also for executionthat we be asymmetric now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. I would prefer symmetric. I still haveconcerns about the weakness of the economy, so I think one can makearguments in either direction. I will say that, having listened tothis discussion, I am persuaded that perhaps the perceptions of ourbeing [watchful]--or maybe getting out the signal that we really areaddressing inflation--might be helpful. So, I could live withasymmetric toward tightening.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I didn't put my hand up, but I have to speakanyway! I was very much influenced by this meeting. I came insitting on the fence, frankly. And based on hearing the discussion mypreference would be--if I had to do one or the other--probably to moverates up a little right now. But it's clear to me that there's not aconsensus to do that. This is a very important move and I think therehas to be a stronger consensus than exists right now. Therefore, Icould accept deferring action. I think there's a risk in deferral andDavid put his finger on it. There's a risk that we might have to domore later if things break the wrong way. In a sense, even if theybreak the right way and we follow [developments] in this intermeetingperiod, we may decide we really don't have to act. We can discuss itagain at the next meeting and maybe decide that we don't have to actthen either, but it won't remove the fact that the funds rate probably-52-5/18/93is not pegged at a sustainable level. The question is: What is that[delay] building in, in terms of lagged effects that ultimately aregoing to come home to roost later? And then there's the credibilityquestion that Al Broaddus raised in terms of where we all expectedinflation to come in this year and where it is likely to come in andwhat that means if we take that sitting down. It's a tough issue, butthat's where I come out.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm quite comfortable with "B"asymmetric. I might say, if I could just add a word on process whichI know you want to deal with separately, that if it turns out that theCommittee does come to a consensus that a tightening move is needed inthe foreseeable future, of course, I won't be a part of that decision.But leaving that aside, if a tightening move is needed any timebetween now and the next meeting, that will be one of the relativehandful of watershed policy decisions that come along. This is not a"gimme putt." Indeed, it's probably [a watershed decision] not justbecause it would be a turning point but because of the environment inwhich it is going to happen, if it happens. So, I think there's agreat deal of wisdom in the suggestion that several people have madethat if you do that, you better do it right with a meeting of theCommittee by telephone or otherwise and by a vote.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm inclined to agree strongly with thatin the sense that we haven't moved interest rates up since 1989. Wehaven't moved at all in over six months. This Committee is going tobe highly visible. And no matter what it is we do over the next 3 to6 or 9 to 12 months, it's going to be quite important for us to be asclose as we can to each other. In other words, it's important sincethere's no doubt from our various conversations that the underlyingphilosophy of every member of this Committee falls within a relativelynarrow range in terms of what should be the economic and monetarypolicy of this country. I think it would be very tragic if a group ofthis extraordinary capability--as Bob Black used to say, this is thebest Committee he has seen in all the years he had been on the FOMC--were perceived to be in disarray. It's very important that we act asa Committee and try to avoid, where we can, any evidences that thisCommittee is in disarray or something of that sort. If it ever getsto the point where this Committee is either in disarray or perceivedto be in disarray, there is no other institution in this governmentthat can substitute for us. And if my [assessment of] what in fact iscausing the problems we are confronting is correct--that it's a deep-seated psychological deterioration that continues--it is cruciallyimportant that we stand tall as a group and try to find the means bywhich we can merge our differences in a way in which the vast majorityof the Committee can support. There have been occasions in the pastwhen I've raised the issue of "Let's try to vote together because it'sa crucial issue" but they were very few. I think I raised it a coupleof years ago; I may have raised it two or three times in the lastseveral years. I don't think it's something that ought to be raisedoften because one of the great strengths of this Committee is thecapability, which I think we exhibited today: namely, that we haveinteraction where a lot of minds are changed. I know my views changedseveral times as this meeting evolved because of the evidence and thestrength of the arguments that came up. That's an extraordinarilyvaluable facet of this Committee. If we at any time endeavored to-53-5/18/93sort of force ourselves into a mold, we would lose that. So, thereare two sides to this question. All I want to say is that JerryCorrigan won't forgive us if we don't get this right!In any event, as I read this Committee as to where we standat this point, there is a significant majority who are willing tosupport an asymmetric directive, using alternative B. I think we arein a position where before any action is taken--or indeed if anyevidence emerges that would even raise the question of whether weshould or should not act--we would want a telephone conference. Mybest hope is that this whole psychological thing will dissipate, whichit could conceivably, that the next set of price data we end up withare benevolent, and that we won't speak to each other for the next sixweeks! The chances of that are less than 50/50. But leaving thataside, are there any other issues that people would like to surface atthis time before I call for a vote?MR. KEEHN. I think I hear that any change would be precededby a phone call.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Correct.MR. ANGELL. But that would be more restriction on you thanyou normally have when we have [an asymmetric directive].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I don't consider that a restrictionon me. This is something that I want to do. I think it is importantthat I get the views of this Committee before making this particulardecision. Frankly, I don't consider it a diminution of the Chairman'spower; I want to emphasize that.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I also assume that if somethingreally ugly happens that has nothing to do with the things we'retalking about here, you will always have--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me put it this way. I've beenaround this Committee for a number of years and I think I can say thatI pretty much know how every single member of this Committee wouldcome out under [any given hypothetical] event. In other words, Icould take the vote myself if I had to and I bet I'd get it on thenose three times out of four! The reason for that is that I knowwhere you're all coming from. We get updated periodically on what ourbasic views are. So, I don't consider that a major concern.Obviously, I'm not arguing that we are setting any precedents; this isnot a precedent. This is something quite extraordinary. I hope thatwe don't have to talk again shortly; but if we do, we shall. And withthat I would like to get a vote on an asymmetric directive and havethe Secretary read it.MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. In the context of the Committee'slong-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economicgrowth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, andmonetary developments, slightly greater reserve restraint would orslightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable in theintermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected-54-5/18/93to be consistent with appreciable growth in the broader monetaryaggregates over the second quarter."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR.BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell NoPresident Boehne NoPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Lindsey YesPresident McTeer YesGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Phillips YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Officially our next meeting is when?MR. BERNARD. July 6-7.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. July 6-7. I assume that all of you arejoining us for lunch to give our best wishes to Jerry.END OF MEETING-55-