Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 16, 1993A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systemin Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, November 16, 1993, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, ChairmanMr. McDonough, Vice ChairmanMr. AngellMr. BoehneMr. KeehnMr. KelleyMr. LaWareMr. LindseyMr. McTeerMr. MullinsMs. PhillipsMr. SternMessrs. Broaddus, Jordan, Forrestal, and Parry,Alternate Members of the Federal Open MarketCommitteeMessrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents ofthe Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,St. Louis, and Boston, respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and EconomistMr. Bernard, Deputy SecretaryMr. Coyne, Assistant SecretaryMr. Gillum, Assistant SecretaryMr. Mattingly, General CounselMr. Patrikis, Deputy General CounselMr. Prell, EconomistMr. Truman, EconomistMessrs. R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, Promisel,Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld, Siegman,Simpson, and Slifman, AssociateEconomistsMs. Lovett, Manager for Domestic Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Winn. Assistant to the Board, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Ettin. Deputy Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Madigan. Associate Director, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant.Division of Monetary Affairs, Board ofGovernorsMr. Beebe, Ms. Browne, Messrs. J. Davis, T. Davis,Dewald. Goodfriend, and Ms. Tschinkel, SeniorVice Presidents. Federal Reserve Banks ofSan Francisco, Boston, Cleveland, Kansas City,St. Louis, Richmond, and Atlanta, respectivelyMr. Guentner, Assistant Vice President, FederalReserve Bank of New York1. Attended portion of meeting on the review of FOMC practiceswith regard to recording and transcribing FOMC meetingdiscussions and the release of information about suchdiscussions.Transcript of Federal Open market Committee Meeting ofNovember 16, 1993CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. As you know,the first item on the agenda is a review of FOMC practices with regardto recording and transcribing FOMC meeting discussions and thedesirability of preparing more detailed meeting records for eventualpublic disclosure. There are basically two issues to be covered. Thefirst is the question of the release of certain FOMC records to thepublic, specifically the meeting transcript or some alternativedetailed document going back [in time] and the discussion record goingforward, including of course the question of whether or not tocontinue to record the discussions. The second is the Committee'sresponse to Chairman Gonzalez's most recent request for all tapes andtranscripts going back to 1976. I would presume that the decisionmade with respect to item one will in turn provide the basis for theresponse to Chairman Gonzalez. To start us off, I believe you havedocuments sent to you from both Virgil Mattingly, who will brief us onthe legal issues, and from Don Kohn, who will discuss considerationsrelated to various options before the Committee. Which of yougentlemen wishes to start? Virgil.MR. MATTINGLY. I will, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman andmembers of the Committee, there are two federal statutes that bear onthe issues before the Committee this morning of public access to theexisting transcripts of FOMC meetings and to tapes, transcripts, orother types of records of future FOMC meetings, should those detailedrecords be prepared in the future. These are the Freedom ofInformation Act (FOIA) and the Federal Records Act (FRA). FOIAgoverns what information the FOMC must release to the public and when.The FRA governs what records the FOMC must maintain. As explained inthe memo, I believe that under FOIA the Committee is entitled, but notrequired, to withhold from public disclosure most of the material ineach of the existing transcripts as well as in memoranda of discussion(MOD) type documents, should they be prepared for future meetings.There are two relevant provisions in FOIA. Exemption (4) wouldprotect confidential information from [foreign] central banks and fromindividual businesses. I don't think there's any question about that.Exemption (5) would protect the Committee's deliberations. By that Imean the discussion and debate among the Committee members before theyreach a decision on the directive or other monetary policy matters.This would cover the recommendations by staff as well as views andrecommendations of individual members leading up to the time ofdecision. Factual portions of the transcripts would have to bereleased, however, where they could be reasonably segregated from thedeliberative materials. These types of factual materials wouldinclude the vote, the attendance, and material that was already publicor non-confidential. The view that public disclosure of thetranscript is not required by FOIA is supported by the 1976 decisionin the Merrill case against the FOMC. There the lower court, thedistrict court, held that the FOMC was required by FOIA to discloseonly the reasonably separable factual portions of the two memoranda ofdiscussion at issue in that case. The great bulk of the material--running as high as 85 to 90 percent of those documents--was in factwithheld under the deliberative exemption.I should note at this point that FOIA does not protect thetranscripts or any information of the FOMC from Congress. I'm only11/16/93talking at this point about release to the public. While FOIAliterally protects most of the transcripts, the Committee needs toconsider the new FOIA policy recently announced by the President andthe Attorney General. That policy is designed to promote maximumdisclosure of information within the Federal government. Under thenew policy the Justice Department has stated it will not defend anagency's decision to withhold information unless the agency reasonablyforesees harm to important governmental or private interests protectedby the exemption that is claimed by the agency. In accordance withthe Committee's instructions, Ernie Patrikis and I discussed theimpact of this new policy on the transcripts with the JusticeDepartment official responsible for administering the new policy. Wedescribed to him the Committee's deliberative process and theCommittee's view regarding the need to protect from premature releaseconfidential information as well as information regarding itsdeliberations in order to maintain the high quality of monetary policydecisionmaking. The Justice Department official's response was quitepositive. He stated that the new policy was intended to end automaticinvocation of FOIA exemptions and instead require a careful, case-by-case consideration of the harm that might result from discretionarydisclosure. Based upon our description, the Department officialstated that it appeared that the Committee could satisfy this newpolicy. He also agreed that exemption (4) would cover the centralbank information and that exemption (5) appeared to be relevant tocover the deliberative materials. I judged from what he said that theDepartment would defend the nondisclosure by the Committee oftranscripts or other records of its meetings, certainly meetings forthe more recent years. As the memo points out, there is an issue thatat some point in time the sensitivity of deliberations in oldertranscripts might diminish to the point where the harm to thedeliberative process of the Committee is outweighed by the benefits toscholars and other members of the public from access to thesedocuments.If the Committee decides to prepare and release, with a timelag, MODs or edited transcripts for past or future meetings, the issuearises as to whether a tape or transcript used to prepare the finaldocument must also be retained. The Federal Records Act governs thisissue. The FRA states that an agency record may be discarded onlywith the approval of the Archivist of the United States. To obtainthat approval the agency must prepare and submit to the Archivist aschedule which the Archives is required to publish for public comment.The staff has had several discussions with the Archivist's office--thelast as late as yesterday--regarding whether transcripts or tapes needto be retained under the Federal Records Act if an edited transcriptor MOD type document were prepared and retained. Our discussionsindicate that there is a different treatment for the past transcriptsthan for those that may be prepared for future meetings. Based uponour discussions, it is likely that for future meetings, after an MODtype document is prepared and approved by the Committee on a fairlycontemporaneous basis, the Archivist would find that the tapes andtranscripts used to prepare the MOD were merely temporary workingmaterials and could be dispensed with once a schedule was approved bythe Archivist. This advice was based on our description of the MOD asa near transcript-like document reflecting all of the substance of thedeliberations of the Committee.11/16/93With respect to the existing transcripts for the past 17years, the Archivist's staff felt that they were the best historicalrecord of the deliberations of those meetings. The staff was not atall receptive to substituting for those raw transcripts an MOD typedocument because such documents would not have been contemporaneouslyprepared and then reviewed by the meeting participants. Withoutcontemporaneous review and approval, the Archivist's staff said thatthe accuracy of any edits could not be verified and that there couldbe no assurance that the MODs were truly reflective of the Committee'sdeliberations. The Archivist's staff was also concerned about thetemptation of participants or others reviewing transcripts well afterthe fact to rewrite history with the benefit of hindsight. Based onthese comments, our staff feels it is unlikely that the Archivistwould approve the schedule allowing for the raw transcripts of thepast 17 years to be discarded in favor of MODs. The Archives staffsuggested that rather than editing the raw transcripts the Committeecould produce an annotated version in which the Secretariat would notepotential or likely inaccuracies in the raw transcripts. They didleave the door open to approval of a schedule to substitute a lightlyedited transcript for the raw transcript, as long as nothingsubstantive was deleted. And they would have to review that [lightlyedited transcript] and compare the two documents to make sure that infact nothing substantive was deleted. I should note that these arethe preliminary views of the Archives' staff and a final decisioncould be made only after a proposal was submitted and published forcomment.MR. KOHN. The questions of what to do about the existingtranscripts and about release of information regarding deliberationsat future meetings involve subtle and complex considerations. Asbackground for your discussion of these matters, the staff suppliedyou with a series of options. Obviously, we didn't exhaust thepossibilities, but we thought the ones we listed would highlight themain issues you confront.The options were presented in two groups--one for dispositionof existing transcripts and the other for release of information aboutthis and future meetings. Nonetheless, decisions with respect to onemay interact with the other. The critical consideration is the effectof the options chosen on the deliberative process going forward.Therefore, a decision concerning the disposition of past transcriptsdoesn't necessarily mandate your actions going forward. For example,you could decide to release the transcripts, edited or not, going backin time, without necessarily committing to do so in the future.Virgil has outlined some of the legal considerations bearingon these decisions, and the Committee has in the past debatedextensively the effects of various options for the monetary policyprocess and its interaction with markets. By now, many of thesearguments are well known to the Committee and I won't repeat them indetail as I review the options. However, there is an important thirdclass of considerations that has been highlighted by the hearings andtheir aftermath--that is, the public's perception of the FOMCinformation release process, and the implications of that perceptionin the political sphere. The Fed was already viewed as insufficientlyopen--and our reasons for current practices somewhat inscrutable--bymany in the press, Congress, and the markets. The existence of thetranscripts has no logical bearing in terms of the effects on markets11/16/93and monetary policy of what we do going forward, but it has heightenedpublic and Congressional awareness of current practices and seems tohave placed additional pressures on us either to change practices orcome up with more convincing explanations. Against this generalbackground, I will review some of the issues raised by eachalternative on the outline you received.With regard to the existing transcripts from 1976 throughSeptember, one alternative was for no release in any form until thetranscripts were transferred to the National Archives in thirty years.This would provide maximum protection for participants who had no ideatheir words were being saved for later public release, many of whomhave no way of reviewing the transcripts for accuracy. Any release ofthe transcripts--edited or unedited--will be unfair to some degree tothese past participants. However, this option would seem to havelegal and public perception problems. Legally, it may be difficult toconvince the Justice Department to defend against a FOIA request forvery old transcripts on the grounds that it would harm thedeliberative process. This defense could be more difficult if theCommittee were to decide not to tape meetings in the future, since inthose circumstances one might argue that release of past transcriptscould not affect future deliberations.The second alternative was for release of the raw transcriptsafter a considerable period--perhaps from 5 to 10 years--deleting onlythe most sensitive information about international developments orindividual domestic firms. The longer the lag, the greater theprotection for unwitting participants. Release of raw transcriptsavoids our trying to divine what people really intended to say, sincewe would not correct the material. This course would seem to bedefensible under FOIA, though some of our critics would question thelag. In the past, the Committee has deemed a 5-year lag, albeit foran MOD, sufficient to protect the deliberative process. An importantadditional problem would involve obvious errors in the transcripts--the "not" where it doesn't belong and was never intended. Suchmiscues result in misrepresentation of what people were saying at themeeting. Reasonable users of the transcripts would undoubtedlyinterpret each sentence or thought in its context--in effect, doingthe type of editing we would do for a lightly edited transcript orMOD. But we may not be able to count on such reasonableness. Thisoption avoids the problem of placing an FOMC imprimatur on thedocument. The Committee could state that this transcript has not beenreviewed or approved by the FOMC and is therefore not an officialpublication.One way to address the problem of transcription errors wouldbe through the annotation process mentioned by Virgil. Another wouldbe lightly edited transcripts--the third alternative, which wouldcorrect such obvious errors of transcription as well as smooth throughsome of the more severe syntax problems and remove some clearlyextraneous material. But no change of substance could be made. Onlyunder these circumstances would the Archivist consider a scheduleallowing for the raw transcripts to be discarded as the editedversions were completed. They stressed their need to carefullycompare the lightly edited transcripts against the raw transcriptsbefore they could approve the procedure. The question that ariseswith edited transcripts is whether it is fair or appropriate torepresent such a transcript, which would involve some deletions as11/16/93well as attempted corrections of remaining errors in transcription, asthe language of the speaker--as would be implied by the transcriptform--especially when the speaker has not had the opportunity toreview what is being released.The fourth option--an MOD--was suggested to deal with thisconcern. The MOD would involve a more complete editing to removefurther problems and get at the underlying intent of the speaker, butwould put the results in third-person format. The difficulty with theMOD for meetings in the past is that the Archivist is not likely toapprove a schedule allowing us to discard the raw transcripts once theMOD was completed. We could make available an MOD and a rawtranscript at the same time; the MOD would represent the FederalReserve staff's attempt to make the transcript more comprehensible anduseful. The cost of an MOD is greater than for a lightly editedtranscript--more than twice as high according to the cover note fromMr. Bernard.The outline also raises issues associated with review of atranscript or MOD. An awkward situation may arise if parts of atranscript are edited because some participants are still able to doso, while other parts are not. Perhaps the cleanest approach would beto have the staff do the editing of transcripts for past meetingswithout review by any participants. Each transcript, edited or not,would carry a statement noting that these were not official records ofthe FOMC, had not been reviewed by participants, and likely containederrors of transcription. Since they would not be official records,the FOMC could consider not publishing them officially, but rathermaking them available to interested parties.Options for meetings going forward are presented in Roman IIon page two. The first option would have the Committee continue torelease only what it does now and turn off the recorder. Any tapesand transcripts prepared could not be discarded under the NationalRecords Act, and would be subject to subsequent FOIA or other requestsfor release. Premature release or threat of release of a transcriptcould have adverse effects on the deliberative process. As analternative to taping and transcribing, the Secretariat would need totake notes to use in preparation of the Minutes; it is possible thatthese notes would be subject to the Records Act. The quality of theMinutes might suffer to some extent--depending on the extent andaccuracy of notes--and today's mostly reliable source for determiningexactly what occurred at FOMC meetings would be lost, for those rareoccasions when such questions arise. Finally, if this option werechosen, the Committee would need to consider its repercussions on thepublic's view of the Federal Reserve and on Congressional attitudesabout the need to strengthen our accountability. The extent andseriousness of these repercussions is subject to differing judgments,and might depend in part on whether we were able to tell our storymore convincingly and, in addition, how forthcoming we were with theexisting transcripts.Alternative two--enhanced minutes--might help ameliorate someof the reaction, although this issue would still need carefulconsideration. The exact nature of the enhancements could takeseveral forms. The one suggested in the outline would be moreattribution of individual policy views to encompass those in themajority as well as those in the minority who now file dissents. This11/16/93would be consistent with Board practice in which individual Governor'sviews are often covered in the minutes of the meetings. In addition,the Board occasionally publishes concurring views with its decisions,when those voting with the majority wish to emphasize differentrationales or concerns. Adopting these practices would go aconsiderable distance toward satisfying requests for greateraccountability. It would, however, detract to an extent from the ideaof collective responsibility for Committee decisions. The publicwould be getting more information than it currently does. Inparticular it would get a better sense of the nuances among the viewsof the policymakers and probably a more complete idea of all thearguments brought to bear on the final decision. The tape also wouldbe turned off for this alternative, with the implications discussedabove. Moreover, the enhanced minutes would still not reveal toscholars the full detail of the reasoning that went into policydecisions.Alternatives three or four--the MOD or lightly editedtranscripts--would give that detail. As between the two, the greaterexpense of the MOD would need to be weighed against the additionalconstraining effect the members might feel a transcript would have onthe free flow of Committee deliberations. If the MOD or editedtranscript contained all the substance at the meeting and was subjectto review by participants shortly after the meeting, we are reasonablysure the Archivist would treat the raw transcripts as workingdocuments that were no longer needed once the final record had beencompleted. In both cases, confidential information would be redactedfrom the publicly released document. A number of members havesupported the production and release of MODs in their letters andpublic statements, with appropriate lags and redaction. The FederalReserve itself produced such documents and later had no majorobjections to laws that would require them. Most of those favoringthe MOD, however, expressed considerable concern about protecting itfrom public release for a substantial period. No law can guaranteeagainst a Congressional request, including a subpoena. However, asVirgil noted, it now appears that the chances are quite high that wecould protect MODs against premature release to the public underexisting FOIA, assuming an appropriate lag for release to the public.Obviously though, there can be no guarantee against a judge with adifferent interpretation or a Justice Department with more extremeviews on this matter in the future.One aspect of FOMC information release that we did not treatin the outline, which may have some bearing on public perceptions, wasthe publication of the directive or the Committee's policy stance.Our current policy of delay, while soundly based in my view withrespect to the potential effects of other alternatives on theflexibility of decisionmaking, certainly contributes to the perceptionof the FOMC as a secretive organization. The Committee may not wantto rule out considering once again the costs and benefits of thecurrent practice, especially if it decides not to produce editedtranscripts or MODs going forward, but still wants to improve itsreputation for openness.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I am most concerned, as I suspect therest of you are, that the openness and free exchange of views soessential to monetary policy will be unduly compromised if we areforced into a premature, detailed disclosure of our deliberations. We11/16/93will only succeed in stifling originality, new ideas, and speculativenotions, which so often open us up to new insights for the Committeeas a whole.We are authorized by statute to fashion and implement themonetary policy of this country. We are also required by both statuteand tradition to maintain the maximum amount of disclosure consistentwith our ability to deliberate effectively. The Congress has given usthe authority to decide within limits the scope of disclosure. As youall know, we have been struggling with this issue for quite a longwhile, trying to find the right disclosure [practices] to maintainrecords for scholars and others interested in our deliberativeprocess. As part of our decision we have to address the policy changeat the Justice Department, which we discussed via telephone conferencelast month, and issues raised more recently by the National Archives.We must recognize that whatever course of disclosure we choose, wewill have to divert key policymaking personnel to the endeavor andaccordingly incur significant costs in the process.From previous discussions of this matter it's clear thatthere are many views within this Committee on the appropriate way toapproach this issue. I'd like to start off with my general view ofhow to approach this and then open up the floor to questions for thethree of us, followed by individual positions annunciated by theindividual members of the Committee. As a result of the preliminarydiscussions that Virgil outlined with respect to both the JusticeDepartment and the Archivist, I personally believe that we meet ourresponsibilities under FOIA and the Federal Records Act, as well asthe requirements of the deliberative process, if we go to an MOD forfuture meetings, releasing deliberations with a lag of three or moreyears. Thus the meetings of 1994, for example, would be published atthe end of 1997 or later. Tapes and transcripts employed indeveloping such MODs could, upon completion of the MODs, be dispensedwith. If we adopt such a recommendation or something similar and findin the months ahead that we are unable to protect the deliberativeprocess in these meetings, we will have to consider altering our rulesand returning to a much earlier procedure of detailed note taking. Irecognize that if we move in that direction, the Congress may chooseto legislate a different procedural change in our disclosure policies.That is, of course, their prerogative. Should that occur, I assume itwould be the judgment of this Committee that the quality of monetarypolicymaking would be impaired. Should hearings be held leading up tosuch potential legislation, I and others will surely endeavor to makethat case.With regard to the transcripts that have accumulated since1976, I would recommend that we release lightly edited versions with afive-year lag. I think, for example, if three years is appropriategoing forward, a longer delay is required for the [historical]transcripts since the individuals, as has been pointed out, wereunaware that what they said would be disclosed. For reasons I raisedin my letter to Steve Neal, which I presume has been circulated to allof you, I'm uncomfortable with releasing these transcripts. But theArchivist informs us that the documents must be maintained and thatthese documents at some point would be subject to public disclosureunder FOIA. As I indicated at the beginning, the answer wecommunicate to Chairman Gonzalez after this meeting with respect tothe transcripts will depend, of course, on what decisions we make here11/16/93this morning. I would now like to open the floor for questions toeither Virgil, Don, or myself. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I'm not sure who will answer this. I understandthat if we move to a lightly edited transcript, going back, then theunedited transcript and the electronic recordings could be dispensedwith under the Archivist's preliminary judgment. Is that correct?MR. KOHN. If the lightly edited transcript faithfullyincludes all the substance of what happened at the meeting and didn'tchange or even guess at what people's intent was in what they said.MR. BOEHNE. Going forward would that same policy then holdfor a memorandum of discussion?MR. MATTINGLY. Yes.MR. BOEHNE. And what is the logic of the distinction betweengoing forward and going back?MR. MATTINGLY. Going forward we would have the participantsimmediately review what was said for accuracy.MR. BOEHNE. I see.MR. MATTINGLY. And we'd have the tape.MR. BOEHNE. I see. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. In terms of the past meetings, it seemed to methat what you were [expressing] as something of a preference isalternative three. Is that correct?MR. KOHN. Yes.MR. PARRY. Okay. And would you explain why you prefer thatover alternative one?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One being that there's no release?SPEAKER(?). No release.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think the question here reallyrelates to whether in fact we can avoid eventually releasing thetranscripts. Basically we can't dispose of them under the Archivist'sregulations; and under FOIA, eventually, as they age they will clearlybe made available by some judge or other. And I think we do have anobligation to try to make as much [information] available as possible.While, as I indicated, I'm uncomfortable with a lot of this largelybecause of all the technical problems involved in releasingtranscripts for which there is no means of evaluation, I nonethelesshave concluded that our choices are extraordinarily limited; and Iwould much prefer that the decision as to what we do be ours and notthe court's or the Congress's.11/16/93MR. PARRY. May I ask a second question? I assume in termsof the future meetings that whatever alternative we come up with wouldapply equally to the conference calls?MR. KOHN. I would guess so.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I see no way to avoid that. In otherwords, a conference call by its nature, unless it's strictly aconference call that is not relevant to deliberations of the [FOMC] ispart of the record and would have to be included.MR. PARRY. But it seems to me that there wouldn't be muchproblem leaning over to the side of greater exposure of [the contentsof] these conference calls. I don't see any [resulting] damage; evenif we were getting updates on issues, it probably would be somethingthat would be in the spirit of greater openness. And I can't see anydamage that would result from that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The only reason I would argue, frankly,is that it is costly to transcribe all of this. And under certaincircumstances--for example, if we have a telephone conference in whichthe sole purpose is the staff reading a report of some form--it may befar cheaper merely to transcribe part of it, such as the Q&As, andhave the physical report sent on. So my concerns are not on the issueof openness but on the issue of costs.MR. PARRY. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Virgil, you and Don both mentioned Congressionalsubpoena. Could you describe that process in more detail and how itmight relate to tapes and transcripts that are prepared in connectionwith doing a Memorandum of Discussion even if we had a procedurewhereby once that MOD was approved the tapes and transcripts couldthen be disposed of pursuant to authority from the Archivist?Further, if there were legislation that specifically protected usunder FOIA with respect to public release with some appropriate lag,would that have any bearing on Congressional subpoena power?MR. MATTINGLY. Well, I'll try to answer your question. Theway the subpoena power works in the House is that the House hasdelegated to its committees the authority to issue subpoenas. And inthe House Banking Committee they haven't delegated it further.Therefore, the Committee would need a majority vote to authorize asubpoena. Once the subpoena was issued, in the House there's noprocedure in the law to challenge that subpoena. As I indicated, theexemptions under FOIA do not protect information from the Congress atall. If a statute were passed that protected MODs or MOD informationfrom public disclosure during the three- or five-year lag period, thatwould, of course, help immeasurably with the FOIA problem. But itwould not help technically with the Congress although, as I think DonKohn pointed out, the enactment of such a statute would indicateCongressional agreement that this process was too important to beunnecessarily disrupted and the FOMC would get some at least moralsupport in your arguments to fend off a subpoena.11/16/93MR. MELZER. So, in theory, it would be possible, say, inextreme circumstances, or under any circumstances, [for Congress] tosubpoena tapes and transcripts on a real time basis?MR. MATTINGLY. Oh sure.MR. MELZER. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Don, when you outlined your alternatives youmentioned releasing the raw transcripts with, I presume, a warninglabel on them as well as a warning label on the [MOD]. Then you[discussed] separately the release of lightly edited transcripts. Youthen gave us some advantages and disadvantages. Did you consider analternative of releasing both a lightly edited and the raw transcript?MR. KOHN. No, I did for the MOD, but it would be the samething. I think that's possible. As I mentioned for the MOD, we coulddo the raw transcript [and] the MOD, with the MOD then representingNorm Bernard's attempt to make sense of the raw transcript. Thenscholars could use it or not and compare it or not. I think the samearguments would go for the lightly edited transcripts. Certainly wecould do both. The reason I raised it with the raw transcript and theMOD is that the Archivist would absolutely force us to do that. If wedid an MOD, we'd have to do the raw transcript; with the lightlyedited transcript we wouldn't have to do both but, sure, we could.MR. ANGELL. But one of the disadvantages of the lightlyedited transcript is that someone might say that it really wasn't[accurate], that it was really a rewriting of history.MR. KOHN. Right.MR. ANGELL. And one of the disadvantages of the rawtranscript is that someone says "Here's what happened" and isn't verycareful--MR. KOHN. There can be a miscue or someone [mispeaks] or isquoted out of context and that sort of thing. So the light editingwould be an attempt to smooth through that and avoid some of that[problem], although we're never--well, an unscrupulous scholar orother person would always be able to take sentences and pieces out ofcontext. The light editing we thought would help a little.MR. ANGELL. But you didn't visit with the Archivist or getimpressions as to which [he would prefer], if he had both a lightlyedited and the raw transcript. I would think that most people wouldfind it much easier to read the lightly edited one.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's right. It's easier,actually, to read the Memorandum of Discussion in that respect also.MR. ANGELL. I know, but it would be somewhat more expensive,I think, to do that back [in time].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh, no question. Governor LaWare.11/16/93MR. LAWARE. What authority is represented by the currentrequest from Chairman Gonzalez? In other words, this is not asubpoena but I thought I heard you indicate that our ability to deny arequest of Congress for information is limited. In other words, howdo we respond to the immediate situation?MR. MATTINGLY. My view of the most recent correspondencefrom Chairman Gonzalez is that he is asking this Committee to turnthose documents over on a voluntary basis.MR. LAWARE. Well, he didn't use that kind of language.MR. MATTINGLY. I know, but that is the substance of whathe's asking. He may take issue with what I've said, but there areonly two ways to get material: He either asks for it [to be given]voluntarily or he uses the legal process, which is the subpoena.MR. LAWARE. All right. If he should be dissatisfied withwhatever answer we give him on the basis of the current request and hereverts to a subpoena, do we have the right to deny the confidentialinformation and so forth in responding to that subpoena?MR. MATTINGLY. No. I would point out [as an example] theB&L case where the Chairman refused to turn over the examinationreports, which were replete with confidential information. ChairmanGonzalez then obtained subpoena authority from [his] Committee and wewere forced to turn over the examination reports.MR. LAWARE. Third question, if I may: What constraint ishis Committee under in terms of subsequently releasing thatconfidential information--making it public or leaking it or some otherpublication of it?MR. MATTINGLY. I don't know.MR. LAWARE. I would judge then that the best we can doretrospectively with regard to these transcripts is to try to satisfyhis request by offering something other than the raw, uneditedtranscripts that we have on hand in order to try to protect thatconfidential information. Is that where we are? We're in a--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think [unintelligible] satisfy theCommittee's request. The subpoena--MR. LAWARE. All right, it's the Committee's request but it'scoming from--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's a Committee document, a Committeesubpoena.MR. LAWARE. Well, we haven't been subpoenaed yet.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I'm really referring to [the fact]that the subpoena is of the [House] Committee--MR. LAWARE. I understand.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. --not the Chairman.-11-11/16/93MR. LAWARE. I understand, but the current request is fromthe Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm trying to say that, as Virgilindicated, the authority has not been delegated to the Chairman as Iunderstand it. Is that correct?MR. MATTINGLY. That's correct.MR. LAWARE. All right, thank you.MR. KELLEY. May I make sure I understand the answer?Virgil, did you just say that if there is a subpoena that requires usto turn this information over and we do so, then there is nothing toprotect that information from release by the [Congressional]Committee?MR. MATTINGLY. Well, that's correct. But Chairman Gonzalezin the past has exercised care when he thought the materials were of aconfidential nature. He has not released, for example, examinationreports.MR. KELLEY. But that would be at his discretion?MR. MATTINGLY. It would be his judgment, yes.MR. LAWARE. But he has read top secret documents on thefloor of the Congress.MR. KELLEY. He certainly has.MR. LAWARE. Into the Congressional record.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, most of my questions have been answeredbecause I wanted to ask about this Congressional situation. But letme just follow up with one other. Is it the judgment of the staffthat a subpoena would issue from the Committee in this situation? Inother words, do you think Mr. Gonzalez will be successful inpersuading the other members to issue a subpoena?MR. WINN. Bob, I don't think there's any way I can give aclear answer to that question. I think to some extent it depends onthe decision the FOMC makes with respect to the release of thetranscripts or how we may make those transcripts available. But Iwould say that Chairman Gonzalez does make a distinction--at least hehas in his letters so far--that while he is interested in the publicrelease of these documents in some orderly way and it appears thatthere would be some time lag, he is asking at the same time that theraw transcripts be turned over to his Committee. So, even if wedecide on a program for the public, he is still interested in ourturning over all the transcripts and tapes to his Committee. And hemay pursue that. To some extent how the whole Committee would feelabout a demand for the raw transcripts may depend on what we decide todo in terms of their release to the public.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.-12-11/16/93MR. SYRON. A technical point, Mr. Chairman, or a reasonablytechnical point: The issue of our ability to obtain voluntarily [fromcontacts in our Districts] proper and confidential information has toweigh an awful lot in this. I will tell you that anyone listening tothis would have a hard time concluding that we're going to have thesame kind of information presented to us by people in our Districts oranywhere else that we had some time ago. So, we're in a damagecontrol situation here.On the question Bob Parry raised of whether going forward wewould keep records of conference calls, I would differentiate that.If there's a decision or a vote, as you were suggesting, there's aneed to do that. But in the cases in which there is pure discussion,very many of those situations have been where you or others have beenbringing people up-to-date on [matters that involve] confidentialinformation. So, for purely economic information or your telling uswhen you come back from an international meeting what happened there,I would think we'd want to treat that substantially differently.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that is an open question and Igrant that you have a point there. I frankly don't have a position; Icould be persuaded in either direction. I would argue that it is notautomatic that of necessity we would tape and transcribe every singlemeeting. We haven't done that in the past; it has not been thepractice of this Committee to do it in the past and it's a judgmentalquestion as to what is proper and what is not.MR. SYRON. The technical question I have [relates to] whatyou talked about as an approach before. I'd be interested in why youfeel that we want a five-year window, if I can call it that, goingback as compared to a three-year window going forward? It seems to methat there are two considerations. One is that it's hard to say ifthose past discussions can put a chilling effect on this becausethey've already happened. But on the other hand, there are rights topreserve.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's the rights--MR. SYRON. It's the rights issue, okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's the rights issue. As I describedin my letter to Steve Neal, these [raw] transcripts are essentiallyhearsay in the sense that they are transcriptions by individuals ofwhat they heard on the tape. And as we all know, in such situations[words] get garbled and put in different positions. And the personwho [made] the remarks does not have any capability of editing them ormaking certain that the tape was heard [correctly] and checked againstthe transcript. So there is a privacy issue here which I finddisturbing. I've indicated that before this Committee many times andI've indicated that both in public and in letters to Steve Neal.MR. SYRON. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. Most of my questions have been asked but letme ask one follow-up question. In these two proposals, one for theMODs going forward and then the lightly edited transcripts going back,-13-11/16/93you're talking about release to the public, not to the [Congressional]Committee?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is correct. These are decisionsthat in my judgment have to made by this Committee as a result of theresponsibilities that we have under the law. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. In the [briefings] by Virgil andDon, I believe Virgil mentioned that when he was speaking with theArchivist a suggestion made from that quarter was that we use anannotated version of the [raw] transcript. Could one of you explainwhy you feel that a lightly edited version is preferable to anannotated version? I must admit when you described it that I foundmyself rather attracted to the annotated version.MR. MATTINGLY. Well, the annotated copy has the benefit ofpreserving the historical record, but in a marginal note the staff canindicate that this comment may [reflect a transcription] error orsomething because it's obviously not consistent with the rest of thediscussion. A note can be made like that. In a lightly editedtranscript, I'm not sure that the Archivist would allow us to changewhat was actually said [or what the transcriber thought was said]unless it was very obvious from the existing transcript that a mistakehad been made.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. That's exactly why I found theannotated version to have a more attractive aspect.MR. MATTINGLY. We could go through it--VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. It says somebody said something 29years ago that really doesn't appear, in the context, to make muchsense. And we'd say that. Whereas if we lightly edit we cannot--MR. KOHN. Well, I presume we can do a combination of lightlyedited with annotation. But I think an advantage of a lightly editedtranscript is that we can take out some extraneous material, jokes andthe like, and clean up the syntax a little to make it flow better sothat the underlying meaning becomes a little clearer.MR. ANGELL. It's desirable that we appear more intelligentthan we are?MR. KOHN. It's more articulate, Governor Angell.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If the jokes are any good, I don't seeany reason why--MR. MULLINS. They're old jokes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They're old jokes.SPEAKER(?). All jokes are old jokes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry, did you finish?VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Yes.-14-11/16/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. To follow up a bit on Governor Phillip'squestion, we really have two issues before us: How we respond to Mr.Gonzalez and the issue on releasing this to the public. If Iunderstand it, one of your options is to release lightly editedhistorical transcripts to the public. Is it an option to generate theequivalent of a memo of discussion and hold the raw [transcript] 30years? Or is that--MR. KOHN. Going back you mean?MR. HOENIG. Yes, in order not to be releasing even lightlyedited transcripts to the public that could be misinterpreted just sixyears back, could we say we'll prepare memos of discussion going backand we'll hold the raw [transcript] for 30 years. Is that an option?MR. KOHN. Well, my understanding from Virgil is that once werelease the memoranda of discussion, which have all the deliberativematerial in there, we would not be able to fight a FOIA request forthe raw transcripts.MR. HOENIG. Okay, for the raw transcripts. So that's whatgets--MR. MATTINGLY. That would be the issue.MR. HOENIG. I see.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the reason why a memorandum ofdiscussion, which a number of us discussed as a plausible alternative,going back doesn't seem--MR. HOENIG. That's because once we've done that, we'd haveto release the [transcripts], the way it looks under FOIA.MR. MATTINGLY. It would be likely that you would have waivedyour deliberative privilege and you'd have to turn over the rawtranscripts. That's an argument, of course.MR. HOENIG. Okay, and that's not the case with a lightlyedited version? The Archivist is saying that if we release a lightlyedited transcript, then we do not retain the raw [transcript]?MR. MATTINGLY. Right.MR. HOENIG. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Just a follow-up for Virgil along the lines ofGovernor LaWare's question. Does a subpoena imply wrongdoing and, ifso, what wrongdoing are we being accused of?MR. MATTINGLY. No, I think they could delegate authority toissue a subpoena and it would [imply the need for an] investigation asto whether additional legislation is appropriate. It doesn't implythat there has been wrongdoing.-15-11/16/93MR. MCTEER. Why would they investigate us?MR. MATTINGLY. Well, again, I don't know that. Conceivablyone basis would be to determine whether the minutes that the Committeehas released since 1976 accurately reflect what actions transpiredduring the meeting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. In talking about a delay of, say, three to fiveyears, somehow we seem to have gotten to a very short fuse right offthe bat. Is there an argument, if we're going to do this, to use alonger time period before release at least at the outset? I thinkthree to five years gets to be very, very short right at thebeginning.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Going back? Three to five years? Well,I think three years is too short; I was recommending five.MR. KEEHN. Why not ten as a start?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Basically it's a judgment call. I thinkit's a question essentially of what types of FOIA requests we may getand what the Justice Department would be willing to support us on. Myguess is that five years is an easy one and would be more appropriatethan ten. It's strictly a question of [deciding] what the statuteenables us to do.MR. KEEHN. Secondly, if I could, looking ahead: What's oursense of the real interest within the Banking Committee in terms ofmaking a fundamental change here? I must say that out in theDistricts this is an absolute non-issue. I haven't heard--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're talking about the disclosurequestion?MR. KEEHN. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's Chairman Gonzalez who feels verystrongly about it. I assume that there are others in the Committee,but at the hearings where I have been testifying I have not heardanything resembling a groundswell of support. But I really don't knowthat. In other words the issues have not materialized except at thesemost recent hearings. And there weren't enough people who commentedon this for me to derive any reasonable judgment as to where the HouseBanking Committee stood as a group.MR. KEEHN. Does that say, therefore, that if we change ouroperating procedures a bit in [the way] we develop the currentminutes, it's entirely possible that we might not have to make afundamental change in the way we record our proceedings?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure, if we change our operating--MR. KEEHN. To wit: If we don't have a recording, if wedon't have transcripts going forward, we need not necessarily changewhat we do and the way we do it.-16-11/16/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I indicated in my opening remarks, Ithink we can, as a consequence of the discussions that Virgil has hadwith the Archivist and the Department of Justice, successfullymaintain our deliberative processes with an MOD three or more yearsforward and five years or more or, say, just five years going back.If that does not work, if in fact we find that under a regime such asthat or something comparable we cannot maintain an effectivedeliberative process, in my judgment we would not be carrying out ourstatutory requirements to fashion and implement monetary policy. Inthat case, I think it would be incumbent upon this Committee to find ameans by which we are within the law and which enables us to maintaineffective deliberations. The Congress obviously always has thechoice, if it wishes, to construct its own set of rules as to how wedeliberate. We do have the issue of accountability, which I think isimportant for us to meet; but the ultimate choice in that respectwould be Congress's. I think it is we who have the best capability ofmaking a judgment about what the appropriate tradeoff is betweenefficacy of our deliberative process and the making of monetary policyon the one hand and the requirements for accountability in ademocratic society on the other. I say that basically because we havethe most experience in dealing with this. We know how the systemworks; we know where, if we are constrained, the usefulness of ourdiscussions breaks down. At the extreme the issues that we confrontare sufficiently complex that we have over the years been seeking eachother's views. It's not an easy process. I don't think peopleoutside of this Committee understand the nature of the subtleties ofthe process anywhere near as much as we do, and as a consequence theycannot be expected to make an appropriate decision on the level atwhich I think it is really incumbent upon us to make.The Congress has given us the authority to [make thatdecision] within limits and I think we have the responsiblity to dothat. If we take a position in this regard which is perceived to beoutside the realm of what the Congress has conveyed to us as our limitof authority, we probably would confront some form of legislationwhich will override the position that we take. And I must say that'sthe reason why I made the suggestion that I did. In the context ofthe discussions that Virgil has had with the Archivist and the JusticeDepartment, I do think that we should be able to implementsuccessfully what we have to do. I may be wrong on that. If I am, Iwould be very much open to see what changes we would have to make,because our fundamental statutory imperative is the making of monetarypolicy. If we can't do that, the issue of accountability isirrelevant. We have to keep that in mind so that our first order ofbusiness is to make sure that our deliberative processes areprotected. The recommendation that I made [reflects] my judgment,having been here for more than six years, that we could do it. But,as I said, I may be wrong. And when I say that, I mean that if weadopt something of this nature and find two or three meetings down theroad that it is not working, I think we are required to change it.MR. MATTINGLY. Mr. Chairman, just a point of clarification:My understanding of your recommendation is that, going back or goingforward, confidential central bank information and confidentialbusiness information would be redacted from the copy made available tothe public.11/16/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Of course. I'm sorry; I did not makethat point explicitly in my opening remarks but clearly that was myintention. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. And I assume the Archivist agrees that thatwould be appropriate?MR. MATTINGLY. Absolutely.MR. MULLINS. I have several questions. With respect to thesubpoena you mentioned, what does the process in the House require--asimple majority of a quorum?MR. MATTINGLY. Yes.MR. MULLINS. Okay, so what is a quorum?MR. WINN. A majority; [it] would be 26 of the 51.MR. MULLINS. So it's 50 percent, so it takes a little over--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Fourteen members could--MR. MULLINS. It takes a little over a quarter of theCommittee. You mentioned that in the House this subpoena authorityhas been delegated to all committees. In no case has it beendelegated to an individual chairman?MR. WINN. I think there are instances, at least in the past,where committees have delegated to the chairman.MR. MULLINS. Okay.MR. WINN. That is not the current set of rules in the HouseBanking Committee.MR. MULLINS. But in theory, a committee could delegate it tothe chairman?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure, they could delegate to anybody.MULLINS. And what is the procedure in the Senate? Is it thesame?MR. WINN. I'm not clear on that.MR. MULLINS. Okay. Just as a technical point: Have wereceived any correspondence or request for this material from anyother member of Congress or other government officials?MR. KOHN. We have about half a dozen FOIA requests, but--MR. MULLINS. Mostly scholars?MR. KOHN. Scholars who work for American Banker and TheWall Street Journal and--MR. MULLINS. They're interested mostly in '76 and '77?-18-11/16/93MR. KOHN(?). Yes.MR. MULLINS. Okay. In talking with the Archivist, what isthe process in other parts of government where sensitive informationand transcripts are kept routinely, as they are kept presumably by theNational Security Council or the like?MR. MATTINGLY. They are required to turn those transcriptsover to the public unless they can claim--MR. MULLINS. When?MR. TRUMAN. [In] 30 years.MR. MATTINGLY. Upon request.MR. TRUMAN. Thirty years. He's asking about the redactionof material that would be confidential--that relating to foreigngovernments or proprietary information. And that would be redactedfor 30 years, is that true?MR. MATTINGLY. Well, there is a schedule whereby material isturned over to the Archives. It has to be turned over in 30 years.MR. MULLINS. It has to be turned over in 30 years?MR. MATTINGLY. Yes, but--MR. TRUMAN. No later than 30 years?MR. MATTINGLY. Correct.MR. MULLINS. Do we know what the State Department does orwhat the White House does? What is the process in White Housemeetings with senior staff discussing sensitive foreign policy oreconomic matters?MR. MATTINGLY. Well, once it's turned over to the Archives,you can still retain the confidential nature of the information if youcan support that.MR. MULLINS. Okay. Finally, I'd like to explore yourthinking, Mr. Chairman, of going forward with an MOD versus some sortof edited transcript. Of course, we do have a long history of MODsand we would link into that. But I wonder if an edited transcriptdoes not have the sense that it's less sanitized, more dangerous torelease, easier to defend. I suspect that in the National SecurityCouncil's deliberations and the like transcripts exist; that seemsmore like the sort of thing other sensitive parts of government wouldhave whereas an MOD to me sounds a bit more sanitized, safer torelease. It sounds a bit like minutes--not that I think this is a bigdifference--and might be marginally harder to defend when they comeafter us, as they will. Was there any special reason for recommendingan MOD as opposed to something like an edited transcript going forwardif in fact, as I take it, the substance of it would be exactly thesame?-19-11/16/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Frankly, I had thought, but merely fromhearsay, that the MOD was a significantly contracted version of anedited transcript. I found out from the examples that have beenproposed here that that is factually false. The difference is reallyvery negligible; for all practical purposes an MOD has all theinformation that is on the transcript. It's frankly easier to readand in many respects, if the purpose is scholarly, probably is moreuseful to the public. But if you're asking me do I have any strongopinions, that's--MR. MULLINS. So that's not based upon any strong opinion?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No.MR. MULLINS. With the edited transcript we might providesome sense that we're being more forthcoming even though it conveysthe same information as the MOD. Okay, thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I wanted to come back to the MOD and itsrelationship to FOIA. I guess this would be a question for Virgil.Even if the Justice Department agreed with the procedures we intendedto pursue and therefore presumably would defend us in the futureagainst a denied FOIA request, assuming policy or personnel didn'tchange, isn't it likely that we would in fact have a lawsuit? Inother words, if we decided to do an MOD going forward, it seems to methat at some point--sooner or later, and probably sooner--someonewould test that in the courts, whether the lag with respect to itsrelease was three years or five years. We'd have the litigation andultimately be subjected to some judgment in the courts. That's partof the question. The other part of my question is: As the FOMC hasconsidered this in the past, is the only way that we could really besure we would be adequately protected is if we had specificlegislation on that?MR. MATTINGLY. I think that's right. I can't give you anyassurance that some judge--or not a judge so much as the JusticeDepartment--might decide that a five-year lag would be too long undersome circumstances. The only sure protection is legislation.MR. MELZER. One other question, Virgil: If we adopted theMOD procedure going forward, do you think the likelihood of litigationis fairly high?MR. MATTINGLY. I can't make a comment on that. Thepossibility certainly is higher than it is now. But as I indicated inmy comments, I think we have a very strong legal argument that thismaterial is exempted. And the FOIA statute doesn't have a time limitin it. It says that if [the information] is deliberative, it'sprotected forever.MR. TRUMAN. Thirty years.MR. MATTINGLY. Thirty years because of the statute.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.-20-11/16/93MR. LAWARE. It seems to me that we have two separate issueshere. One is how we respond to this [House Banking] Committee requestthrough Chairman Gonzalez. And then if we're going to make thematerial available to that Committee, do we also release that materialto the public on some sort of a schedule retrospectively? Is thatwhat is contemplated here?MR. KOHN. Yes, our--MR. LAWARE. That's certainly something to be considered, isit not?MR. KOHN. Our thought was that whatever the Committeedecided about releasing to the public, the Chairman would write aletter to Chairman Gonzalez saying that the Committee met, decidedthis about releasing to the public, and we assume this takes care ofyour problem. Obviously, this is the Committee's choice, but thethought was that we wouldn't give something to Chairman Gonzalez thatwe weren't releasing to the public at the same time, at least as anopening shot here.MR. LAWARE. Well, let me understand that. Is what is beingproposed that we suggest something that we're going to release to thepublic in the hopes that he will then change his request from uneditedtranscripts and tapes to accept whatever we have proposed?MR. KOHN. Our hopes in that regard weren't very high but wethought that if the Committee had something that could be sold andlooked reasonable that his odds on getting the rest of his Committeeto go along with the subpoena, if he then decided to request it, wouldbe much lower. In effect our letter back to Chairman Gonzalez isreally a letter to the other 50 members of the Committee saying whatour decision was and defending it as reasonable in the circumstances.MR. LAWARE. Yes. And if there is some prurient interest inthese unedited transcripts and tapes retrospectively is that going toprompt them to ask us to share with the [House] Committee uneditedtapes and transcripts prospectively as part of their oversight ofmonetary policy? I understand the rationale in the sometimes opaquelanguage in these letters; it's all under that oversight umbrella. Soif they needed all of this to overlook the historic performance, willthey not insist on having it prospectively?MR. MATTINGLY. Chairman Gonzalez's letter says he wants towork out an agreement on that with this Committee.MR. LAWARE. So it seems to me that that's another issue wehave to address: Not just what we're going to release to the public,possibly in the form of a Memorandum of Discussion, but whether infact there's going to be a demand that we continue to release tapesand transcripts as they are generated in the process of doing theMemorandum of Discussion, regardless of what the Archivist says. [Isay that] because, as I understand you, Congress can ask for anythingit wants.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.-21-11/16/93MR. KELLEY. Virgil, I wonder how much more comfort we mighthave if it were possible to get something in the way of a firmofficial position from the Justice Department relative to FOIA and theArchivist relative to the [Federal] Records Act. You have veryinteresting but very preliminary expressions of opinion from them. Towhat degree do you think we can be comfortable that that's where theywould come out if they were to opine formally. Would they formallyopine at all?MR. MATTINGLY. I think they would not until a lawsuit wasfiled. That was what he said. But I thought the Department ofJustice official we spoke to--Ernie [Patrikis] can speak up--was verypositive that they would defend this Committee on these materials,certainly the recent ones. When I say "recent" I mean five years, ormaybe even longer. But he was very positive on that. Now, that wasbased on our description of--MR. KELLEY. Right.MR. MATTINGLY. So I think our description is accurate.MR. KELLEY. And you feel that's as much as we can getprospectively?MR. MATTINGLY. But that is more than I expected to get.MR. KELLEY. Yes.MR. MATTINGLY. As for the Archivist--Dave Lindsey can speakup--he was more forthcoming than I thought he was going to be aboutour ability to substitute an MOD for these raw transcripts goingforward. He was very positive on that and he was very positive onmaintaining an historical record.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just state this: Clearly, if werun into the type of concerns that Governor LaWare was raising, Ithink it would be appropriate that the [Federal Open Market] Committeerequest a hearing before the [Banking] Committee and try to explain insome detail what it is that we do and why we do it and why it is soimportant for us to [protect] this deliberative process. I don'tsense an inability on our part to carry our case before the Congress,and I think we should not be in any way restrained in our endeavor todo so. So, rather than fail to make our case, I think we should seekCongressional hearings and other public forums because this is a verycrucial issue for this country. It would be a mistake for us not tobe as supportive as we can of our basic underlying procedures, whichhave carried this Committee as far as they have. I must say, as Ihave said before, that I have been very impressed with the way thisCommittee functions; I think it's an extraordinarily efficientCommittee. I have sat on an awful lot of private boards and publicboards, and there is nothing as effective in the deliberative processas this Committee has been in the past six plus years. And I thinkthat is a case we have to make to the House Banking Committee, to theCongress as a whole, and to the public at large because we, more thananyone else, know the implications of a deterioration in thatdeliberative process. We are the central bank and we have to speakfor ourselves. There is no one else out there who is sufficiently-22-11/16/93involved, except at the periphery, with what we do and we must be veryforthcoming in addressing this particular subject. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. No, I don't have any comment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions? The floor is nowopen for individuals to express their views. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Well, I'm glad that the opportunityto speak came immediately after the Chairman's declaration of our needto go public and fight for our cause. It seems to me that what isreally at issue here is the ability of the Federal Reserve to makemonetary policy and execute it properly. And that ability to carryout our most basic responsibility has to be protected. We cannotcontinue to fight a battle in which we get letters of evermorepejorative tone released to the press and then we reply as gentlepersons. I think the right place to take our arguments is to thepublic, and asking the House Banking Committee for a hearing is theright place to start. Beyond that it may be necessary for theChairman and others of us to seek opportunities to speak out on thissubject. It really seems to me that our ability to carry out our mostbasic mission is what is seriously in question.As to the specifics of the Chairman's recommendationregarding [what we should do] going forward and going back, I thinkthere could be a modest benefit to going in the direction of an editedtranscript instead of a Memorandum of Discussion simply because itdoes give the impression of being, and in fact is, marginally moreforthcoming and therefore beneficial to us. Going back, I think thatthe five-year period is appropriate largely because of the rights ofindividuals who did not know that their remarks would be made public.Therefore, we should insist as much as we can on the five-year period.And I think the lightly edited transcript is the appropriate form.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And three years going forward?VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Three years going forward.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that we do need to be somewhatforthcoming to Mr. Gonzalez in addition to the three- and five-yearproposal. As we go to the hearing it seems to me important that wecome forward laying some [proposal] on the table [to the effect] thatwe would expect him and his staff to maintain the privacy [of FOMCmaterials provided]. I think we should make a deal before the hearingso it doesn't appear that we're fighting everything and then explainwhy it is that we're asking the Committee to keep [the materials]private.In regard to the future, the Memorandum of Discussion isacceptable to me with a three-year [lag]. I think there's someadvantage of having the organizational improvement [of an MOD] ascompared to the lightly edited transcript. I think a Memorandum ofDiscussion is unacceptable going backward because we don't have allthe members [available] to concur. I would prefer for the past thatwe have both the lightly edited and raw transcripts. Now, when I sayraw, I mean raw redacted according to the General Counsel's-23-11/16/93privileges. And I would presume, Virgil--tell me if I'm incorrect--that references to individuals by name that in a sense weren'tnecessary could be left out. Even in the raw transcript could namesbe left out?MR. MATTINGLY. They could if they invade personal privacy,things like that.MR. ANGELL. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Well, this proposal is basically fine. Thegreatest concern we all have in this is [the possibility of] amisunderstanding with the public and the Congress. This is one ofthese issues. That's the reason I don't have that much concern withsomewhat greater release, done properly. When people see what isactually done it will work to a substantial degree to our benefit.Having said that, going backwards I initially had a preference forthree years but I am quite convinced by your statement. What we'vedone in going back is that we've changed the rules on people. Whenyou change the rules on people, that makes a big difference becausethe real question is whether you should do it at all. That certainlyargues for a five-year period. I would go with a lightly editedtranscript. I like Governor Angell's suggestion of accompanying thatwith the raw transcripts so that people see what has been done. Andgoing forward I think there's a lot to be said for an editedtranscript over an MOD because it has as much information.Unfortunately, what is generating this whole thing is an attitude ofmisplaced suspicion and mistrust, which would make it difficult toprovide an MOD rather than a transcript.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In other words, you'd do a transcriptboth forward and backwards?MR. SYRON. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I have three general points I'd like to make andthen I'll cover my thoughts on what we ought to do. The first pointis that past practice can and should be separated from what we do inthe future. Don made that point and I agree with it. First of all, Ithink the existence of transcripts which have not been used in generalfor any purposes of the FOMC beyond preparation of the policy recordor minutes, depending on what we called them at a point in time,should not require that we continue to tape and transcribe. Secondly,I think the President's new policy with respect to FOIA should causeus to review our future practices. In other words, that is asignificant change; and regardless of what may be going on in terms ofa general legislative debate about FOMC disclosure, that should causeus to review what we're doing. It's unclear to me what the outcome oflitigation would be with respect to an MOD. Even if we were tapingand transcribing, there is the possibility of a FOIA request for tapesand transcripts, which would in effect freeze that process. Now, Iappreciate what Virgil said about the position we have, but we justreally don't know where litigation is going to come out. And we wouldhave that overhanging our deliberative process for some considerable-24-11/16/93time as we fought it out through the courts. So, really, the only wayto protect tapes, transcripts, and so forth going forward is throughlegislation. That's the only way we can be sure that the deliberativeprocess is protected.My second general point is that I think we need to resolvetoday what we want to do with respect to the release of informationabout past meetings. We just have to do that. Because of theimportance of decisions with respect to future meetings we may want toconsider what we do further and decide later, albeit promptly--in mymind certainly no later than the December meeting.My third point is that as a general matter I think it wouldbe desirable from a public information point of view to consider doingsomething in the future which provides greater disclosure withoutadversely affecting the deliberative process. I'll get to thatbriefly at the end.With respect to past meetings, Alan, I favor what yourecommended: lightly edited transcripts with a five-year lag. And Iwould be inclined to release those for 1988 as early in 1994 as wecould and then establish some schedule for release of the earlierones, which would really be determined by the availability of staff toprepare them. And I'd just make those available according to somepredetermined schedule. As people have said, I think they would bemore open than an MOD looking back would be and I think the cost isconsiderably more reasonable. I'd favor review by the Secretariatstaff only in the interest of getting this information out on a timelybasis. And one final point with respect to releasing them with afive-year lag: The precedent of what we did with the old MODs is whatwe ought to look to in terms of setting that timeframe; five yearswould be consistent [with our past practice].With respect to future meetings, I would favor our currentapproach to keeping minutes. Don, I don't know which alternative thisis of yours; I guess it would be your alternative one, the currentminutes with no taping or transcript and with any notes of theSecretariat staff made in connection with preparing the minutesdisposed of on approval of those minutes. That would be, in my view,normal practice for that sort of function. My general view is thatthe FOMC ought to be held accountable for its decisions, not thedetails of its deliberations. And in my view the minutes are morethan adequate in that regard and include details of how individualsvoted. Secondly, our procedure of taping and transcribing is notrequired in any way. In effect, it has only been for the convenienceof the Secretariat staff. And that raises questions that have beentouched on before with respect to retention of these records--tapesand transcripts--under the Federal Records Act. Third, I think tapesand transcripts, as I've said before, would be subject to FOIAlitigation and [would result in] considerable uncertainty overhangingthe Committee for some period of time. Finally, as has been pointedout, tapes and transcripts would be subject to immediate Congressionalsubpoena, which would be a form of oversight that goes well beyond thesemiannual Humphrey-Hawkins testimony and could raise questions infinancial markets of the Fed's independence. Another point on thisapproach, which I think has considerable advantages, is that nolegislation would be required in order to make sure that ourdeliberative process was protected going forward.-25-11/16/93My final point would be, and I touched on this at thebeginning, that I do think in a public information sense we need totake steps to be more open and should consider such things as eitherenhanced minutes or prompt release of the directive in connection withthe approach that I laid out.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, I certainly agree with thegeneral thrust of your recommendations. Going forward I agree withyou that an MOD is the best way to go with a three- to five-year lag.I know there's not a huge difference between an MOD and an editedtranscript but, frankly, I have a fairly strong preference for an MOD.It would eliminate a lot of extraneous commentary and I think it wouldmake the atmosphere here better. And it would in that way minimizethe negative impact on the deliberative process that an editedtranscript might entail. Going backward, for the past, I also agreewith your recommendation. I have the same very strong feeling you doabout the privacy issue. I think of my predecessor and his 20 yearshere. But trying to avoid the release of these transcripts is goingto make it look as if we're trying to hide something. The fact isthat we don't have anything to hide, or at least nothing to hide thatis of lasting significance in my view. The great advantage ofreleasing transcripts is that it makes that point very clearly andemphatically and puts us in a better position to deal with what Ithink is the real threat here, and that is the opportunity that thissituation presents to people who want to paint us as secretive andmanipulative and interested in issues of concern to the few ratherthan the many. We need to act decisively to keep that kind ofsentiment in check because I think that's the central threat andproblem here.As far as the particulars are concerned, again I wouldrelease the transcripts. Along the lines of Governor Angell'srecommendation, I would release both the lightly edited version tomake them intelligible and also the unedited version to make it clearthat we're not using the editorial process to hide anything. As faras the length of the lag time is concerned, I came to the meetingthinking that probably three years was the right amount of time. Yourargument for five years makes some sense to me but, frankly, I'm notsure we would buy that much additional privacy by going to five yearsand three years is a bit more forthcoming. And finally, so far as thereview process is concerned--I think you discussed that briefly in thememo, Don--it would be nice if we take this route to give the peoplewho participated in these meetings an opportunity to make comments andreview them. But I think speed is of the essence; if we're going tobe forthcoming, we need to move quickly. And I don't think we can dothat unless we restrict the review to the FOMC Secretariat, so I wouldgo with that approach.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. Thank you. I like your idea of explaining theposition of the Committee before the Congress and I hope you willpursue that as a way to explain all the dimensions of this. As forthe past, frankly, I think it's wrong ever to release transcripts ofmeetings that people didn't know were being made at the time, but thatdoesn't seem to be an option. So my first choice would be along the-26-11/16/93lines suggested by Tom Hoenig's question that we prepare Memoranda ofDiscussion for the past and release the raw transcripts to theArchives after 30 years. If that doesn't give us protection--if thejudgment is that that's not going to do it--then your proposal onlightly edited transcripts is sort of a third best if that's whatwe're stuck with.Going forward my first choice would be enhanced minutes withno tape and no transcripts, Don's number 2, but frankly I think thechance of getting away with stopping the taping and transcribing nowafter we've been doing it for 17 years or more is not likely to besuccessful. So the question then of Memoranda of Discussion versuslightly edited transcripts released after a lag I think has to bedecided along the lines that Dave Mullins suggested, as to which oneis most likely to withstand protection without legislation. And ifthat comes down to the side of lightly edited I would favor that;otherwise I would favor Memoranda of Discussion. Certainly if we hadlegislation, I would prefer Memoranda of Discussion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think it's very important aswe have this discussion to keep in mind what you've already indicatedand that is that the thrust of what we're talking about today is theability of this Committee to formulate and implement monetary policy.That is an activity under the law that has been delegated to us by theCongress and if we were to fail in any way to keep the deliberativeprocess and, therefore, impede our ability to make monetary policy wewould be failing very, very severely in our responsibilities under thelaw and to the public. Congress did not delegate this authority to anindividual member of Congress. And, if I might say, in my experiencein the Federal Reserve System, I think one of the mistakes that wehave made has been being far too forthcoming and far too amenable onthe whole to satisfying the particular requests of individualCongressmen. I certainly understand the political necessity to dothat at times, but when essential issues are involved I think ourresponsibility is to the Congress and to the duly delegated committeesof the Congress and not to individual members. But having said that,if whatever the decision turns out to be is not satisfactory to[members of] the public, I think we ought to endure the defense, if wecan, of a FOIA suit and take that on. And we ought also to take ourcase to the Committee and to the Congress generally and to the public.In other words, whatever we decide, we ought to draw a line in thesand and not go beyond that if we possibly can.On the particulars of the proposal, I think the lightlyedited version of the transcripts going back with a five-year lag isquite appropriate and I would support that. I don't think it'snecessary to have an MOD. And going forward, I have favored an MOD inthe past and I so indicated that to Chairman Gonzalez in at least oneletter. I think they do have value. And while there are somedifficulties in terms of resources in preparing those MODs, I think itwould be appropriate to do that. I'm not sure that a three-year lagis really long enough; my preference would be for a five-year lag.And, if I'm not mistaken, I believe that was the lag with the previousMODs, so I think we do have some precedent to rely on.-27-11/16/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Actually, I might say that the lastversion of the lag under the 1984 bill, which as you know never gotthrough the Congress, was three years, was it not?MR. KOHN. Five.MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, the '84 bill would have releasedtranscripts that were between four and five years old.SPEAKER(?). Transcripts or MODs?MR. WINN. I'm sorry, MODs between four and five years old.The '79 bill was--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh, it was the '79 bill which was--MR. WINN. The '79 bill would have released them betweenthree and four years.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, as several other people have commented, Istart from the position that we really have nothing to hide. So interms of what we release, I don't see a lot of danger, at least goingback, aside from privacy considerations. Going forward, of course, weget into the issues of the deliberative process and I'll comment onthat, but in general I have favored Memoranda of Discussion. Inlistening to the conversation this morning, I think what we're talkingabout in looking at the distinction between MODs versus lightly editedtranscripts is really a question of quality. I think the quality ofthe Memoranda of Discussion is going to be higher and, therefore, thedocuments are in some sense more useful. [It's higher quality] versusthe openness, or at least the appearance of [greater] openness, if weconfine ourselves to lightly edited transcripts. And I must say themore I look at that, the less the issue seems to be very clear to me.So I can live with either alternative going back. And I'd have noproblem if we wanted also to provide the raw transcripts, again withthe appropriate lags. People who wanted to do that kind of comparisoncould then see what [editing] work was done. Going forward, I think--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And on the timing going back?MR. STERN. Well, five years or more as far as I'm concerned.I think that's sort of a tactical question. Going forward, again Istarted with a presumption in favor of Memoranda of Discussion, but Imust say I don't feel the distinction between those and the lightlyedited transcripts is all that great. I have a mild preference forthe Memorandum just because I think the quality of the document ishigher.I don't think this is the right time, frankly, to change ourprocedures with regard to taping and transcripts. In a way I thinkthat would be self-defeating in the sense that while we're tryingessentially to be more open, that would give the appearance at leastthat we were becoming less open. [The elimination of taping andtranscripts] may be worthy of consideration down the road, but at themoment I don't think that's the way to go. And I do think, though weought not try to resolve this today, that we should consider the-28-11/16/93question once again of when we release the directive or the policydecision because, as I consider that issue, I don't think our currentpractices are necessarily optimal.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And going forward [you favor a lag of]three years?MR. STERN. Or more.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I fully subscribe to theproposition of making available to the [Banking] Committee editedtranscripts, eliminating the confidential information that we wouldfind sensitive. I'm less concerned about the time lag. It seems tome three years on the retrospective part is adequate. And though wehaven't addressed this specifically, I don't think it's practical togo back and try to get every living person who ever participated toreview something that they may have said 15 years ago. So I would letthe staff do the editing. And I don't think I could possibly justifyin my own mind trying to do a Memorandum of Discussion of all of thoseancient meetings because the person attempting to do so simplywouldn't have the proper environment in which to interpret what wasbeing said.On the [going forward] side I strongly favor the Memorandumof Discussion simply for accuracy. You can read, as we did in theexample that was circulated, the kind of gibberish that one of thosetranscripts contains. It's almost impossible to tell what individualswere really trying to say in any given speech. And that leads me notto be in favor of releasing both an edited and a raw transcriptbecause it seems to me that then somebody can raise the question ofwhether we interpreted that bit of gibberish correctly. So, I thinkthe edited transcripts retrospectively are right; and prospectively inorder to eliminate inaccuracies the Memorandum of Discussion should beused, which would be subject to the review of the participants. Andas I understand current Archival practice, we would be allowed todiscard the tapes and the transcripts from which that was prepared.And until that is challenged and found inoperative as far as a courtwas concerned, I would think we would be adequately protected in usingthat procedure on a prospective basis. And I hope that kind ofprocedure would satisfy the [Banking] Committee and not encourage themto try to seek our working materials, our working papers if you will,on a prospective basis.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I missed it; your going forward time[lag] is what?MR. LAWARE. Three.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Three years for the past?MR. LAWARE. One would be satisfactory to me but I sense thatI'm way out of line with everybody else on that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So you have three and three. Is thatright?-29-11/16/93MR. LAWARE. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I have just a couple of general points. We'vetalked a lot about the deliberative process this morning and howimportant it is for the quality of the decisionmaking process. Ithink it's important to underscore that this deliberative processevolved over a long period of time; it was not made in a day or ameeting or one generation of Open Market Committee people. And onecan undermine that and weaken that process much more quickly than ittook us to get it to the point where it is. So, we all have to looknot just at our short-run issues but also at this longer-run view ofour effectiveness.The second general point is that the deliberative process isnot unique to the Federal Reserve. The Executive Branch and otherindependent agencies have to have an effective deliberative processfor every major public policy decision. I make this generalstatement, and I'm sure others are more factually aware of it, but Isuspect that the kinds of things we are talking about today if theywere applied to the rest of the public policy decisionmaking units inthis city throughout the Executive Branch would give them a great dealof trouble also in carrying out the kinds of quality decisions thatthey have to make. I think one can make the case that central bankingis different, but we don't want to be different on the side that wehave less of an environment to be deliberative than [others making]public policy. And I think it would be helpful to us if we comparedthe practices elsewhere in Washington to our own; we may not be asmuch of an outlier as we think we are. And the way that we are movingmay in fact result in our short-changing our ability to deliberatecompared to other agencies.Having said that, we have to deal with the [issues at] hand.In general what you proposed, Mr. Chairman, makes sense to me. Ithink going back five years with a lightly edited transcript is theway to go. I would not go back and ask everybody who has been a partof this to sign off. That would be a time-consuming and probably notvery effective process. The document ought to say that the staff didit and used their best judgment; there may be errors in it, but hereit is. And we ought to move on releasing these as quickly as we can,given the resources.Going forward, again I think your general proposition makessense. Nevertheless, when I went back for the first time in a longtime and actually reread parts of a Memorandum of Discussion and thencompared it to the lightly edited transcript, there was not a greatdeal of difference. My recollection of the Memoranda of Discussionwas that they were somewhat shorter and somewhat more summarized, butafter just going back and reading one it seems to me there isn't a lotof difference. And while I can support the Memoranda of Discussiongoing forward, since a lot of our problem is one of perception--and wealmost surely will have to defend this in a FOIA suit at some time inthe future--I wonder if we ought to err marginally on the side of moreopenness. So I could easily accept, and in fact have a marginalpreference for, going with an edited transcript instead of theMemorandum of Discussion going forward. But I don't feel that-30-11/16/93strongly about it and I can certainly accept your proposition ifthat's the majority view of the Committee.One other point: This is not the time to consider it, butgoing forward I think this Committee ought to keep a very open mindabout the kinds of minutes that we now put out--whether they ought tobe enhanced and how they could be enhanced. I also think we ought tokeep an open mind about the schedule on which we formally release ourdecisions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I would start by perhaps echoing alittle of what President Boehne said. Whatever proposal we comeforward with, if it is not accepted we should take the opportunity topresent our case again in a hearing before the full Committee. Ithink it needs to be reiterated that we are indeed the most opencentral bank in the world and that we do release very detailed minutesnow. I don't think that is appreciated as much as it perhaps shouldbe.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I tried to make that point at thehearings.MR. HOENIG. I understand that. And I'd say that if what wepropose gets no acceptance whatever, we should take the opportunity topresent our case again before the whole Committee and reiterate thosepoints. We just absolutely have to. It's very important to show howopen we are and how detailed our minutes are. What is happening, andwe can see it now, is the very beginnings of disrupting the process.What one may say in an open discussion, what may be a speculativegesture for discussion purposes, is likely to be taken out of contextif this information is released quickly after a meeting. So, I thinkthat's very important.As for your proposals then, given the answers to thequestions that have been asked, I see that we probably must go backand release lightly edited transcripts as you are suggesting with theproper redactions and so forth. I favor five years minimum going backbecause there are [issues] of privacy here. And there is the factthat very detailed minutes have been released in the past. Goingforward, appearance is an issue; and if there is not a big differencebetween Memoranda of Discussion and lightly edited transcripts,perhaps lightly edited is a better way. However, the Memorandum ofDiscussion is fine with me. I feel very strongly that [the lag]should be five years, not three years, because the longer the timeperiod the less disruptive it will be to the process, which is soimportant. That's why I would go for the five years.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Somewhat along thelines of Jerry Jordan's comments, I believe that we have a rathersignificant obligation to current and past members of the Committee.And that leads me in terms of the past meetings to Memoranda ofDiscussion and a five-year lag. However, I certainly wouldn't beagainst lightly edited transcripts; I just have a preference for theMemoranda knowing full well that they would be quite expensive to-31-11/16/93provide. But I think we do have a special obligation to people whodidn't realize that this would ever see the light of day even in alightly edited fashion. In terms of how that would be constructed, Ithink it's only practical that the Secretariat staff have anoverwhelming share of the responsibility but I would hope that in someinstances where there might be a need they could consult withparticipants who are currently in the Federal Reserve System if thereis a real question as to what was meant by a particular comment.With regard to future meetings, I must admit that I found theenhanced minutes to be quite interesting. One of the things itclearly does is give accountability, and I thought accountability wasthe major issue. The other thing I like about it is that it seems tome a pretty low-cost way to deal with this accountability issue. Thisis [an option] I hadn't thought about much until I got Don's memo; Ihad a short discussion with him [after] that and I find it attractive.If that were rejected, my second alternative is the Memorandum ofDiscussion and my preference would be for a five-year lag if that werethe case.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's pretty clear that we are going tobe moving on through lunch and into the afternoon before we getthrough, so why don't we take our regular 11:00 a.m. break at thispoint.[Coffee break]MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, proceeding along as we have, Icertainly concur with what I've been hearing from virtually everyonethat it's time to be pro-active. I think the regime that we are undernow and have been under has been the best way to make public policy.But I'm afraid that I have come to the conclusion that that's notviable any more, given the evolution of FOIA and the understandings asto what FOIA means. So looking at what might be done, first of allfor the past meetings I concur with your proposal and I don't thinkthere's anything further that I can add to what has already been saidabout that.As for going forward, I prefer alternative number 4, whichprovides for the lightly edited transcript. Substantively I don't seea great deal of difference between a lightly edited transcript and aMemorandum of Discussion. I see some moderate advantages anddisadvantages to each but nothing compelling either way. But in myjudgment I am afraid that a Memorandum of Discussion type document isjust not as acceptable as it was in the past. It should be perfectlyacceptable but I'm not sure that it is. We live in a somewhatdifferent age than we did in the '70s. I regret it. We live in anera of suspicion of government. Appearance has become enormouslyimportant even to the detriment of substance in many cases, which Ithink is enormously regrettable and not warranted but nevertheless isthe case. And I am afraid that today's reader will wonder in the caseof the Memorandum of Discussion if he's not getting a little spin andhe will be uncertain that he is receiving [an account of] theproceedings with full accuracy. Now, I'm perfectly comfortable myselfthat they would be [accurate]. I don't have the slightest doubt aboutthat. But if we are going to be forthcoming, and I think we must be,we would be more satisfactorily forthcoming to go the route of thelightly edited transcripts. Consequently I would prefer that for that-32-11/16/93reason. I would have a strong preference for a lag of five years overthree for reasons that President Hoenig and others have expressed.But if we have to go to three, I don't think that would necessarily bea deal-breaker.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I'm certainly more concerned aboutwhat we do going forward than what we do about the records of previousmeetings, and I certainly hope that nothing we do with regard to theexisting transcripts is going to affect our [deliberative] processadversely. I must say, as kind of an aside, that I have a group ofpeople--some ten people or so--that I talk to before I come down tothe FOMC meetings. I sent each of them a copy of my [October 19]testimony after I got back just so they'd be aware of what was goingon. And in my calls this time, getting ready for this meeting, I mustsay that one of the conversations turned out to be very different. Itwas with a man who runs a very large manufacturing company in ourDistrict. Normally we have a 15 to 20 minute conversation; this timeit was about 5 to 6 minutes. And as I went through that process Ijust had a feeling that maybe he had talked to a lawyer and cameforward with quite a different message. So, I think there is a riskin this that the information we get and the way we use it is going tohave an impact on the way that we develop policy.With regard to the existing transcripts, I would favor thelightly edited transcripts. Clearly I would state here, and itdoesn't have to be repeated, that all the confidential informationshould certainly be deleted from them. I'd prefer to have the staffdo it as opposed to going to the principals; I think it's just easierto have the staff go through them and clean them up. I raised thequestion about timing earlier. If we start off with a short time,it's not going to get longer; they're always going to chop it down.I'd prefer starting at longer than five years, but if we got to fiveyears on the existing transcripts I think that would be okay.Going forward, I would far prefer the current procedure. Imust say that I think the current minutes are a very detailed,excellent record of what has taken place, what has been said, and whatinformation we are looking at. They are certainly more detailed thanthe minutes of most other meetings that all of us are familiar with.And it seems to me that if we move away from that, it's going to havean effect on the way that we develop policy. So I would prefer Don'salternative number one. I would cease the recording and I would ceasethe transcripts. I would rely on greater secretarial support toproduce the minutes. It's probably going to mean that we're all goingto have to work a little harder in cleaning them up, but that's theway it is. A couple of people have mentioned that the timing of adecision to cease our recording and transcripts now would be awkward;I don't think it would be at all. After all, we are having a meetingin which we are discussing the process. In the years I have been herewe have never had this kind of full discussion. It seems to me onlyreasonable that as a result of it, it's very likely that we would makea change. And this is the change that I think would be appropriate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're staying with the existing minutesand---33-11/16/93MR. KEEHN. I'm staying with the existing minutes, norecording, no transcript.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Looking backward, I could live with yoursuggestion for lightly edited transcripts. But I think it's importantfor us to be as forthcoming as possible and I believe providing rawtranscripts with some notation on the side that there are some obviousdifficulties here and there and so forth might be perceived as a bitmore forthcoming.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's as distinct from lightly editedwith annotation?MR. MCTEER. Yes. Let people see the garbled stuff; let themsee how incomplete the raw transcripts are.MR. SYRON. Both or one?MR. MCTEER. One.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So you want a raw, annotated transcript?MR. MCTEER. Raw, annotated would be my preference.Primarily because Chairman Gonzalez asked for it, I'd be inclined togo back only three years for protection rather than five, although Iwould personally prefer five. I think we've got to be as forthcomingas we can be. And looking forward, I rather agree with what GovernorKelley said. I don't think there's a lot of substantive differencebetween a Memorandum of Discussion and an edited transcript, but Ithink the edited transcript would be perceived as an improvement overpast practices and as more forthcoming. And I think it could beadvertised as more forthcoming than pre-1976 [practices]. And inorder to diffuse the other issue, I still believe that it would behelpful to combine whatever we do with an early announcement of thedecision of the outcome of the meetings. These are shadings ofpreference; I'd be willing to go along with your recommendation in thespirit of consensus.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. Well, with respect to the past transcripts, Imust say that I have considerable discomfort with changing the rulesof the game for all of those people who sat around this table. So mypreference is no release, but I take it that that's not sustainable.Assuming that it's not sustainable, I'd go with the lightly editedoption, and as a second choice raw transcripts, annotated. I'd havethe Secretariat review it and state that it might contain errors. I'dgo with a five-year delay because of privacy [concerns].Going forward, I would prefer the minutes the way that we aredoing them and could see some enhancement of them. But I could livewith an MOD, which I have a slight preference for over the lightediting. I'd go for a three-year delay. I also think that we're intothis tit-for-tat, going back and forth with these letters, and that itwould be good to seek hearings so that the only form of discussion isnot letters back and forth.-34-11/16/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I must say that I've become quitecynical about the process. I think we've been negotiating withourselves; there's no one on the other side of the table where peopleon the other side of the table refuse to [bind] themselves. Thecourt's decisions can be overturned by a decision by the President andthe Attorney General. So my basic suggestion would be to do whateveryou think is best. I think it's entirely a tactical call. I thinkit's tragic that the rules can be changed and people's rights can bereversed ex post facto; that's my most important concern. In thatregard I would prefer that the tapes never be released. Failing that,I would prefer 30 years; failing that, I'd prefer 29 years. My 26thchoice would be 5 years. How does one function in a world where thereare no property rights and laws can be changed willy-nilly? I wouldnote that in Chairman Gonzalez's letter he did not necessarily stressthe process; he wanted the results of the meetings out earlier. Ireally think that is what is key [for him]. There's a good reason whywe value the process of how we got there, and I think that's importantfor us to protect. They value the results. I think if they had theresults they wouldn't give a fig how we arrived at them and no onewould bother to read through 150 pages of unedited transcripts. Iwould suggest, therefore, giving them the raw transcripts with a five-year delay. I think the key to getting out of this mess is that wereally have to change when we release our decision.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Going forward?MR. LINDSEY. Five years.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry, I thought that was the past;I missed it.MR. LINDSEY. Five for both.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Five for both?MR. ANGELL. And what's the form going forward?MR. LINDSEY. Raw transcripts. If you want to have thisannotation and what was the term--recision--to take out?SPEAKER(?). Redaction.MR. LINDSEY. Redaction. Yes, so redact and annotate. Butif anyone can go past a hundred and so pages of that raw transcript,more power to them.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Most everything has been said, but I think thekey objective is to try to create a situation going forward which doesnot compromise the deliberative process. I don't think the optionsare very attractive, but I thought I'd put it through one last realitycheck just so we're aware of the consequences of what we're doing. AsI see it, going forward, it's unrealistic to believe that either anMOD or edited transcripts with attribution of views can be protected.Even with legislation--and we've talked about that--it can't be-35-11/16/93protected from Congress. Especially when we start to raise ratesCongressional critics can subpoena it. We've seen it even with thelegislative protection on examination reports. There are criminalpenalties if examiners release information; Congress can get it. Andby the way when [the subpoena] happens, I think the objective will beto identify the agitators. And then I think it's not unrealistic toexpect that members of Congress might write letters to individualCommittee members who expressed strong views and perhaps call them totestify; they will basically zero in and apply pressure.Obviously, I think this would do very substantial harm to thedeliberative process. Even at the Board we have open and closedmeetings now and the quality of the process is quite different just asit would be here, I suspect. The quality here would change, even ifit didn't change immediately. It would just take one of theseepisodes. The future is a long time and I think this is quite certainto happen. I feel safe in saying it's quite certain to happen becausethe future is a long time and I can't be disproved! If you thinkabout it, first of all the character of some of these [Congressional]committees is changing through time, and changing in a way which Ithink makes it more likely or easier to get a subpoena. And if onethinks about the rate scenario we might be facing in the near-termfuture, much less what the Fed went through in the late '70s and early'80s, as soon as we start doing MODs or edited transcripts for releasegoing forward basically the deliberative process is put at risk. Andthe die is cast when that happens. It's very difficult to try to puta stop to it once it gets going; and sooner or later it will becompromised, although I suppose we can try to fight.Is there any way to avoid this? Ideally I would like aprocess in which we're not harboring secrets because I think theharboring of secrets in our files--documents which are kept secret foryears--is an irresistible attraction to political opportunism. Itgives us the bad image of having things to hide. And there may be nopolitically feasible way to avoid this. My first preference, clearly,is to have a process of extensive minutes--enhanced minutes whichcapture the full discussion, including all the issues and all thearguments but without attribution. And I'd release it immediately,six weeks after the meeting, or whatever time it takes to produce it.I think this could be managed under the Federal Records Act.Basically we would have no taping but we would have note-takers. Thenote-takers also would have to avoid giving attribution. Now, in thepolitical process when you compare that--basically the full discussion[in the form of enhanced minutes without attribution] produced veryquickly--with an MOD and the promise of a full discussion withattribution later, it seems to me the only [significant] difference isthe attribution. And the only reason why one would prefer theattribution is to bust open the process and find out who's doing whatearly on. And that certainly may be the objective of some of ourharshest critics. But it's not clear to me that the bulk of Congresswould favor that, especially because I've seen very little interest inthis issue.Now, maybe it's unfeasible to try to do that given where weare today, but at least we ought to consider the stakes. Given thestakes, it seems to me it might be worth a try. Essentially we haveto believe what we're doing now is sufficient or else we wouldn't havebeen doing it all this time. So one consideration is: Shouldn't we-36-11/16/93try to enhance that to have a shot at least at a sustainable processgoing forward instead of going with an option which I think foreverputs the deliberative process at risk? I am willing to accept thatthis may not be feasible. I must say it's unfortunate that we seem tobe willing to do this in response not to a broad-based Congressionalcriticism or public outcry on these issues but in response essentiallyto the harangues of very few critics. That's not a healthy precedent.Nonetheless, I am willing to accept reluctantly the summary judgmentthat we have no chance of protecting the process. But we ought to gointo it with our eyes open because once we start this process, itseems to me highly likely that sooner or later it will be busted open.And then I think the process will be damaged. I also would supportconsideration of a change in the timing of the release of thedirective. I think [the delayed release] does us much greater publicand political harm in terms of perceptions than possibly its value. Ithink it's time to reweigh those pluses and minuses.Now, if the enhanced minutes idea is simply not feasible, Iwould prefer for the past just edited transcripts with [a lag of] atleast five years. For the future I generally agree with what a numberof people, including Tom Hoenig, Ed Boehne, Mike Kelley, and BobMcTeer have said. I don't see a lot of difference between an MOD andan edited transcript. It's an issue of quality versus the ability todefend the thing. In terms of quality, maybe I don't have enoughexperience with an MOD to recognize its superior quality. I wouldn'tfeel strongly, but I don't see why we would want to differentiateourselves from these other agencies by having an MOD. And I do thinkat the margin that an edited transcript would be easier to defend. Iwould prefer to try to defend it for five years rather than three.Again, I don't see why we can't make this--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry, are you talking past orforward?MR. MULLINS. Forward and past [I'd favor] five years. Ithink we ought to link it to the same sorts of considerations thatmust be weighed in similar discussions with respect to foreign policyissues and other issues. If it's a transcript of a meeting, it seemsto me that we ought to be able to defend something like five years. Icould live with three, but I think we have to be realistic about it:It will be three until the going gets tough and then it will beimmediate. And then I think we have a real problem especially whenone looks around at how other central banks operate. It's anunfortunate situation we're in. I would be willing to go along with,and would have a marginal preference for, the edited transcripts goingforward.MR. PARRY. Could I ask a question?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure.MR. PARRY. In terms of your preference for the enhancedminutes you stressed non-attribution.MR. MULLINS. Yes.-37-11/16/93MR. PARRY. What about the wrinkle that Don put on it that atthe end, I presume, there would be some accountability in terms of thedecision that is made so that--MR. MULLINS. Well, my view on attribution is that if youwant attribution, you dissent. But--MR. PARRY. Well, I guess you had some discussions withpeople and Congressmen--MR. KOHN. No, the attribution idea was not from thediscussion with Congressmen; the attribution idea really came from theBoard's current minutes. And also the notion of accountability--MR. ANGELL. Do we have current minutes?MR. KOHN. Yes.MR. ANGELL. With attribution?MR. KOHN. Yes. Now, for the discount rate, for example, Ithink those minutes are released with a longer lag than the--MR. PARRY. Oh, from the Board's current minutes. I see.MR. KOHN. The Board's current minutes, I'm sorry. And thereare concurring statements in those minutes when people vote in favorbut differ on the reasoning. It doesn't happen very often.MR. MULLINS. Yes, any time anyone wants attributionthemselves it seems to me they can dissent, have a concurringstatement, etc., etc.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We've never had concurring statements.MR. SYRON. We've never had concurring statements at theFOMC.MR. MULLINS. Yes, I know, we haven't; but we have at Boardmeetings.MR. SYRON. Mr Chairman, can I ask an information question?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure.MR. SYRON. I must say, I'm sort of intrigued by somethingthat David said here and it's an information question. It's ajudgment question for you, I guess. Suppose in the relatively nearfuture, [and by that I mean] very near, we were to say that we aregoing to do two things or a package of things. One would be that wewould do something on this notion of enhanced minutes. I might callthem something different than enhanced minutes; I'm trying to come upwith a new term of art. And if we were to combine that with immediatedisclosure any time the Committee acted on the directive--[I stress]"acted," not just going asymmetric--if we were to do this prettyquickly with the kind of lags that David talked about, I must say Ihadn't thought about this at all, do you think there's a chance thatthat would significantly change things? [Would it be viewed as] an-38-11/16/93offering where we would seem to be coming forth with quite a lot andwould it give us the ability to do away with keeping things whichinappropriately could be subpoenaed and--MR. MULLINS. One issue is whether it would satisfy aparticular critic, and my guess is it would not. But a broaderquestion is would it essentially satisfy FOIA--MR. SYRON. That's the question I'm asking.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I must say, I'm not as pessimisticabout this as Governor Mullins. We are confronted with an immediateproblem, which is essentially the transcripts, that has to beresolved. I think we've got to come to grips with how we handleourselves in the future, and I am not of the opinion that if we dosomething now and it's not working the way we want, that we can'tchange it. Remember, nobody here is talking about [releasing] tapesor transcripts immediately. If it turns out that we are unable tohold onto our deliberative process, I think it is essential that wechange [our procedures]. And that would be a unilateral change. Itis something that does not require legislation. My own view is thatlegislation is not going to turn out to be necessary. Frankly, thereason that I have argued the way I have is that I happen to thinkit's the appropriate policy. I had that view before the transcriptissue came up. So, I personally am not responding to any of ourrecent problems with the House Banking Committee. I just think it'sgood policy to do something about the way we [make informationavailable]. Frankly, I hadn't focused at all on the past transcriptsbecause I thought they were FOIA-protected as staff operations and itnever entered my mind. But moving forward to do something which ismore forthcoming is something I myself have been supportive of forquite a long time. I have problems with the immediate release ofminutes because I do think that's real stuff and their immediaterelease would in my view fundamentally alter the way we do business.But I must tell you I can't get overly excited about the question of[whether to release] transcripts three, four, or five years out.That's because basically the business cycle lasts three or four yearsand it's hardly likely that anything we're saying [currently] is goingto get compromised by positions we took in an earlier period.But let me just say that the most important issue here isthat I'm not sure how Congress is going to behave one way or theother. David may be right; it may be getting worse. I'm not surethat is necessarily the case. But the point that I would raise[relates to] the presumption that whatever we do--aside from what wedo with the historic transcripts--once we do it we're locked inconcrete. I don't think we ought to view whatever it is we do goingforward as locked in concrete because these laws are evolving. TheArchivist is evolving, the Justice Department is evolving. It mayturn out that presumptions relevant to this are inappropriate. And Iwould have no hesitancy myself to argue for change even if it's sixmonths from now or three months from now. So I don't see that we haveto be judging [anything] at this point other than the necessity underall conditions of protecting the deliberative process, which I hope isthe unanimous view of the people around this table. Aside from that,which is our number one unquestioned priority, how we do it isvariable. And in my judgment the recommendation I made solves it formy purposes. Would I like enhanced minutes? I would say that in the-39-11/16/93event we cannot hold our confidentiality with tapes and transcripts, Iwould very readily go to enhanced minutes with no tape, because Ithink that would be necessary. I don't think we'd have any choice butto move in that direction. But I don't see that as a highly likelyoutcome at this point. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I agree with the thrust of your arguments. ThisCommittee has a lot of capability to maintain a deliberative processeven if it doesn't seem exactly ideal. I can't imagine, whateverhappens, that we're going to let ourselves change that much.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. My impression basically, knowing thepeople around this table, is that they may start to become hesitantbut they're going to be unable to maintain it. [Laughter]MR. ANGELL. But we can go in more directions than one and[the differences in] one alternative versus the other alternatives arenot that significant. And I agree with you that changes can be madeif they need to be made. But I do believe that we need to decidetoday what we're going to do. The longer we go without deciding, themore it's going to appear that somebody else is pulling our chain.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Absolutely.SEVERAL. We all agree on that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me [move toward a decision]. Eventhough I've taken extensive notes here--. [Laughter] It would betough to write a transcript, but they would actually be usable. Wehave a number of different issues on the table. And the questionbasically is [how to proceed]. If they were all fundamentallyindependent, then as good mathematicians we could vote on them one ata time. But, for example, on the issue of [what we do] going back, inanybody's mind is the choice of raw transcripts or edited transcriptsa function of the timeframe or the judgment on the length of timebefore we would make them [available]?MR. ANGELL. No.SEVERAL. No.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I thought not. So what I can do is askfor preferences. Well, it's a little more complex going forward, solet me start with the historical setup. I'll ask first that weliterally go around the table and have individuals respond to a firstchoice and "could accept" type question. We're talking now about theraw transcript with annotation, a lightly edited transcript with orwithout annotation--MR. ANGELL. And both.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. --releasing both, and Memoranda ofDiscussion. So how many is that?SPEAKER(?). That's four.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's four [choices].-40-11/16/93MR. LAWARE. Are you talking retrospectively?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Retrospectively.MR. ANGELL. No one mentioned MODs going backward, did they?MR. SYRON. Yes, it has been mentioned.MR. KELLEY. Going back?MR. ANGELL. Well, by only two people I believe.MR. BERNARD. Yes, by some.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is that acceptable? Okay. It's easierto go down [my list]. Vice Chairman, can I ask for a quick sentence?VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. My first choice would be lightediting without annotation and my second choice would be the rawtranscript with annotation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. My first choice is releasing both [lightlyedited and raw transcripts] with redactions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, redacting is for all of them.That goes without [saying].MR. ANGELL. Right. So my first choice is both; my secondchoice is the raw transcripts.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. My first choice is light editing withoutannotation but with a note on the [cover] page that says this was doneby the staff and it may or may not be accurate. My second choicewould be a raw transcript with some annotation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. My first choice would be lightly editedtranscripts without annotation; my second choice is raw transcriptswith annotation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. My first choice is lightly edited transcripts;my second choice would be [releasing] both raw and lightly editedtranscripts.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. My first choice would be lightly editedtranscripts; my second choice would be lightly edited transcripts withannotation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.-41-11/16/93MR. LINDSEY. My first choice is raw transcripts withannotation; and lightly edited is fine.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. First choice is annotated raw transcripts;second choice is lightly edited.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. My first choice would be [releasing] both; andI could accept either raw or lightly edited.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. First choice would be lightly edited; secondchoice would be [releasing] both.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. First choice would be lightly edited and secondchoice would be raw transcripts with annotation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. My first choice would be [releasing] both; mysecond choice would be raw transcripts with annotation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. My first choice is lightly edited transcriptswithout annotation and my second choice is raw transcripts withannotation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. My first choice is lightly edited withoutannotation; my second is raw with annotation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. My first choice would be lightly edited without,and my second raw with, annotation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Lightly edited is my first choice; my secondchoice is raw with annotation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I guess my first is the Memorandum of Discussionand my second is lightly edited.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. My first choice would be both and my secondchoice would be raw, annotated.-42-11/16/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The consensus is lightly edited. It'sunclear as [to the issue of annotation]. Let me put it to you thisway: I assume that the question of annotation is a secondary issuerelative to the other. So it is lightly edited and what I'd like todo is get a show of hands on annotated or--MR. ANGELL. Well, I guess in terms of the count we have amultiple choice here and we ought to boil it down to the two highestand have a vote-off on the two highest.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, when you start to do that itbothers me--MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, are you going to be negotiatingwith Chairman Gonzalez on this?MR. ANGELL. Well, why?MR. LINDSEY. We're just going to make a decision and then--MR. SYRON. That's what we should do.MR. ANGELL. I mean multiple choice voting--. You reallyneed to find out among the two highest choices--MR. LAWARE. We have a majority for one choice though.MR. ANGELL. Listen, Robert's Rules of Order provides foralways determining a majority; you can't do anything without amajority.MR. LAWARE. Well, if you have a majority--MR. ANGELL. But you don't have a majority first choice forlight editing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, we do.MR. LAWARE. Yes, we do.MR. FORRESTAL. Yes.MR. ANGELL. Well, what was the count?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Amongst the members it's one, two--MR. ANGELL. First choice?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. --three, four, five, six, seven, eight.SPEAKER(?). Well, that's it. Let's go to the next issue.MR. ANGELL. Well, I sure didn't--. I heard a lot of rawsand I heard a lot of boths as first choice. How many raws were therefor first choice? Were there three?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Two among the Committee members and forboth there were two.-43-11/16/93MR. ANGELL. Okay, so it's the voting members. I see. Allright.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The nonvoting members are also roughlythe same; there's not a big distinction between them [and the votingmembers]. If there were, I think we'd want to think about it. Unlesssomebody questions my accounting, I got a majority.MR. ANGELL. Well, that's fine if there's a majority.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is a majority. All I'm asking,since some of you didn't say whether or not it was with or withoutannotation, is for a show of hands, first without annotation.MR. KEEHN. Could I ask what you mean by annotation?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Annotation is basically comments in--.Well, rather than give my view, why doesn't the person who wouldannotate it [tell us].MR. KOHN. As I understand it from Virgil, if we saw a "not"where clearly it didn't belong, the Archivist would hesitate to allowus to take it out but he would allow us to put a footnote there andsay: "Editor's note: Read in context this word doesn't seem tobelong."MR. SYRON. You couldn't take the "not" out with the lightediting if it is clearly indicated--MR. MATTINGLY. If it was very obvious from the transcriptthat the "not" was an incorrect transcription you could take it out,yes. In other words, if the transcriber typed "adversary" and theword really was "emissary" and it was clear that the speaker meant"emissary," you could change it.MR. ANGELL. You have to annotate unless you put the originalout.MR. KELLEY. This is a very knotty question.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's an interesting question. It alsodepends to a large extent on who is doing the annotating. Rememberwhat annotation means. Annotation means that somebody has gone overthis and decided whether it is right or wrong. Now, the problemunfortunately is that whoever is annotating is not going to captureall the wrongs but they will be certifying that they are right.MR. ANGELL. I hate to tell you this but the reason you wantto do both is because if you have both of them there; that solves thatproblem.MR. LAWARE. It just complicates it.MR. ANGELL. No, because somebody is free to interpret asthey wish and say "Look, here's the way the experts thought it shouldbe."MR. KELLEY. But the errors get preserved.-44-11/16/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, it's an impossible situation. Wedon't have real-time evaluations of whatever it is we're doing andwe're trying to make guesses [about] the past. Frankly, while I wasoriginally attracted to annotation, my concern is that if we haveannotated, the presumption is that if it's not annotated it isaccurate.MR. SYRON. Correct.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And I'm not sure that that's factuallycorrect.SPEAKER(?). Isn't that also true of editing?MR. ANGELL. Once you've edited, you've doctored it.MR. KELLEY. Yes, definitely.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, this is where the Archivist isrelevant. If he decides that the editing does not do violence to theraw transcript, the raw transcript can be dispensed with. If not--MR. SYRON. But the edited transcripts still might bemisleading. And what I thought [about] was that it could beinterpreted, since you've edited it, that you've somehow "certified"it, if I can use that phrase. And editing may or may not fix things.MR. ANGELL. And [for] some member of the Committee who is nolonger living, I just think it's better to have some doubt in regardto whether the [editor] fixed it or not.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it this way: There is nogood answer to all of this. We did take the vote. Where we are atthe moment is a decision on annotated or not. So, all those whoprefer unannotated? [Secretary's note: In a show of hands a majorityindicated a preference for no annotation.] I think we solved thatproblem.The next question is the time [lag] involved. There appearsto be a heavy [leaning toward] five years but I'm not sure and I'dlike to go over that again. Let's do the first and second choice,okay? Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Five years; second choice, threeyears.MS. PHILLIPS. Is this for the past?MR. ANGELL. I don't understand the first and second choice.How do you count the first and second choice? Are you counting bothchoices?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No.MR. ANGELL. You're just counting the first choice?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The [issue] wholly is that if the firstchoice doesn't get a majority, we can move to second choices as to-45-11/16/93whether--. I don't think this is a [big] issue or anything, but goahead. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. This is on the future?SEVERAL. The past.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The number of years. The past.MR. ANGELL. The past. All right. Five is first choice;three is second choice.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Five, first choice; three, second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Ten, first choice; five, second choice.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Five and three.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Three and five.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Poor four! Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Infinite and five.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Three and five.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I would say ten and five.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. Five and three.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Five and three.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. Three and five.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Five and three.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.-46-11/16/93MR. HOENIG. Ten and five.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. Thirty and five.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Five and ten.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Ten and five.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. [Five and] three.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One interesting aspect of all this isthat five shows up in everybody's [answer], just not in the sameplace. It looks to me as though five is the best--SPEAKER(?). I think the more-than-fives clearly--MR. KOHN. President McDonough, you said five?VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The fives have it, as best I can read.MR. MCTEER. May I make a comment or raise a question beforeyou call for that?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure.MR. MCTEER. Earlier someone said that the Memorandum ofDiscussion looking back hadn't been mentioned, but you do recall thatthat's one of the proposals in Mr. Gonzalez's letter. It seems asthough we might be passing up something that's more beneficial to usthan what we're really going for.MR. MULLINS. We can't protect the raw transcript from FOIA.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other than our own concerns, I'm notsure that we ought to be adjusting to anything other than what wethink [is appropriate].MR. MCTEER. I guess I was assuming that we really wouldprefer a Memorandum of Discussion but are voting otherwise because wethink it's not acceptable.SEVERAL. No, no.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I didn't get that sense. That'scertainly not my point of view.MR. MCTEER. Okay.-47-11/16/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's go to the hard part. It's called"from here on." Oh, I'm sorry, there's another question out there,the question of who does the editing. I sensed for those who raisedthe question that [it would be] the Secretariat, not [the FOMCmembers]. In other words, we would not as a Committee oversee any ofthis process. Basically these are unofficial records of the Committeeand would be handled as such. And as a consequence they could bedelegated to the staff for these purposes.MR. LINDSEY. And so noted on the cover.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. ANGELL. But the emphasis is upon light and we mustdefine what light means.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Light means the type of editing which inthe view of the Archivist is such that [the option of] dispensing withthe raw transcript is available. That's what that means.MR. ANGELL. Does that mean non-sentences become sentences?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a good question. I think thestandard would be, to a greater or lesser extent, something closer tobut not quite to the [type of] editing that goes on for Congressionalhearings. You can't change the substance.MR. ANGELL. You can't change the substance and I presumeevery sentence that's there has to be left there.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unless it's gibberish. I know when I goover my Congressional testimony--I haven't done it since I've beenhere--but when I was in the private sector there were sentences whichwere utter gibberish. Even I didn't know--MR, ANGELL. But even though we voted not to do annotated, ifthere's a sentence that's not [included] would there be an annotationsaying "sentence unintelligible"?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the criterion has to be--MR. ANGELL. Just solve it by the Archivist standards?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the only objective standard Icould conceive of. Is it agreed then that the Secretariat does it?SPEAKER(?). Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, next. Now, again--here I'm goingforward--is anybody's view of the vehicle a function of the timeframein which it takes place? So let's start off in the same manner, firstand second choice, going forward. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Edited transcript first choice; MODsecond choice.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.-48-11/16/93MR. ANGELL. MOD first choice; lightly edited second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I take it in all cases that we'retalking about lightly edited. Let's stipulate that. PresidentBoehne.MR. BOEHNE. Edited transcript first choice; MOD secondchoice.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Current minutes first choice; enhanced minutessecond choice.MR. ANGELL. What are enhanced minutes? I thought thecurrent minutes were enhanced minutes.MR. SYRON. Well, [more than when] they were last enhanced--SPEAKER(?). Put a little more pep in them.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Lightly edited transcript first; MOD second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. MOD first; and lightly edited transcript fourthor fifth.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. I'm going to go with Sy Keehn.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Lightly edited transcript first; MOD second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Enhanced minutes first; edited transcriptsecond.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. Enhanced minutes first; edited transcriptsecond.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. MOD first; edited transcript second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. MOD first; edited second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.-49-11/16/93MR. FORESTALL. MOD first; edited transcript second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Edited first; MOD second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. Enhanced and MOD.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Enhanced minutes first; current minutes second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Enhanced minutes first and MOD second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON.I didn't understand that enhanced minutes was one[of the options]. Is this enhanced minutes with a five-year lag?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We're voting on it independently of thetimeframe.MR. MELZER. It's prompt release like [the current minutes].MR. SYRON. It's enhanced minutes quickly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't think enhanced minutes has anytimeframe [unintelligible].MR. MELZER. It's the same as what we do now.MR. SYRON. Is that David Mullin's proposal?MR. MULLINS. Yes, the same as what we have now except thatwe probably go further--MR. SYRON. Okay, I see. Enhanced minutes; editedtranscript.MR. ANGELL. What was the count on the MOD?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. MOD as first choice? I haven't votedyet; I need to decide--MR. ANGELL. I thought that was your proposal--the MOD.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh no, the [unintelligible] influence myvote! [Laughter]MR. BOEHNE. The deliberative process at work here!MR. ANGELL. Well, how did you vote?-50-11/16/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm trying to get the voting membersfirst.MR. MULLINS. I got three MODs first.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Three. And four--MR. MULLINS. Four edited transcripts first.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We ought to have lunch.MR. SYRON. What time are we eating dinner tonight?MR. ANGELL. Can we vote for lunch?SPEAKER(?). Is that one of the choices?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I interpret it--this is not an easytype of vote and if anybody objects please speak up--looking at thefirst and second choices, basically, it is between an MOD and anedited transcript. It's not clear-cut; we're all over the place on alot of different things.MR. ANGELL. Does either one of them have seven votes?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No.MR. ANGELL. Then I think we really have to go around asecond time.MR. PARRY. How did enhanced come out?MR. MELZER. How do enhanced and current minutes takentogether come out?MR. MULLINS. Well, that's four Committee members.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Two voting members are for enhancedminutes.MR. MELZER. And current?MR. BERNARD. It's two and two.MR. MELZER. So it's four.MR. PARRY. Two current and two enhanced?MR. KOHN. It's four for everything.MR. LINDSEY. To enhance enhanced, I'd switch from current toenhanced.MR. KEEHN. Yes, I would too.SPEAKER(?). It's still got four votes; there are fourenhances.-51-11/16/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, rather unfortunately, if I staywith an MOD, for the voting members it's four, four, and four.MR. SYRON. Any swing vote?MR. ANGELL. Well, then it seems to me that someone needs tomove some motion and see if it passes or gets amended or something.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. May I ask a question for clarity?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. The enhanced minutes has a verydifferent timeframe than either the MOD or the--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's right. Let's take a minutebecause this is what I was expecting might happen. Let's define whatwe really mean by enhanced minutes. What concerns me is that the MODis unambiguous and the edited transcript is unambiguous, but I'm notcertain that the view of this Committee of what we mean by enhancedminutes is unambiguous.MR. ANGELL. Does enhanced minutes have attribution in it?SPEAKER(?). No.MR. MULLINS. No. My view of it is that it wouldn't but itwould capture every issue and argument--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But we do that now.MR. ANGELL. Yes, we do that now.MR. SYRON. Is your enhanced minutes the MOD withoutattribution, essentially?MR. MULLINS. It should have all the substance in it that anMOD or edited transcript has but without attribution.MR. SYRON. So it's the MOD without attribution?MR. MULLINS. I think we could vote on whether you'd likethat sort of [document] or an MOD or an edited transcript and thatwould dispose of it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, wait a second. My own problem isthat to have a fully detailed MOD without the names on it--SPEAKER(?). That doesn't make [sense].MR. MULLINS. Well, [the current minutes] are pretty close toenhanced.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the point is this: I've thoughtthat what we do now is about as complete [coverage of] what we talkedabout as one can imagine. The only meaningful concept of enhancement,as far as I can judge, is adding names.-52-11/16/93MR. PARRY. On the vote.MR. BOEHNE. We have names on the vote.SPEAKER(?). We don't have views on the vote, though.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, maybe that's what we need todecide. Some of us want to have attribution and some don't. Maybe weneed to decide that first. That's either a yes or no.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But wait a second.MR. MELZER. Well, you could have the opportunity to--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There are several who have been in favorof enhanced minutes. I think we ought to go around quickly and get aone sentence description of what that means to each of you.MR. MULLINS. I would suggest that we take the currentminutes in which we have gone a pretty long way [in covering themeeting discussion] and go as far as we can in the same way--in otherwords, just talking about the issues and arguments and not doing adetailed MOD. Basically the argument would be that we've been goingin the right direction; we believe that this is sufficient or else wewould have been doing something else.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does that mean shutting off the tape?MR. MULLINS. That would shut off the tape in the sense thatwe'll simply take notes. The notes will be without attribution so thestaff can produce the minutes. The minutes are released. There issome sense maybe of an improvement over the current practice in termsof the amount of information in there, but essentially it is in linewith the current practice. And I think it has not harmed the processat all to release those ideas.MR. ANGELL. Rather than discussing this, Mr. Chairman, Iwould move that we have attribution first of all. And then we'lldecide what form the attribution will take afterwards. I think that'sthe disagreement here.MR. SYRON. There's another disagreement here. We may betalking apples and oranges. I said I was in favor of enhancedminutes. But being in favor of enhanced, which I still am, in my viewis part and parcel in a broader sense expecting that we won't have tohave verbatim recordings in the future. Also I must say in terms ofthe public appearance issue--though I'd vote for it separately--that Iwould favor combining the enhanced minutes with immediate disclosurewhen we did something.MR. ANGELL. Does yours have attribution in it?MR. SYRON. No, my preference was without attribution.MR. MULLINS. Well, couldn't we vote on that sort of process,which is essentially an expansion of the current process, or vote onan MOD?-53-11/16/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I suggest that there is a moreimportant question? The really crucial question is whether the tapeis turned off or not.MR. SYRON. That's right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. All the other issues are reallyirrelevant because, if you turn off the tape, you automatically go toenhanced minutes. If you leave the tape on, then doing enhancedminutes doesn't get you anything.MR. SYRON. Correct.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I will just tell you that my own view isthat this is the wrong time to turn off the tape. There may occur alater time when that is the desirable thing to do. I think it'spremature. It's an action at this stage that I don't think iswarranted. It's unnecessary. It may become necessary. But thequestion has nothing to do with enhanced minutes because if we doenhanced minutes and leave the tape on, I don't know what the purposeof that would be.MR. SYRON. Right. To see this in the totality and how itwould affect FOMC deliberations, I think one has to look at thismeeting; it has obviously been impacted [by the prospect of releasinga transcript]. It may be less impacted if it shows that we can't--myself particularly--be quiet as time goes on. So in two days [theinhibiting effect] may have all worn off. But in terms of thetotality of the impact on the deliberative process, I would favor apackage--I hate to call it a package--of immediate disclosure when wetake actions, combined with enhanced minutes and not taping. I wouldconsider any of those things individually but in the totality--andit's a political judgment to some extent as to what can be done--Ithink that's a far better solution going forward in terms of meetingour responsibilities.MR. MULLINS. So, no secret materials basically?MR. SYRON. No secret materials.MR. LINDSEY. Release everything.SPEAKER(?). Except you've said [you would redact material]that's secret.MR. MELZER(?). No legislation would be necessary.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Go ahead, Tom.MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. Well, I would just make twopoints. One is to reiterate what I said earlier: This is veryimportant with respect to the future functioning of the Committee. Ithink the most important decision we need to make today is the onewith respect to going back. I think it would be helpful to make onegoing forward but if we can't do it with the sense that there is totalcomfort in the decision, maybe we shouldn't. Maybe we should thinkabout it more and decide---54-11/16/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I have no intention of movingforward with a vote that is very close.MR. MELZER. The other point I wanted to make--and reasonablepeople can differ on this--is that I don't feel we have as muchflexibility to change going forward as you do. [If we were to decide]to go to an MOD now, we would be announcing that publicly. I thinkthe perception would be that we've moved toward further disclosurebecause we think it's appropriate; some in Congress certainly feelit's appropriate. Then, if within a short period of time--months oreven years--we decided that we didn't think that was appropriate anymore, I doubt that [a change] would be accepted very well. [Theperception would be that] we made a move toward further openness andthen all of a sudden, presumably as soon as the heat was turned up andwe got a Congressional subpoena for tapes and transcripts, weimmediately changed our procedures. I think changing our proceduresat that time would be even more difficult than changing them now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me make the following suggestion.As I suspected, this is a very close vote. There is no way, I cantell you, to squeeze a significant consensus out of this easily.Because it is difficult, I think a suggestion that Don Kohn madeearlier is probably the appropriate one. My own recommendation atthis stage, having heard this, would be to enlist Don in hisrecommendation.MR. KOHN. My recommendation, Mr. Chairman, after hearing theinitial discussion, was for the Committee to vote on the past and getthose transcripts behind us so we've got a clear--MR. ANGELL. I thought we did that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We did that.MR. KOHN. Essentially we did that already.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not essentially, we did it.MR. ANGELL. We did it. Now what?MR. KOHN. The next part of the suggestion was to tellChairman Gonzalez that the FOMC is looking at different means toenhance our openness and disclosure [practices]. We would not tellhim exactly what we're planning to do because it didn't seem that wehad a consensus; but we would make a commitment that after theDecember FOMC meeting we would tell him what we're going to do. Partof [the reasoning behind] that was to reconvene the Mullins'Subcommittee so it could make recommendations to the FOMC at its nextmeeting. That was my recommendation.MR. LAWARE. With the momentum that he will gain by ouracquiescence to [releasing the transcripts], he will then say: Well,this is what I want you to decide to do.MR. ANGELL. Absolutely.MR. LAWARE. He's going to back us right into a corner.-55-11/16/93MR. ANGELL. It is essential that we go forward. I don'tknow what the majority is on this attribution/non-attribution issue.I don't know what the majority is on keeping the tape recorder on.But let's find out. Let's vote.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, I'm willing to--MR. MULLINS. [We might first] have a vote between thisquestion of something like minutes that we release quickly or an MODor edited transcript--those two options--which is essentially yourattribution versus non-attribution question.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I might suggest that the first one isreally: Do we keep the tape on or turn it off?MR. ANGELL. That's fine. Mr. Chairman, I would move that weleave the tape recorder on. All right?SPEAKER(?). Second.MR. SYRON. You'd leave the tape recorder on?MR. ANGELL. Yes. That's what we're moving. Vote it down ifyou don't want it.MR. KELLEY. I think they're bundled. That's Larry's wordand I think he's correct. I think if we go one route, turning thetape recorder off is a much more sensible way to go. If we go witheither alternative number 3 or number 4, then I think we leave thetapes on and get permission to erase them from the Archivist.MR. ANGELL. But, Mike, one person thinks one way and onethinks the other. A motion has been made and seconded. Now, if youwant to make a substitute motion and reverse the order, that's yourprivilege.MS. PHILLIPS. What motion has been made and seconded?MR. ANGELL. That we leave the tape recorder on.MR. MULLINS. Putting it that way may--MR. SYRON. Oh Wayne, this is not a legislative body.SPEAKER(?). That's right.MR. SYRON. We're here trying to discuss as a Committee thebest way to deal with this issue.MR. ANGELL. But when the discussion doesn't lead todetermination as to where the majority is, a motion is a very handyway to find out where the majority is.MR. SYRON. I don't disagree with that. But the issue hereis that what I call the "Mullins proposal" for lack of a better term--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me say this: I don't want anofficial vote. I request that you withdraw the motion on the grounds-56-11/16/93that we're not necessarily trying to find [a consensus on] a series ofevents but a series of choices--or I should say on a specific fixedissue. Look, turning on the tape or not turning on the tape is not adecision on what we're going to do. It is a vehicle to determinewhere people want to be. I think it's helpful but it can't be abinding vote. It has to be a preference because people can--MR. ANGELL. Of course. All votes are--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I'd just as soon not have [a vote]in an official sense, if you don't mind. I think it's going tocreate--MR. SYRON. Confusion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. --more problems in trying to come out[with a decision] on this.MR. ANGELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't care which we voteon first. I'm open to voting on--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I tell you what the best vote atthis stage is?MR. ANGELL. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Whether we delay until the Decembermeeting or whether we do something at the present one.SEVERAL. Yes, that's right.MR. MULLINS. At the December meeting or the Humphrey-Hawkinsmeeting so we can explain it? [Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me get an unofficial show of handsas to whether we should delay until the December meeting or act now.First, to delay until the December meeting.SPEAKER(?). This is prospective?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh yes, obviously. One, two, three,four, five, six.... And we have twelve. That does it.MR. ANGELL. No, not unless--. Are we doing this as votingmembers or are we doing it with everybody?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I thought the voting members had it.Let's do voting members very specifically. Voting members only.MR. ANGELL. Delay?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Delay. One, two, three, four, five,six, seven.MR. ANGELL. Six or seven?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.-57-Seven.11/16/93MR. ANGELL. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That solves the problem. Let me tellyou: Of all the issues that I have been involved in, this is theclosest vote that we have had. I would submit to you that if we triedto work our way through today to find a reasonable consensus we wouldbe here until 5 o'clock this evening. This is a very complex issueand I think the ability to focus on this [unintelligible]. Having hadthis very broad discussion, returning it to the subcommittee for[filtering], if I may put it that way, is the least worst of thechoices we're confronting. I don't know any way at this point to geta general consensus where everyone would feel comfortable. I'mappreciative of the fact that we have solved [the issue for] the past.And in certain respects I think developments over the next severalweeks may change some of the things that are going on. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I'd like to make a comment becauseI was not one of the seven. The reason I was not--and I have to bevery direct despite my normally very high opinion of Mr. Kohn--is thathe expressed his recommendation in such a way that I think it is verydangerous. It is far, far too defensive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I don't disagree with that. Theonly thing we voted on was delay, not--VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Correct.MR. KOHN. I certainly regret anything I said! [Laughter]VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. My positive sense is to go back tothe [statement] that you made earlier, which I rather belligerentlyendorsed. It was that we have to go on the offensive now. It's toughto go on the offensive when we say: "Well, we're thinking about whatwe're going to do next." It's not impossible, but I think--MR. KELLEY. I would agree.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's a lot more difficult if you don'thave a consensus.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I agree. I just want us tounderstand that if we're going to ask for a hearing and we're going tostart defending ourselves, which I really think we have to do,deciding to wait--and I think you're right that deciding we need towait in order to form a consensus has great wisdom, but it creates adifficulty for you or anybody else--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No question.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I just hope we understand that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's no question that if we could geta consensus in this Committee on going forward that would be farsuperior to not [reaching a decision]; I don't deny that. Justremember that the issue of hearings is essentially not to be terriblymuch involved in precisely how we go forward. The really crucialpoint is to try to emphasize how crucial the deliberative process isand [to urge] its protection. That's only partially related, if at-58-11/16/93all, to the decisions we will be making with respect to what we goforward with.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, we've been here for 3-1/2 hoursdiscussing this one issue and have only decided maybe a third of it.I wonder if there's any merit, rather than cluttering up the next OpenMarket Committee meeting when we're supposed to be making monetarypolicy, in having a separate meeting on this subject and resolving itno matter how long it takes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. A thoughtful thought.MR. KELLEY. Somewhat to back up Bill McDonough, if we dodecide to delay, it wouldn't surprise me a bit if we all got a letterby the day after tomorrow asking for our independent--and undiscussedwith anyone else--opinion of what we would like to see done goingforward.MR. MELZER. I think it would be appropriate in that case forthe Chairman to say that this is an issue that the Committee has tofocus on and the Committee will respond through the Chairman when ithas completed its deliberations.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Absolutely.MR. SYRON. There is something to John's suggestion, though.We wouldn't have to wait until--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's a very good [idea].MS. PHILLIPS. If we do that, it would be a good idea to haveyour subcommittee [report] so that we have [options to consider] andwe're not arguing about definitions of what "enhanced" means and soforth.MR. MULLINS. That's actually an advantage of the delay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Absolutely. Does anyone stronglyobject? Another problem we may have is scheduling.MR. BOEHNE. Thanksgiving Day. We're all free. [Laughter]MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, my confusion here is this: We hada discussion, which seemed to be much more in one direction than Ianticipated it would be. Then all of a sudden we had a discussionabout, well, we can do it this way or that way, or we can make itwork. Many of us--I can go several different ways--can be satisfiedwith more than one [approach]. I don't feel strongly about which waywe come out. But I do feel very strongly that this Committee is goingto be disadvantaged if, after you've written your letter and you sayyou can't answer his letter about these tapes until the [next] FOMCmeeting--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, he didn't ask [unintelligible].MR. ANGELL. Is that all he requested?-59-11/16/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The only thing he requested was thehistorical--SPEAKER(?). So we're responding to that.MR. FORRESTAL. That's what we're responding to. We'reresponding to the request in his letter. We've taken care of that.If I may, Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to say that while there is someadvantage, obviously, to moving forward, it seems to me that it wouldbe very dangerous to do so, given the differences of understanding asto what we're talking about and the differences of opinion. I thinkwe would be even more disadvantaged if we moved forward with a vote inthat kind of environment. We're talking about the future meetings ofthe FOMC; we need to be very, very clear about what we're talkingabout. And it's in that connection that I'd like to support whatGovernor Phillips said. Whether we have a special meeting or not, weneed to have some kind of staff document that clarifies exactly--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I absolutely agree with you, Bob. Ithink we will find at the end of the day that through proportionalvoting or representation or what have you, we will come out with aconsensus of this Committee. The combinations here are too complex tosimply put forward [proposals] and start working through theconfusion. And I don't think we should pressure this process; it'stoo important. I think John LaWare's recommendation is very sensible.I would ask the Secretariat to survey all of the members to see wherewe could possibly squeeze in [a meeting], even if it comes out to bean evening or, if absolutely necessary, a weekend. But what we needfirst is a document, then a date; and then we will just stay until weget the issue resolved. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. I agree with that. I just wanted to ask if wehave in fact taken care of what Gonzalez has requested via the votes.Have we responded?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have.MR. ANGELL. To every part of his letter?MR. KOHN. Well, he has made suggestions about what youshould do before. He suggests you release an MOD after 60 days andraw transcripts after--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we have to respond to himprecisely [in terms of] the content of this meeting.MR. SYRON. That's right.SPEAKER(?). He asked for the transcripts and--MR. KOHN. His demand is for the past [transcripts].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I assume that if he requested that wevoluntarily offer the transcripts, the answer of this Committee is"no." Is there any dissent to that? That's the impression that I'vegotten from all the members. It is our basic view that we've done itappropriately in the manner we suggested; that is an issue that we-60-11/16/93have made a decision on. If the Congress chooses to override us,that's their prerogative.MR. ANGELL. I don't think I understand what you're saying.What decision have we made?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We've made the decision to release thelightly edited transcripts after five years.MR. ANGELL. Yes. But what decision have we made in regardto his request to give [the raw transcripts] to him? I thought thatwas a separate question.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the [unintelligible].MR. ANGELL. Virgil, is that a separate question?MR. MATTINGLY. As the Chairman said, yes.MR. ANGELL. So what is our decision on that?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I understood the context of thisdiscussion, the answer to that question is "no."MR. ANGELL. Oh, I just didn't think that had been discussedand deliberated and voted on.MR. FORRESTAL. That's what I was voting on.MR. ANGELL. I thought we were voting on what we werereleasing to the public and we decided to do [lightly editedtranscripts] with a five-year delay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We did. If you wish to go around and--SPEAKER(?). It's the same.MR. ANGELL. Well, what I'm wondering is whether or not therewould be a possibility of your going to him and asking him if we couldmake them available to him as a Committee Chairman and keep themprivate and still have our five years. Do you think that's an option?I thought, Virgil, we had to deal with the fact that he's the Chairmanof the Committee and--. Are we saying "no" to him? Is that whatwe've [agreed]? Okay.MR. KOHN. This is very similar, Governor Angell, to whatChairman Burns replied to Chairman Patman in 1975--MR. ANGELL. I see.MR. KOHN. --who asked for the last five years of unpublishedMODs and Chairman Burns said no.MR. ANGELL. Well, I do want to dissent from that decision.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, let me ask: Are there any otherdissents in the Committee or amongst the nonvoting presidents?-61-11/16/93MR. LAWARE. I think that's the right course of action, butit seems to me that inevitably that is going to trigger a subpoena andhe will [get] the unedited tapes and--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If a subpoena is issued, we will have todeal with it. One possibility is that we could go up and discussthese other alternatives with them.MR. ANGELL. Could I ask you this question? Do you thinkthere's any chance that he would be open, after you've told him we'rereleasing these lightly edited transcripts with a five-year delay andthat means we're going to get out the--. Are we following thesuggestion that we start with 1988 first? Is that the order?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.MR. LAWARE. And work back.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I got the general impression that wewould do the early ones as quickly as we can feasibly turn them out.MR. MULLINS. And tell that to the Committee.MR. ANGELL. Yes. Now, after telling him that--that we'vebeen forthcoming and the Committee has voted--do you think there's anychance that in negotiation with him he would be open to proceeding inthe direction of having them himself with one staff person to reviewthem and not go the subpoena route?MR. KELLEY. And do what with them?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I, frankly, do not know the answer tothat.MR. ANGELL. Well, I just would prefer we not get caught in asubpoena if we can negotiate our way out of a subpoena.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't see the means by which webasically can negotiate our way out.MR. PARRY. Shouldn't our agreement to release these lightlyedited transcripts with a five-year delay buy us some votes in theCommittee anyway?MR. MULLINS. Yes, if the argument--MR. PARRY. I would think that that would be significant andthat the chances of Chairman Gonzalez getting his way with his ownCommittee would not seem that high.MR. ANGELL. Well, my fear is that we will have kicked andscreamed all the way, and he will end up getting all of this [despite]our kicking and screaming and it will really put us in a very badlight with the public. I at least wanted a discussion of thealternatives to going that route.MR. SYRON. What would you do? What would your approach bethen?-62-11/16/93MR. ANGELL. My approach would be to authorize the Chairmanto release to [Mr. Gonzalez] whatever FOMC materials he wants to see,if he will agree that only he and one staff person will look at themand that they will return them to you within a reasonable period oftime--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I can't--MR. SYRON. That's a dangerous precedent.SPEAKER(?). A dangerous precedent.MR. ANGELL. So that's impossible?SPEAKER(?). That's impossible.MR. SYRON. Given the choices, I would prefer to stay herefor the next two or three days and work out what we're going to dogoing forward rather than do that.MR. KELLEY. So would I.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I suggest this? Unless I hearsomething to the contrary, the answer to Chairman Gonzalez is "no."We will release the transcripts in lightly edited form. We will dothat starting with five years back and do the remainder as quickly asis feasible. If that is the case, and unless I hear something to thecontrary, we will now move to the next item on the agenda.MR. ANGELL. Wonderful.SEVERAL. Is it lunch?MR. LINDSEY. A working lunch?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a good question.MR. LINDSEY. I move that we work through lunch, Mr.Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's do that. Why don't we just getour food and come back here.[Lunch recess]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move [theminutes]?SPEAKER(?). Move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Peter Fisher andafter you, Ted Truman.-63-11/16/93MR. FISHER. [Statement--see Appendix.] Mr. Chairman, I'd behappy to answer questions on my report or to move on to Agenda item4.C. as the Committee wishes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we first see if there are anyquestions. Questions for Peter? If not, you may move on.MR. FISHER. The System's reciprocal currency arrangementscome up for renewal at this time of year, including the existing $700million swap with the Bank of Mexico, which is relied upon as part ofthe package being prepared. I have no changes to suggest in the termsand conditions of the existing swap arrangements and I request thatthe Committee approve their renewal without change. I'd be happy toanswer questions on the renewal of the existing swap arrangements.Ted has something to say about the Mexican package being worked outnow. [We can proceed with] Ted or questions, either way.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we have Ted go first.MR. TRUMAN. Just briefly the state of play is as follows:As you know, last week we put in place, in the sense of being ready togo, a bilateral package between the U.S. monetary authorities and theBank of Mexico, and because of the favorable behavior of the financialmarkets it wasn't necessary to use that. Meanwhile, we have beenworking with the Bank for International Settlements and their backingcentral banks to put in place as a contingency a packagein which the [United State's] participation would be the same $6billion. The Federal Reserve's [part would be] $3 billion: theexisting swap line of $700 million that Peter just referred to and thespecial swap arrangement of $2.3 billion. Our aim is to put all thisin place on a contingency basis by tomorrow--to have it ready to gosometime after 8:00 p.m. Eastern standard time if things should turnout poorly, but not to do anything unless things should go poorly andthe Mexicans decide to activate the arrangement. In that connection Iwould request that you maintain contact with Norm Bernard, telling himwhere you are. In particular, I think we need to know where you mightbe between 8 and 12 tomorrow night; or if that's too inconvenient, youmight give Norm your proxy. Our hope and the Mexicans' hope too,obviously, is that none of this will be necessary and it will all goaway by early Thursday morning.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for either gentleman?MR. JORDAN. The last time we had discussions aboutreciprocal currency arrangements either late last year or early thisyear--I don't recall--the response to a question about these swaplines was this: That we had a new Administration that had been eitherjust elected or just inaugurated and until they had been there for awhile and we could get acquainted and find out what their attitudesand moods were, we couldn't really address this, so for the time beingwe would go ahead and just continue what we were doing before. We'venever had that report. It's a report I still look forward to gettingas to what is the attitude and what is the [purpose] of even havingthese kinds of arrangements with all these different banks. If wecould, I'd really like to have that discussion.MR. TRUMAN. Well, your memory is probably better than mine,President Jordan. I don't think there was a commitment to review-64-11/16/93whether we needed to do away with the swap network. The commitmentwas that we needed to work on the question of balances, and that workis continuing. We have had some problems getting the Treasury tofocus on that, but I understand that is a continuing effort. But ifthe Committee would like us to prepare a report on whether the swapnetwork should be continued as it is, we can do that. I feel that itis probably one of those things that is easier to retain than to doaway with.MR. JORDAN. The Vice Chairman might recall that [as] thethen Manager [with oversight] for foreign operations in response to aquestion about under what circumstances he could foresee implementinga swap with certain minor central banks said that he couldn't imagineany. He also said that he thought it was an appropriate topic toaddress once the new Administration was in place and conversations hadtaken place. [Unintelligible] to hearing the report.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I do recall making such astatement. The likelihood of our having to use the swap line withMexico obviously says that it is possible that these things can beused and, therefore, I suppose puts some merit in discussing their[continuing] existence. I'd probably come out essentially where TedTruman just suggested and that is that they are alliances that havebeen in place since the 1960s and it becomes an immense dog thatdidn't bark in the night if we decide to deconstruct what was puttogether at the time. And we would have to have a whole new view ofwhat we wanted to do on international currency arrangements and whatwe would put in place of these reciprocal relationships which we'vehad for so long. Personally I wouldn't put an immensely high priorityon what we'd get out of such an exercise; if other members of theCommittee thought it would be a good idea, I wouldn't oppose it. Butagain, I'm not sure just how much we'd achieve by doing it.MR. FISHER. I'd like to add that I think the question ofwhether we would use them, given the current high level of balances,is a very different one than whether we would want to have themavailable for other central banks to use. It's essentially a questionof cooperation and whether having them in place isn't a good idea as asign of central bank cooperation.MR. JORDAN. I think that is the question.MR. TRUMAN. The other part of it as far as I'm concerned andthe reason I reacted the way I did--and I obviously misunderstood ormisremembered, President Jordan--is that I don't see this as a matterfor the Treasury Department at all. It is true that since it's theFOMC that maintains the swap network, the FOMC can do away with it. Ithink it is probably fair to say that if we were to move in thatdirection, we might want to have some consultation because over timewe have used that cooperative [approach]. But essentially what we dowith those things is not a Treasury decision. The balances side is abit more [of an] ongoing [issue]. I would note that both last year,in September, and this summer there were approaches from some of theEuropean central banks about possible use of the swap network. It isalso fair to say, as this current episode with Mexico illustrates,that if one really wanted to help the Danish National Bank--I can'tremember the size of our swap network with them but Peter can tell youbecause it's right there in his table--it's hard to imagine that it-65-11/16/93would cover more than half a day's worth of the Danish National Bank'sintervention. Is it $100 million--?MR. FISHER. $250 million.MR. TRUMAN. But it also [should be noted] that thesemechanisms are there and they are a form of central bank cooperation;they are the basis on which we receive and provide information toother central banks. And if the need [arises] they provide aframework where we can easily augment [balances] either for our ownuse or for their use under appropriate [conditions]. But, as I said,if the Committee would like us to take another look at this question,we will be glad to do so.MR. LINDSEY. If that's the case, why are we voting suddenlyto authorize it now?MR. FISHER. They're renewed annually. They are one-yearswaps which are renewed each year. And at this time the Committeeauthorizes the manager to renew them for the coming year.MR. LINDSEY. Oh, I see. So it just happens that the lasttime we did this was 12 months ago?MR. FISHER. Yes. It's fortuitous.MR. ANGELL. Well, I agree with the Vice Chairman of theCommittee that there are not likely to be issues here [in terms of]the Committee wishing to make this kind of change. It seems to methat we've already expressed sentiment in regard to careful andjudicious use of these instruments. But I would tend to favor theirbeing retained as a part of the arsenal under the arrangements inwhich we're very careful as to how they're used. So I don't reallysee that much benefit, Jerry, of the Committee engaging in that study.MR. MCTEER. I'm not sure that a study of the swaps per se isnecessary; but since I've been attending these meetings, over 2-1/2years, we really haven't had a discussion of our views on interventionversus nonintervention. I don't know what the FOMC's opinion is onthat subject and I do think it would be worthwhile at some point whenthe crises are over to review the whole subject.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a very useful notion. I didn'trealize it was that long; but if it is, it's longer than it should be.MR. ANGELL. Yes, it was about 1989 or 1990 when we had ourlast--MR. SYRON. It was 1990.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ted, could you see that that gets on theagenda?MR. TRUMAN. I noticed that President McTeer qualified it,saying once we get beyond other more pressing matters--SPEAKER(?). Yes, that's a big qualification.-66-11/16/93MR. TRUMAN. --but I hear the directive.MR. MCTEER. Yes, I don't think it's the top item on theagenda.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, but I think it's a useful one.Anybody else want to come forth in this discussion? If not, wouldsomebody like to move the renewals?MR. SYRON. So move.SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. All in favor say "aye."SEVERAL. Aye.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Opposed? The "ayes" have it. Joan.MS. LOVETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the interest oftime I'm going to dispense with some incredibly interesting statisticson the Treasury's fund-raising operations in the market over theintermeeting period and the reception of the refunding and compositionof the debt unless someone has questions about it. [Secretary's note:Statement in its entirety is shown in the Appendix.]I'd just conclude, Mr. Chairman, with a request for atemporary increase in the intermeeting leeway from $8 billion to $11billion. As I noted earlier, upcoming reserve needs at this junctureare expected to be sufficiently large and persistent as to warrant acushion beyond the normal limit.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Joan? If not, we need twomotions. One is to ratify the actions of the Desk of the past month.Would somebody like to move that?MR. BOEHNE. So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. And secondly theleeway request.MR. SYRON. So move.MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Thank you very much.Moving on, Mike Prell.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Mr. Prell?MR. FORRESTAL. Mike, if I read the Greenbook correctly,you're anticipating a tightening of policy later in 1994. I was alittle confused or baffled by that in light of the deceleration ofGDP, a relatively high unemployment rate, and a deceleration ofinflation. Could you comment on that?-67-11/16/93MR. PRELL. Well, we have not assumed anything significanthappening within 1994. We have the notion that things might start inthat direction and then continue on gradually through 1995. I don'tthink the precise pattern is critical here. Basically we've stretchedour forecast horizon out through 1995. We would anticipate that as wemove through 1995 into 1996, not knowing what will happen on importantthings like medical care and so on, there will be alleviation of someof the negative elements in the economic picture [at a time when]fiscal policy will no longer be exerting quite the drag it willthrough 1994 and perhaps into 1995. We expect that we will haveworked our way further through the overhang of unoccupied commercialspace and multifamily residences and so on and that by then therewould be some assurance that foreign industrial activity will havepicked up. In general we think there may be an emerging strongerthrust to activity and that some tightening of policy may be calledfor in order to hold aggregate demand at a level that would beconsistent with maintenance of some marginal slack in the system andthus the conditions that will promote some gradual further movementtoward price stability. This is in essence a matter of design, tryingto capture at least in a rough way the objectives of the Committeeover the intermediate term.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mike, one characteristic of some of the recentGreenbook forecasts has been a relatively lean inventory picture,particularly business inventories; and I think there were evendiscussions about just-in-time inventories, etc. It seems as thoughthings have changed dramatically in this current forecast in thatthere is anywhere from $10 to $20 billion a quarter more in nonfarminventories. I wondered what has changed your thoughts?MR. PRELL. I don't think there is a change in anyfundamental way. There are two things that we had in mind in thisforecast. One was we had to live for all practical purposes with theset of third-quarter data that existed. Our suspicion was that thatlevel of inventory investment in the third quarter was overstated byBEA. They didn't have data for September, and that's why I focusedsome attention on that a couple of minutes ago. As things turned out,it does appear to us, as best we can do the arithmetic--and this isn'teasy--that there will likely be some downward revision to nonfarminventory investment in the third quarter. And we noted in a littlesubtle footnote in the Greenbook that using our best change approach,which addresses what the growth contribution of inventory investmentwould be, the numbers written on the green sheets are artificiallyhigh relative to our belief of what would be happening. Basically wethink that inventories are at reasonable levels now. There are somesectors where they may be a bit lean, particularly at themanufacturing level. We don't see large shortages; we don't see anyreal impulse coming here in the way of longer lead times andexpectations of rising prices that would lead companies to want tostock up rapidly. Essentially, with this adjustment we haveinventory/sales ratios in the aggregate probably declining slightlyover the forecast period. And I think that's a continuation of thejust-in-time modifications of inventory practices and so forth.MR. PARRY. But the '94 number is probably about twice whatit was before?-68-11/16/93MR. PRELL. Well, we're always constrained in terms of thoselevel numbers but we don't think we have an exceptionally high rate ofinventory accumulation here. If some of those upside surprises that Isuggested came about, those might be circumstances in which we mightalso get besides the extra final demands some greater inventoryinvestment. But we just don't see inventories as a tremendouslydynamic element in the forecast; it contributes only a small fractionof a percentage point to GDP growth over the coming year.MR. PARRY. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. At meetings I attended in 1992, there was apublic or outside perception that the Committee implemented its policyactions in the short run based on what the monthly nonfarm payrollemployment numbers were doing. And I thought that that wasundesirable and had implications that could be troubling down theroad. We've gotten away from that and I think it's very healthy andvery desirable that we've gotten away from that. But when I looked atthis Greenbook and the one before--it's emphasized more in this one--Iwas concerned about this input to our deliberations. And Mike'sresponse to Bob Forrestal enhances my concern. On page 1-13, with thefirst look at 1995, you say: "We have assumed an increase in short-term interest rates that we believe sufficient to hold real GDP growthto 2-1/2 percent." I've never thought that the role of monetarypolicy is to put an upper limit on real growth. It was troubling tome in past times when the idea was that the role of monetary policywas to foster or stimulate certain kinds of real GDP growth. And it'sjust as troubling to suggest that the purpose is to put an upper limiton it. The next sentence says "With continued slack in labor andproduct markets, core inflation...." Again, the idea that we'redirecting monetary policy with the intent of maintaining slack is verytroubling. However we come out on our discussions about deliberationsin the future, as I understand it the Greenbook is released to thepublic with a five-year lag. And this exposition about the criteriafor implementing monetary policy I find very troubling.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mike, just a pure information question: Is theBLS changing the definition of unemployment somehow? I heardsomething about a one-time change which is going to bump the measuredunemployment rate by a significant number of tenths next year.MR. PRELL. Yes, the BLS had a press conference this morning.There are a number of changes that will be taking effect with theJanuary household survey. Some of these have to do in essence withconcepts and the way various questions are asked and how the responsesmight be interpreted. Others have to do simply with the mechanicalprocedure of the survey--the use of computers which will permit themto check out what the person in that household who has been in thesurvey in prior months had been saying; they have found that thatsometimes alters the responses. They've run this experiment now forthe last year and they indicated this morning that the result of thatexperiment was that the unemployment rate they were getting for thisoverlap sample was 7.6 percent versus 7.1 percent on average for theregular series. Whether this is a unique period of some sort that-69-11/16/93might make this 1/2 point differential unrepresentative, one can'tknow for sure. And there will be, I gather, a number of analyses ofthe difference issued over the coming year. But it does appear thatthe methods they will be using will raise the measured rate ofunemployment. The question for us will be: Is there any reason toassume anything other than that in essence the natural rate has risen1/2 point and we just need to adjust our thinking, with duerecognition of President Jordan's remarks, about what inflationarypressures might be implied by a given level of the unemployment rate.MR. SYRON. So, after the first of the year, will they bereporting the number both ways for some period of time?MR. PRELL. I don't believe so, and there's not going to beany endeavor to do historical revisions.MR. SYRON. So conceivably people are going to see somethingthat says the unemployment rate is a half point higher?MR. PRELL. Yes, and I'm sure [BEA] will be engaged in aneducational effort. But I suspect we'll have one confronting us, too,in February when we present the Humphrey-Hawkins report. Now thepublic will be trying to educate us as to what we've missed all along.MR. SYRON. Well, it is going to be [unintelligible] becausein the whole forecast period if we don't change what we assume, wewould have an unemployment rate, [with the revised] measures, of morethan 7 percent.MR. PRELL. Presumably, if we were to adjust our forecasttoday, we would just tack 1/2 percentage point on there for lack ofany alternative rationale.SPEAKER(?). Ouch!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Mike? I guess wedon't like the answers! [Laughter]MR. PRELL. Let me remind you that the change in the surveyhas not changed anything in the realities of the world. It's a matterof how we understand them and perceive them.SPEAKER(?). Well, it's a political reality.SPEAKER(?). Yes it is.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Who would like to start our Committee[discussion]? President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, our District's economy continuesto grow at a moderate pace as it has for several months. There arereally no major changes. Construction remains strong with most of thegrowth in housing. Nonresidential construction will slow a littlebecause of some major infrastructure projects coming to completion,but I don't think that will have a significant effect on our region.The energy sector has slowed slightly because of lower prices. Ourservices and retail areas remain solid. The manufacturing arearemains sluggish but there are some signs of improvement, especially-70-11/16/93in the non-durable goods portion of it. As we look ahead we thinkthat [the regional economy] is going to continue as it has in recentmonths with moderate growth. We expect to see housing starts continueto do well. Energy activity should remain steady although we don'tsee any real boost there. Agricultural incomes should be good bothfrom crops and in the livestock area. Manufacturing should remainsteady with perhaps some signs of improvement. So overall it is goingto continue as it has in the past.On the national level we are expecting [activity] to besomewhat stronger than the Greenbook shows going into next year andthroughout the year. And for us that means GDP growth of around 3percent or a little more. We also see because of that perhaps alittle more pressure on inflation. So that will be a major concern ofours as we go forward in terms of our projections and what that meansfor policy. For now our fourth quarter looks about like theGreenbook. That's all I have.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, in the interest of time let mesimply say that in the District there really hasn't been a great dealof change since the last meeting. But I do think, to a modest[extent] at least, that the underlying level of activity hasincreased. The steel business is going to finish the year on a prettystrong note and [our contacts in that industry] are preliminarilylooking for an increase in shipments of 3 to 4 percent next year, sothey're feeling pretty good. The auto industry currently is havingperhaps the best quarter in a sales sense that they've had since thefirst quarter of 1990. The production schedules for the first quarterof next year have been preliminarily set some 7 percent ahead of[those for the first quarter of] this year, and this is invariably apretty good quarter. So, they're looking currently and ahead at acontinuation of good business. I must say that the retail side hasbeen a very pleasant surprise. I talked to one retailer--they havenationwide activity--who said their sales in October had been simplyfantastic. Total sales were up 20 percent and on a [same] store basisthey were up 12 percent, so he has an underlying feeling that thelevel of confidence of retailers and consumers is building. Imentioned the last time that in terms of commercial real estate sometentative signs of stability are emerging. I think that trend iscontinuing. I'm told that there really is an awful lot of capitalthat is moving into that [area]--again for the wrong reason. Thefundamentals aren't better but the investment alternatives are suchthat real estate in a yield sense is looking better. And it's nowbeginning to have an effect on rent conditions, which are slowlybeginning to improve at least on the margin. We're a long, long wayfrom new construction, but we have to go through this phase before weget to new construction. The only negative that I'd report certainlyis in the ag sector, for reasons that are well known to the Committee.Particularly in our District, we have been very hard hit by growingconditions this summer. The [harvest] is about completed on soybeansand seventy-five percent complete on corn, and we really have had asignificant reduction in the production of both corn and soybeans.While that's bad enough this year, it really does mean that thepressure on next year is going to be very, very heavy. If we had twobad years in a row, it would be certainly very tough.-71-11/16/93Turning to the nation, I think our [District] outlook isconsistent with what we see in the national economy, namely a modestlybuilding growth consistent with the staff forecast. It may be even atouch stronger than that. But I must say the marketplace pressuresare continuing to restrain price increases so that our outlook forinflation is very consistent with the staff forecast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. States in the TwelfthDistrict are moving along two distinct and divergent paths. TheCalifornia economy continues to weaken according to most statisticsthat we see. Employment has fallen 5.1 percent or by 642,000 in thestate since July of 1990. In the last 12 months it has fallen 1.3percent. In fact, if we look at California's employment losses andwhat they do to the national totals, actually instead of the 1.6percent increase, employment in the nation outside of California hasreally risen 2 percent, which is a fairly significant difference.California's unemployment rate is 9.8 percent in October. The volumeof loans at large banks in California continues to decline although ata somewhat diminishing rate. And loan growth in the rest of theTwelfth District is positive. [Hawaii is reporting] weakness as aresult of the problems in California and Japan. The rest of theDistrict's states are reporting relatively strong economic conditions.Utah remains the fastest growing state in the nation and Nevada isreporting robust growth. Three major projects will have added 10,000new hotel rooms by year-end in Las Vegas, and contacts report that themajor hotels are 100 percent booked for weekends through April of1994. Arizona and Oregon are reporting solid year-over-yearemployment gains in September of 1.6 and 1.9 percent, respectively.And anecdotal reports suggest even more strength since September.Contacts report a shortage of construction workers in Phoenix whileTucson is experiencing a building boom with rapidly appreciating homeprices. I should note that there are some companies moving into theTucson area like Hughes Aircraft. Similarly, a contact in Portlandreports that three major new office buildings are being planned and itseems very likely that at least two of those will be constructed.Finally, while western Washington's economy has slowed because of allthe cutbacks at Boeing, which you've heard an awful lot about, theeastern part of the state is reporting a boom.If I can turn just for a moment to the national economy, webasically agree with the Greenbook's outlook for moderate growth inreal GDP over the next two years as tighter fiscal policy iscounterbalanced by relatively low real interest rates. However, I ama bit surprised that the Greenbook shows such a small decline ininflation next year and the year after. Given the expectation thatoutput will grow only modestly over the next two years and that theunemployment rate is likely to remain at roughly the present level,based upon past relationships it wouldn't be surprising in my view tosee labor market slack of this size reduce the CPI inflation to alower number than that included in the Greenbook.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, economic activity in ourDistrict is picking up again. I've been reporting for the last coupleof meetings that we were doing a little better than the rest of the-72-11/16/93nation but that the differential was declining. That seems to haveturned around again. Momentum is picking up. What's interesting tome is that the sentiment among business people is much more positivethan it has been. It had been cautiously optimistic for some time butalmost universally the business people that I talk to are fairlypositive about the outlook. While they complain bitterly aboutcompetition and not being able to get prices increases, their ownbusinesses seem to be doing pretty well. And I think that sentimentis supported by the economic data. Consumer spending, for example,has been quite good. The apparel people have been increasing theirsales, and production has gone up. Automobile sales fell off a bit inthe summer but they're still well above the pace that we saw at thistime last year. And retailers generally, not just the automobilepeople, are expecting a fairly positive Christmas season. The numberthat I hear most commonly is sales [increases of] between 3 and 5percent over last year. We continue to benefit from the strength inhousing. Residential construction is quite strong in the District andall the industries associated with housing are continuing to do wellbecause of housing. Commercial truck production is also up in theDistrict, responding to order backlogs. Producers of medicalequipment and supplies are also reporting increased shipments.Vacancy rates have been declining all year but I think there is now aconcern on the part of realtors that consolidation is going to reversethat course and that absorptions will not continue at the rate theyhad been running. We're also seeing on the negative side some cutbackin paper producers' production and weak demand from foreign marketsboth in that industry as well as in the chemical industry,particularly in Louisiana. Our employment growth is continuing tooutpace that of the nation, and we have no signs of price increases atall or of wage pressures. Prices of raw materials are pretty muchwhat they were, although we have had reports recently about increasesin lumber prices which we thought were going to be temporary but thattemporary period seems to be stretching out a little. Loan demand isstill fairly weak in the District but it is picking up a little,particularly in the consumer area. So in general the momentum in oureconomy in the Sixth District is picking up and the signs are quitefavorable for 1994.With respect to the national economy, we haven't revised ourforecast significantly since the last time. However, we do see GDPsomewhat stronger than the Greenbook. We think GDP growth is going tobe a bit over 3 percent on a fourth quarter-over-fourth quarter basis.For that reason we see the unemployment rate drifting down just alittle more and inflation somewhat higher. In fact our inflationnumber is about 3-1/2 percent for 1994. One of the interesting thingshere to look at--and the Greenbook does allude to this--is what'sgoing to happen to consumer spending. With the workweek and hoursworked moving up, it's a question as to how long employers are goingto be able to maintain this level of employment. So I think there isa possibility that employment will increase and, therefore, income andconsumer spending. The other thing that's interesting to me is thequestion of whether or not income growth is being underestimated dueto the number of self-employed people and small business formationsthat are occurring. If these people are not being captured [in thesurveys] and if income growth is actually stronger than the numbersreveal, then consumer spending could be fairly ebullient. On theother hand, if one charted [unintelligible], the jury is out on thatscore, so there is a possibility that consumer spending might not be-73-11/16/93as strong as our forecast has it. Another risk to the economy and tothe forecast, it seems to me, is the external sector. We all knowthat the projected recovery of the European economies has beenrepeatedly put off until later in 1994 and that represents a risk tothe economy. But generally speaking I think things are relatively ontrack.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. First with regard to the District, I've reportedfor a long that the District economy has been fundamentally sound, andthat continues to be the case. The one exception is the exceptionthat has also been the case for some time now and that's the areas ofagriculture that were affected by the flooding. We did have a meetingin the Bank about a week or so ago with a group of business leadersfrom the Twin Cities representing a wide range of businesses. I willcomment on that briefly because they did hold some views with greatconviction; they were very adamant about it. Three themes emerged andI will just report to the Committee on those. One was that they werepretty much of one mind that there is no inflationary pressure aroundwhatsoever. And they were quite vociferous about that. Secondly,they were very concerned about the health care proposals, particularlyfrom the point of view of what they meant for prospective employmentand costs of employment. I would say that they were almostuniversally negative about that. Thirdly, while they agreed that inmany respects the latest statistics on the aggregate economy and whatthey were seeing in at least some of their own businesses were morefavorable--and maybe a good deal more favorable--than what we wereseeing earlier in the year, they continue to think that the expansionis very fragile and could easily be disrupted. The one exception tothat was people in the real estate business, especially in residentialbut even to some extent in commercial. Clearly, residential has had avery good year in the District, and commercial activity has started toshow at least some signs of improvement. But outside of those areas,I think it's fair to say that there was still a view that theexpansion is quite fragile.With regard to the national economy and the economic outlookin the Greenbook, clearly this expansion has moved in fits and startsand it looks as if another start is under way. But starts have beenfollowed by periodic fits, and that's what the Greenbook seems to beenvisioning again. I don't know that I would take very strongexception to that but I do have some sense that maybe at this pointthe economy really is starting to build a little momentum. And that,coupled with the anecdotes that we've been getting for quite some timeabout the lack of inflationary pressures, leads me to speculate atleast that while we may get the same kind of path for nominal GDP in1994 as envisioned in the Greenbook, we might have a somewhat morefavorable split between real growth and inflation than is envisionedthere. I can't say that with any great conviction at this point but Ido have a sense that it wouldn't take a lot for things to turn outthat way. But other than that, I don't have any sharp departures fromthe outlook as depicted in the Greenbook.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. Well, it seems clear in our District thateconomic activity is picking up, as seems to be the case in a number-74-11/16/93of other parts of the country. We have a substantial amount ofmanufacturing activity in the Fifth District, especially textiles andfurniture but a lot of other things as well. And for the first timesince the beginning of the year we're seeing and getting informationabout increased orders and increased shipments. A lot of this,especially again with furniture and textiles, is being driven by theapparent increase in housing activity--sales and construction--notonly in our District but around the country. And we are definitelyseeing some significant strengthening in the housing sector in ourregion with a few local exceptions in places like Charleston, SouthCarolina and Norfolk, Virginia where the defense build-down is aproblem. I would just summarize [my comments] on the District bysaying that over the years I've found that the general tone ofcomments at our directors meetings is a pretty good coincident ormaybe slightly lagging indicator of overall conditions, and thosecomments have been decidedly more optimistic for the last couple ofmeetings.I'd like to take this opportunity to congratulate BobForrestal and the Sixth District for getting a Mercedes plant even ifit was at our expense. We're comforted somewhat, though, by news thatMickey Mouse is going to build a historic theme park about 30 milesdown the road which may [deflect] some tourists from Orlando tonorthern Virginia. We need a little more congestion!With respect to the national picture, the upward revision inthe Greenbook projection for the current quarter certainly seemsreasonable, given the broad evidence now that aggregate demand may beheating up a bit. Frankly, I wouldn't be terribly surprised to seesomething even in excess of 4 percent for one quarter. I alsocontinue to believe that the risk of error in the Greenbook projectionfor '94 is at least somewhat on the up side. I recognize, as Mike andthe Greenbook rightly point out, that the recent tendency for consumerspending to outrun income growth is not sustainable over the longhaul. But in the context of the permanent income model of consumerbehavior, I think one can interpret the recent behavior as perhapsindicating that households have revised upward their thinking aboutfuture income prospects. If that's a correct interpretation, thenit's quite possible that the increase in demand will be sustained wellinto 1994. And I wouldn't be surprised to see real GDP growth nextyear at 3 percent or perhaps even a bit higher, compared to the 2-1/2percent projection in the Greenbook. In that regard, the recentbackup in long-term interest rates is, for my money at least, the mostdiscouraging development recently. I think it's primarily due to aconcern in the markets that the recent strengthening in economicactivity is going to be allowed at some point to put upward pressureon inflation. And my sense is that that perception is increasinglywidespread. As we all know, nothing could hurt this recovery morecompletely and quickly than a big jump in long-term interest rates.So I think we need to remain vigilant.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Let me be briefer than usual in light of thehour. Although the Philadelphia District continues to lag the nation,the improved trends that I noted at the last meeting continue largelyfor the same reasons that we're seeing nationally. Manufacturing isstronger; the orders there are better. Residential construction is-75-11/16/93stronger. And the retailers, who usually are never happy, seem lessunhappy; and I think that's a positive sign for the District.Attitudes are still cautious largely because of the employmentsituation--employment growth is flat to very modest--although I dosense that people seem to be more receptive to good news than they dida few months ago.On the national scene, we have a sawtooth pattern that hasprevailed in this recovery now for several years. When we see a blipupward, as we're seeing now--4 percent growth seems likely in thecurrent quarter--there's a tendency to expect that that may continue,just as when things soften it tends to go down. My sense is that weare still largely locked into a 2-1/2 to 3 percent growth patternoverall with this sawtooth trend line that we see, largely I thinkbecause of the slow employment growth. And my sense is that what willkeep the economy from growing much faster than that is that the[strength in] consumption, which has [supplied] a big upward push, isnot sustainable [without] faster income growth, and I doubt that we'llsee the faster income growth that would be necessary. So, I think wedo have a stronger second half but I don't expect that trend tocontinue; next year I think we'll be back into the 2-1/2 to 3 percent[growth] area. On inflation I might just echo what has been said.There just is no sense out there that there's an inflationary problemor that prices are rising; it's quite to the contrary. I might alsosay that the subject of interest rates is a non-topic.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Well, I'll just continue the chorus here. Overthe period of the last couple of meetings there has been a definiteimprovement in our economy. And we see this across the economy.Actually, in some ways the manufacturing sector has improved somewhatbut a tension exists there. Output in the electronics sector isstarting to do somewhat better. Semiconductors and testing equipmentare a fair bit stronger and the software business is strong. Everyonesays they are [producing] components; the computer box business isdead essentially. But that growth is working against the downwardtension of defense, where the feeling is that defense procurementreductions are coming along a little faster, at least in these[electronic] industries, than people had expected. We have a lot ofauto-related small suppliers; they are doing quite well. But a numberof them report continued year-to-year price reduction pressures intalking about the Lopez era at General Motors. And they report anexpectation, when they contract at the end of whatever period it is,of 2 to 3 to 4 percent reductions in unit prices year-to-year. Realestate and the housing sector have strengthened; and even in the non-residential area, though there is not [much] activity, vacancy rateshave declined a fair bit in greater Boston. That leads one to thequestion of "Why?" since we're not seeing it in other figures. Andyet a significant number of start-up companies do seem to be comingalong. It's purely anecdotal information, but we have a large patentattorney office as a tenant in our building and they say they've neverbeen busier. And there are some more broad-based data that areconsistent with that. The retail area is doing relatively well, withsome improvement in appliances in white goods consistent with astrengthening in the housing market.-76-11/16/93In the context of all this, though, everyone we talk to inthe production sector is focusing continuously on productivityimprovements and on what they can do. Everyone, [when] they seestronger demands for their products, talks about: "How can I [meetthem] without making commitments for employment?" I would say thatthe mood swing--this is not consistent with what Ed said--has been apretty strong one to the favorable side by lots of people. Actuallyit outstrips the data by a fair bit; whether it outstrips reality isless clear.As far as the national economy goes, I would agree quite alot with the Greenbook. I would think that the forecast there isprobably center-weighted in terms of risks. I believe this notion ofthinking about the economy on a sawtooth basis has something to it.We've been waxing and waning, [moving in] fits and starts, or whateveryou want to call it. And until we get evidence that our employmentnumbers are somehow suspect and there are other reasons to expectincome generation that would be consistent with a rising level ofsales, we could see some slowdown in the consumption sector. Andbeyond that, I'm just sort of struck by how much moods have changed inNew England. Six months ago everyone thought we were going into atriple dip; now people are talking about boomlets. While I'm notquite sure that reality changes as fast as moods--and I was justlooking at the quarterly standard deviation in GDP--I'm wondering howmuch of this is a long-term shift and how much a short-term variation;that is something we've got to see.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. There are still some areas of the District thatare reported to be flat but they're what I would call fairly isolated.Most of the District reports growth. There is no new information of anegative nature, of things being weaker than before or weaker thanexpected. There are a number of aspects that are positive and strong--stronger than before, stronger than expected--especially realestate, commercial lending, and manufacturing generally, particularlycapital goods industries. And of note is that while at one time themachine tool industry in the Great Lakes region was thought to beheaded to oblivion, they're feeling pretty good; there's quite a bitof optimism starting to build in machine tools.Turning to the national [economy] and the Greenbook, when Ilook at the nominal and the real GDP [forecast], based on theexperience of the fourth quarter of last year I think the Greenbook iswrong. I just have no idea in which direction or how big. And when Ilook at the inflation [forecast] it's unacceptable in that progress oninflation has been pushed out over 48 months. The current number forthe end of '95 is above the number for a year ago as of this time. Soto go out to the end of '95 and still have inflation above where itwas projected a year ago to be at the end of '93 I think has to beviewed as unacceptable.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. The Eighth District economy has been buffeted byfloods, strikes, defense cutbacks, and corporate restructuring overthe last year. Cutbacks in defense spending and auto production haveadversely affected the Missouri economy. These cutbacks were-77-11/16/93especially noticeable in the St. Louis area. Flooding along theMississippi and Missouri Rivers and persistent rainfall reduced theDistrict's production of both corn and soybeans while foreign demandfor District agricultural products remains soft. District employmentgains have been offset somewhat in southern Illinois and Indiana by acoal strike that is now more than six months old. This strike hasreduced U.S. coal exports by 25 percent and depressed barge trafficalong the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers. Lacking domestic supply someutilities in coastal areas are now reported to have stepped up theircoal imports from South America and Asia.Despite these factors, Eighth District economic activityimproved this year and the prospects for next year are encouraging.This has been confirmed by the tone of comments I have been hearingfor the last couple of months. Payroll employment is above year-agolevels and while highly variable it should grow on average byapproximately 2 percent in 1994, near its long-term average growth.The Kentucky, Tennessee, and Mississippi economies all continue toexpand and diversify with numerous reports of new industries, robustloan demand, and higher bank earnings. In September unemploymentrates in the District's four principal states, Arkansas, Kentucky,Missouri and Tennessee, were at or below the national average. Someareas report shortages of qualified workers. Small businessesthroughout the District report generally strengthening demand. Salesof existing homes and residential construction remain strong, and banklending continues to grow. The District is the country's largestrice-producing area. Strong Japanese demand for California rice hascaused rice prices generally to double in the last month and maybolster the District's rice production next year.With respect to the national economy, our outlook is similarto that for the Eighth District. Nationally the unemployment rate hasfallen by more than a full percentage point from its cyclical peak andall indications are that it will continue its downward trend. Despitegrowing at a rate significantly below potential during the first halfof the year, output grew at 2.8 percent in the third quarter and 2.7percent during the past two years. Moreover, in my view the prospectsfor a strong fourth quarter are excellent and we anticipate that muchof this strength will carry over into 1994. Indeed, the economy nowappears poised for a significant period of average growth at or abovepotential.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. The economy in the Second Districtremains very flat as it has been most of this year, with our part ofNew Jersey going a little south and New York State staying at abouteven. The financial services industry and such people as lawyers whowork for them are doing very well, so the yuppie restaurants arecrowded and that tends to give a feeling of affluence and prosperityabout the city that Mr. Giuliani is about to take over. But we nowread that the level of the homeless has been underestimated. And NewYork City, I think, is very much getting to be a Disraeli two-nationphenomenon that is going to be tougher and tougher to govern and couldbe a good-sized challenge for a mayor who I think will respond to hiselection by getting tougher on the criminal classes, or those who arealleged to be by the people who voted for him. It could be aninteresting situation.-78-11/16/93At the national level, we're right with the Greenbook on thefourth quarter of this year and a bit higher, at about 2.9 percent,for 1994. The difference is spread pretty much throughout theforecast; our forecast is just a little more robust in general. Ourforecast for the CPI is exactly that of the Greenbook at 3.1 percent.But if anything that's eyeball adjusted up a bit; if we applied purelythe analysis we'd probably have it at 3.0 or conceivably even 2.9percent. I suppose the concern that we have in general, and I inparticular, is with the robust fourth quarter and that if for somereason the first quarter of next year should start out with a morepositive feeling I wonder if businessmen will try to take advantage ofthe situation to experiment with getting some price increases tostick. My guess is that the possibility of that could be quite high;that would mean that even though normally one would expect that a 2.9percent growth forecast and inflation--without the eyeball correction--coming down would not demand a monetary policy response, I think itcould well shape up that fairly early next year we will be challengedby some price actions which we would have to respond to.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. In the Eleventh District the mood has been moreupbeat and the numbers seem to be following it up. Within theDistrict, New Mexico is somewhat stronger and our part of Louisianasomewhat weaker than Texas. New Mexico is benefitting from an influxof a good many new industries. Louisiana has been hurt by weakchemical demand from Europe and Japan and weakness in the energyextraction business recently. The state has lost 6,600 energyextraction jobs since January of '92. Louisiana is still about 20,000jobs shy of regaining its peak levels of employment way back in 1981.A bright spot there is river boat gambling, primarily in theShreveport area. Within Texas most major metropolitan areas arestrengthening and are fairly strong. Houston is the major exception.At least temporarily energy seems to be a plus rather than a minus.The rig count, after reaching a 50-year low last spring, is up about25 percent from that. The main employment strength we have is in thearea of construction--single-family homes and apartments. In someareas in the state that's up 50 percent compared to a year ago. Inour board meeting last Friday, Amarillo was referred to as [wild] andVictoria as having a mini boom. So things are really getting livelyin the construction area. Several bankers noted an improvement inloan demand, but all admitted that too many banks were aggressivelyseeking to fill that demand. There is not much talk of a creditcrunch anymore. Clouds on the horizon include the depressing effectof health care reform, weakness in the Mexican economy, the prospectsthat NAFTA may not pass, and at least from a local point of view, thefear that Iraqi oil production will resume.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That will create some interestingconsequences. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. In my view we have moderate growth, as we'vehad for 2-1/2 years now. The last seven quarters have averaged 3percent and the last four quarters have averaged almost 3 percent. SoI conclude we have 3 percent growth even though we may have fits andstarts. It's pretty clear looking back that the initial force ofmonetary ease clearly went to financial repair and it's increasinglyevident that we're turning the corner or have turned the corner from-79-11/16/93repair to renewed spending. We now see a very traditional pattern ofinterest-sensitive spending emerging: business investment spendingand consumer spending on durables and housing. I think recent dataand the market response to them do raise the question of whether thereis evidence of a significant acceleration of growth. Based uponcurrently available data I see no convincing evidence of a significantshift in the underlying mean, although there may be some increase. Myunderlying mean is a bit higher than the Greenbook's, more like 3percent. It is true that strong consumer spending has outstrippedincome growth and that's unsustainable and has been for many quartersnow. That raises the question Bob Forrestal raised, and which wetalked about at the Board a while back, which is the question ofmeasurement. And Al raised this question of whether people may befeeling a bit more secure about their job prospects or their jobsecurity and their sense of permanent income, and then there are thewealth gains in the markets. But I don't think we have the potentialfor explosive consumer growth as we did in the early '80s.There is one real change in my view and that is that mortgagerefinancing has given way to housing investment. That is somethingthat's new. It's long overdue and I doubt that it alone is enough totake us off the track here. There remains the ample supply ofcontractionary influences, the usual suspects. But more generally,one interesting thing to assess is this economic climate. Up untilnow despite the recovery, my sense is that consumers, businesses, andfinancial institutions have remained chastened and cautious. Andthere is some evidence, such as what Bob McTeer just reported on, thatthat's starting to change now. I do think we'll probably register avery strong fourth quarter. We did last year. But so far at leastI'm not ready to shift up my mean fundamentally although it's clearthat mean is already a bit above potential. Why this sharp bondmarket response in recent weeks? Very little has happened. We hadthird-quarter growth of 2.8 percent and the bond market changed. Itis true that we anticipate a strong fourth quarter. We've had threeor four strong quarters in the past two years, but we've never had ananticipated strong quarter; fourth-quarter growth was 5.7 percent lastyear but no one expected it so we couldn't enjoy it. This is thefirst quarter that I can think of where--SPEAKER(?). A rally.MR. MULLINS. Right. And we're still not so sure but thereis some of that anticipation. Of course, just a few weeks ago we hadabject pessimism on the economy and euphoria in the bond markets. Oneobvious factor is just the bond market dynamics of [people saying]we've had a long good run in the long bond, let's capture those gainsbefore the end of the year and not be a pig. I think the other factoris this truncation, perhaps temporarily, of a pessimistic tail ofassessments. Despite 2-1/2 years of growth this is a RodneyDangerfield recovery: It's never gotten any respect; it has beendenied, criticized, or bad-mouthed through the full 2-1/2 years, andthis has been fed recently by the weak first half of 1993. I thinkthe recent data make it increasingly difficult to sustain an outlookof economic deterioration. The recent evidence confirms that theexpansion, though it is moderate, does appear durable and sustainable.It may be slow but it appears at least to people in the markets lessfragile, less likely to be punctured by tax increases or fears abouthealth care. And rather than creating a realistic expectation of very-80-11/16/93robust growth, this confirmation tended to extinguish the pessimistictail of distributions, and the market responded to that.There is also talk of Fed tightening in the markets as therewere fantasies of Fed ease just a few weeks ago when everything wasterrible. Should this market reaction be a concern to us? Almentioned it. I don't think sustained moderate economic growth shouldbe a cause for concern. I agree with Jerry that we shouldn't beopposed to growth. Rapid money and credit growth could portendtrouble; we don't have that in my view, not yet at least, although M1is still strong. Economic growth crashing against resourceconstraints would certainly concern the staff, but we still have ourmeasure of slack. And the investment boom and productivity growthsuggest the prospect for growth without those concerns. And again,growth so fast that businesses and workers feel free to seek price andwage increases, the possibility that Bill McDonough mentioned, wouldbe a cause for concern. I think evidence [of that is not apparent];for example, if you look closely at the purchasing managers' reports,the price diffusion index is still below 50 percent. My sense is thatcompetitive conditions remain tight although there's a possibility ofthis sort of speed effect if we have two good quarters. Inflationstill seems to be on a marginally downward path. The fundamentals,including a disinflationary world economic environment, support theprospect for some additional progress. And those fundamentals atleast would suggest some more progress than the Greenbook isprojecting, as Bob Parry mentioned, given the outstanding slack.Having said all of that, I still believe we maintain anaccommodative stance. Because of the long lags associated withinflation it is necessarily our job to look into the future. If wewait until the inflationary pressures are established and evident,it's pretty late in the game. Mike Prell gave the upside scenario;with capacity utilization already at 82 percent, we might not havemuch room left especially because I think growth next year couldeasily be 3 or 3-1/2 percent. Moreover, though, I think our objectiveought to be to continue to make progress on reducing inflation--coreinflation has run 3 percent over the past 12 months--in order tosecure a sustainable low interest rate environment and the associatedbenefits. In my view our objective should not be simply to avoid are-acceleration or an upturn in inflation. I think there's a realpayoff not just from stabilizing inflation in the 3 to 4 percent rangebut in moving lower.Finally, I do think we should take these markets seriously.The long bond rate has moved up 40 basis points. There's a legitimatequestion as to how long we should wait if the long bond rate continuesto move up--how long we should artificially constrain the short end.If the bond rate does move up, we're going to have to consider whethera move on the short end might be necessary and beneficial to confirmthat we're on the job and to limit the damage of inflationaryexpectations on the long end. After all, this is still an investment-driven expansion, dependent on the long rate for its thrust. So Ithink we ought to be sensitive to the risks associated withmaintaining an accommodative stance too long, including the lostopportunity to secure lower inflation. But it does seem to me thatit's relatively early in the game. The long bond rate is up 40 basispoints but it seems to have stabilized and it's still 30 basis pointsbelow its level last summer after the budget deal passed. So it went-81-11/16/93way beyond the budget deal period. And, of course, we've had verylittle increase in the implied forward rates in the long end of thecurve; much of it is intermediate.Nonetheless, when considering when to switch fromaccommodative to neutral I would note that the current favorableoutlook for stronger growth does provide a credible environment inwhich to consider such a move at a time when I think many people wouldsuggest the risks are on the up side. I will also simply say thatit's worth noting that the Administration forecast is, of course, forshort rates to go up above inflation next year. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm about where I've beenfor some months now. I see very little evidence of an importantchange. My definition of that in my lexicon would be a moderategrowth expectation, fits and starts, a surge perhaps here in thefourth quarter but not sustainable, with a slow acceleration--in fitsand starts--over time. I think there are enough positives in theforecast to sustain that growth, not the least of which would be acontinued reduction in your famous head winds. In all probability allof the positives will sustain that moderate growth path. I think wehave to recognize that there exist considerable restraints in thatforecast that should prevent an upside breakout, [including] fiscalrestraint, the further impact of new taxes, and a saving rate that isalready at the bottom of its historical range. Also, restructuringcontinues and defense [outlays] will continue to decrease; net exportswill not be helpful and may decrease or get worse as well; andintermediate and long rates have shown some spontaneous rises. Iemphasize that I come out on the positive side of this, but I do thinkwe have to recognize that there are some pretty powerful restraintsout there.I'll relate one anecdote that I would share with those whoweren't there. The Federal Advisory Committee was in here a week orso ago and they were asked what their forecast for the economy was.They had a very, very strong consensus at between 2-1/2 and 3 percentcentering on about 2.8 percent. Just to see what it might elicit, wesaid: Okay if that's the consensus, think contrarian a little bit andtell us where you would see the risks to that forecast. Interestinglyenough, the way I heard it--others who were there may have heard itdifferently--they were almost unanimous in seeing the risks on thedown side, not the up side, for whatever that's worth.On inflation, I just don't see any pickup visible. Inflationis still falling on a year-over-year basis by almost every measure.We still have slack in the economy, although capacity utilization mayhave to come off of that list with this latest report. But certainly[we have slack] in labor markets and world activity generally andsentiment continues to be weak. So, I see no reason to look to ashort-term move in that regard. In short: Steady as she goes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Well, for the first time in a long time I don'tfind myself in congruence with the Greenbook in terms of all of theelements of [the growth forecast]. I am much closer to the-82-11/16/93Greenbook's version of inflation but for an entirely different set ofreasons. A growth rate in the economy overall of closer to 3 percentor slightly better for next year is more in line with what I seedeveloping. I think that housing markets are likely be a littlestronger. I think we've been overly pessimistic on the exports side.I just can't see that dip and deterioration there in spite of thecommon current outlooks for some of our major trading partners. Theother part of the trade balance that bothers me a little is theexpected and continued high growth of imports. I think at least theconsumer side of the import market is going to be rather weaker thanwe perhaps expect. Now, given the fact that the unemployment figuresmight go down somewhat under that kind of scenario, then I think the3.1 percent projection for inflation may not be an unreasonable one.Having said all that, I think there is an opportunity herefor us to blow an aneurism in this economy through its most fragilepart, and that's the financial markets. The full impact of highertaxes at least for some major segment of the investor market, aperception of higher costs for a lot of things because of excisetaxes, and the possibility of paying higher premiums for health careand so forth and so on, may in fact cause a lot of nervousness thatwill lead people to retreat from the more speculative parts of themarket. And I just believe that the values there are high enough andthe market nervous enough that it looks for chances or opportunitiesor excuses or rationales to trade. And if the trading ball getsrolling down the hill, I think we could have a serious contraction inboth the equity market and the bond market, which could affect allthese other differences that I have had. So I really don't want to beright--I want the Greenbook to be right--because of something likethat. But at the same time that's a part of the economic puzzle thatremains very worrisome to me.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. For the first two-thirds of what John was sayingI was almost exactly in agreement and thought maybe I didn't need totalk very much, but then it turned out that--MR. LAWARE. Mark your calendars! This is the first timewe've been in agreement in about four years or something like that.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that the sentiment expressedaround this table is surprisingly strong. That is, there were thoseof you who were somewhat concerned on the down side who now seem tolack that same concern. And certainly some of you who had a moreplacid outlook now seem to be reporting more vigor in regard to therate of economic activity. I think some of us--particularly I do,having had such a bullish view a year ago--have to ask ourselves:Well, what about this year? Will there be another downturn? First ofall, this recovery statistically does not have more variability thanany previous recovery. There aren't any fits and starts in thisrecovery; there are fits and starts in people's perception of it. Butthe quarter-to-quarter variability is really just about right on.Industrial production, which is a somewhat independent measure, indeedseems to me to be on a pretty steady upward progression.But economies don't get into difficulty because it gets to beJanuary. This January we do have this significant tax phenomenon, but-83-11/16/93I've decided that maybe the impact of that tax phenomenon is mis-measured. It's true that some people underwithheld in [1993] and theyhave to make it up in their actual 1993 tax payments and will have asignificant increase in their estimated tax or withholding in 1994.But it seems to me that the people for whom that occurs are peoplewith high incomes and they are well educated, and I just can't imaginethat there's any surprise of fact. Indeed, I think the politicalrhetoric--that is, the American people's dissatisfaction withgovernment--continues to cause in some sense an over-assessment of thetax impact so people even in high income tax brackets probably areover-reacting and have already taken those tax effects [into account]in regard to their own permanent lifetime income notions and wealthpresent values. Many Americans are not going to have tax increases.The political rhetoric has been that they will; consequently, maybewe'll have a little surprise. People will find out that [the new tax]isn't as bad as they thought it would be, and only a surprise, itseems to me, is apt to alter the activity level. And it seemsunlikely to me that we're going to end up with the same inventorycondition in that we do not have the year-end boom this time, whichsubtracts out of the first quarter because of [efforts] to get[expenditures] in one tax period as compared to another. So I thinkwe ought not take it for granted that the economy will do a little dipnext year.I'm not disagreeing with Mike Prell's forecast in regard toGDP; it's a very reasonable forecast. But it seems very unlikely tome that the economy will be softer than what Mike has outlined. Ithink there's a considerable chance that the economy will be somewhatstronger, or maybe surprisingly stronger, than that forecast. Butnone of us has a crystal ball to be able to see that and to know forsure that that's going to happen. The Federal Reserve has a greatdeal of credibility at this time. We have quite a bit of esteem.There are people who believe we're the only game in town because thosewho have such a disdain for their government tend to look to us asbeing somehow or other the people who get it right. So we're in arather preferred position and yet our responsibility is to continue topursue a monetary policy that continues this disinflation. If we[lose] that--that is, if bad news or an unanticipated shock effectcause the rate of inflation to zoom upward without any action on ourpart--there will be some penalties.As for the inflation forecast--and here again I'm notquibbling with that because it does seem somewhat reasonable--I wouldpoint out that it [shows] very, very meager [progress]. And it's verymeager [compared with other countries] in the world. I was looking atthe G-10 group and I believe we are only slightly ahead of the UnitedKingdom and probably a percentage point and a half ahead of Italy.Other than that, all other G-10 countries have a better forecast,according to our staff, than we do. This to me produces somevulnerability because as long as there are expectations of continueddisinflation then I would expect good bond market behavior. The bondmarket does have more potential for stronger bond prices and lowerinterest rates at the intermediate and long levels. But that's notguaranteed; that's very difficult at this stage of the cycle. And wehave to be very conscious of the fact that if we are perceived asmoving before people thought we should move--indeed if there were somenotion of "What in the world is the Fed doing?" in such a move--wewould probably get a very good long bond response and thereby not-84-11/16/93damage the growth prospects. On the other hand, if there were apickup in activity and if world growth were to pick up somewhat andworld commodity prices were thereby adversely impacted and we wereseen as moving in a laggard fashion, then I think we could have a verysignificant upward movement in interest rates in the intermediate andlong areas. And that could [induce] some vulnerability in themarkets. I am somewhat bullish in regard to the equity markets. Ithink the equity markets probably haven't had that last boom andbubble that often accompanies such moves. The opportunity cost ofbeing in the equity market is very, very small. So if the economy isa little stronger and inflation about as we expect, the equity marketsmay have a somewhat supportive upside potential. World growth has tobe a very significant factor for an economy with our trade balance andits impact on us. I'm not optimistic about Japan. I'm not optimisticabout Europe, but I'm not that pessimistic either; it seems to me thatthey may very well have reached bottom and we may have seen the worstof the impact on our exports in that market. Mexico does provide somedownward risk due to the monetary tightening that is inevitablyaccompanying the difficulties there, and that will have some adverseeffect. But China and other Asian countries and parts of LatinAmerica may offset that to a great extent. That about summarizes myview. It is that the economy has the potential to be much stronger,but I think hardly any chance of being weaker than we've forecast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. Well, smoothing through the quarterly or maybethe half-year ups and downs, it does appear that we've returned to apath of slow or moderate growth. The good news about this growth isthat it does appear to be generally self-sustaining, which we haven'tbeen able to say with a great deal of confidence. But after all, thisgrowth has continued and in fact strengthened in the second half ofthis year despite floods, drought, tax increases, defense downsizing,restructuring, a weak international economy, and the health insuranceuncertainty. The economy has a lot of good things going for it. Wehave low interest rates; we're seeing pretty good business investment,which is giving us the spending, obviously, but also a productivitykick. Consumers are spending; maybe it's mostly on cars and housesbut they are spending. Corporate profits are reasonably strong. Thefinancial sector is strong and able to assist in financing so we'renot having bottlenecks of credit unavailability either in the directfinancing markets or through the banking system. I think it's alittle ironic that we're now seeing much more acceptance of a growthrate of about 2-1/2 percent. Maybe even a year or so ago we wouldhave said that was not an acceptable growth rate for this economycompared to what we've seen in previous cycles. Now, going forward,maybe this is not as acceptable as many folks would like, but I'mhaving a hard time seeing that we're going to move much off of thatgrowth path. And that's indeed what the Greenbook is suggesting. Jobgrowth is not strong enough to lower unemployment. We're still havingthis question of job quality, which seems to be affecting confidence.There is this question of whether or not the income growth we'reseeing will be less than the increases in spending and thus whetherthat [spending] can be sustained. We're seeing a lower saving rate.And we still have the continuation of all of the [factors] we'vetalked about in the past that tend to slow growth: the restructuring,the fiscal drag, and so on. So I'm having a hard time seeing what is-85-11/16/93going to move us much above this 2-1/2 or maybe 3 percent growth rate.But at least it's a slow to moderate growth path.On the inflation front, we've seen continued progress onreducing inflation, albeit the rate of improvement has slowed down.Labor costs don't appear to be causing pressure. We've even seen somedecline in unit labor costs because of the productivity increases. Weclearly have a ways to go on inflation, and it seems to me that theproper approach is to keep our eye on the ball here because there arepressures. We're seeing some pressures, perhaps somewhat late, in thecommodity prices and taxes. But it seems reasonable and appropriateto me to focus on keeping the slope of the movement of inflation goingdownward. I've been really quite heartened recently to see articlesin the popular press talking about how [a firm] can survive when itcan't increase prices. And there has been a lot of discussion aroundthe table about not being able to increase prices. So I'd hope thatwe would continue to focus on keeping the [inflation] slope goingdownward.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, just about everything has beensaid. I'd just add, first of all, that adding a child has taught mesomething. I did the checkbook last weekend and calculated that asignificant fraction of the decline in the national saving rate wascaused by the Lindsey household in October! [Laughter] So, I imaginethat's going to be a temporary phenomenon. My other comment is that Iwas asked a question at breakfast about CRA and I have a document herefor anyone who wants it. And that's all I have to say.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Mr. Kohn.MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, you'll be relieved to know that I'llbe considerably briefer this time than in the previous briefing.[Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Kohn? If not, let meget started. It strikes me that in part the fits and starts were notsomething that was going on in the economy but something that wasgoing on in the data. One way of looking at that is to ask whetherother measures are giving the type of volatility that the GDP datahave given. It's clear, for example, that gross domestic income--granted a somewhat inferior measure--in exactly the same context hasbeen a good deal smoother than the GDP. It's also hardly credible,with two independent estimates of increasing work hours during thefirst half--both the payroll and the household surveys--thatproductivity measured against GDP, not the nonfarm business product,could have gone down. It's just not a credible economic phenomenon.That leads one to conclude that this recovery has been smoother thanthe data show and it raises some interesting questions about whetherit is self-sustaining, which a number of people have commented on, andwhether there is any significant breakout here that we seem to beobserving. It is certainly the case that industrial production hasshown some definite strength of late. And the November data, justlooking at the weekly numbers on motor vehicles and a number of otherrelated weekly industrial components, indicate that [the] November[index] is already up significantly.-86-11/16/93The obvious question that we have to ask ourselves is: Whatis it that's going to induce an acceleration much beyond the Greenbook[forecast]? And I think the argument has to be that the missing linkin all of this is the inventory patterns. We have seen a verysignificant contraction in inventories in terms of days' supply,largely reflecting just-in-time [inventory management and theresultant] increasingly evident compression. And the compression isbeing driven to a large extent by quality control requirements whichrelate in turn to the issue of the competitive pressures. One of theinteresting insights that I learned from your Vice Chairman when I wasout there was this notion that when inventories are very low, thejust-in-time pattern [allows] fairly rapid movement from one segmentof a production process to another or from one establishment toanother. The finding of a fault in a particular product or aparticular element in the fabrication process means that it can getfixed relatively quickly. In other words, you don't have two months'worth of widgets which are slightly off. If it's just-in-time, youhave three days' [supply]; so you don't lose the quality and you don'tlose the production. And that pattern is apparently driving a verysubstantial part of this inventory issue.Historically, we never would perceive of any inventoryacceleration in a business cycle sense until we began to see theprocess of lead times on the deliveries of products begin to stretchout. The normal cyclical process that we used to observe fairlyconsistently from cycle to cycle was that we would begin to get someslight pressure on capacity, which would cause delivery lead times tostretch out. The purchasing managers, being concerned about the nowlonger lead times, would then start to order more and build up theirso-called safety stock. That in turn would overload the system evenmore and create a still greater increase in lead times and still moreordering, and you'd get the standard inventory process which wascharacteristic of much of the business cycle before this one. Thereis no evidence at this stage that any of that process has begun. Thelead times as we measure them off the purchasing managers' reports ortheir equivalent delays in deliveries are remarkably quiescent. Thatdoesn't mean they're going to stay that way. It does mean that if weare apt to see some semblance of acceleration, one of the signs maywell be some lead times beginning to move, some industrial commodityprices beginning to move, as for example steel scrap has been doing oflate, which is an interesting but at the moment the sole indicatorcoming from the commodity markets. We also, I suspect, have to seesome credit expansion. No matter how we look at these numbers, theyare not the credit numbers of a boom. So, I would find it hard tobelieve that we're going to see anything resembling a significantpickup unless we spot it in the lead times or in the credit numbers.And it's more likely to be in the credit numbers because they movesomewhat faster; it's not that they are a better advance indicator butthey're more current. And I think we may find--excuse the expression--that M2 might turn out to have certain elements of information in itjust as we have buried it. But I think the more important question isthe [domestic] nonfinancial [sector] credit, which has been quitequiescent even though it has shown some modest improvements.The foreign markets look awful and I think the Japaneseeconomy is scary. The German economy doesn't seem to be goinganywhere and I think the Japanese economy is demonstrating basicallythat the cycle of balance sheet strains, which the UK went through, is-87-11/16/93very evident in Japan. And since the depth of it is so much greaterthan ours, the presumption that they're going to pick up I just findnoncredible. So I think that we're not going to get very much ofanything from the export markets. Finally, with a five-weekintermeeting period, it seems to me that there's very little thatcould happen to alter significantly anything that we are working on sofar as policy is concerned. I'd conclude that a symmetrical, nochange directive until the next meeting is a "gimme putt." Ed Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Concede the putt.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's about time!MR. KOHN. This would be an easy one to write up withattribution.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MR. PHILLIPS. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Alan, I'm going to spend a little longer onthis. I favor alternative "B" with a bias toward a greater degree ofreserve restraint. The economy is gaining momentum, which isreflected in faster GDP growth and faster albeit still sluggish growthin the broad monetary aggregates. Nominal interest rates have alsorisen. If this rise in interest rates is sustained--along the linesof what David was saying before--monetary policy will automaticallyshift toward a more inflationary stance under a federal funds rateoperating regime. Accordingly, the funds rate must at a minimum beallowed to move up with market interest rates over time. Moreover,the thrust of monetary policy as measured by the growth in M1 andreserves has been quite stimulative throughout the current expansion.M1 has grown at an 11.8 percent annual rate from the second quarter of1991 to the second quarter of 1993 and reserves have grown at an 11.6percent annual rate. Even after allowing for technical factors, whichhave temporarily increased the demand for M1 and reserves at times,-88-11/16/93the growth rates have been very high. The effects of this stimulativepolicy on inflation will be felt only with considerable lags, probablynot for another 6 to 12 months or more. Accordingly, one can not takemuch comfort in current rates of inflation though they appearreasonably stable. In addition, the 3 percent annual increase in theCPI, which many forecasters believe is the lowest rate we will achievein this cycle, can hardly be viewed as representing price stability.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. I have a lot of sympathy for what Tom justsaid but for now "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. My preference in this situation, in which thefed funds rate is at 3 percent and it really ought to be at 4 percent,is to be at a permanent symmetric position. I would agree that thisisn't exactly [the time]--I'd like to have a little better opportunityfor timing than doing it today--but that's my preference. A 4 percentfed funds rate just seems to be much more likely to be associated withstability in commodity prices, the price of gold, and a more neutralmonetary [policy] position away from the accommodative [policyposition] that we're in. And I just doubt very much that we have anadequate ability to call the turn at the time. So, I'd just feel alot more confident with 4 percent but, Mr. Chairman, I don't know howto get there.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. Even if I wanted to choose alternative A oralternative C, I could not do so based on the criteria set forth inthe Bluebook because it says the choice of alternative A is based onunacceptably slow real growth and alternative C on unacceptably highreal growth. And I think those criteria are relevant for making thedecision between "A" and "C," so I'm stuck with "B."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I favor "B" symmetric. I have some sympathy forthe issue of how we are going to know when the right time to deviatefrom this path is. But we can't avoid that responsibility, and mybest judgment is that this is not the time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.-89-11/16/93MR. MCTEER. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's try "B" symmetric.MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. In the context of the Committee'slong-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economicgrowth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, andmonetary developments, slightly greater reserve restraint or slightlylesser reserve restraint might be acceptable in the intermeetingperiod. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to beconsistent with modest growth in M2 and M3 over coming months."Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman McDonough YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Lindsey YesPresident McTeer YesGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Phillips YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible] if we ever find anappropriate time. The next meeting for monetary policy is December21. We'll be in touch very shortly.END OF MEETING-90-