Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeFebruary 2-3, 1993A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, February 2, 1993, at 2:30 p.m. and wascontinued on Wednesday, February 3, 1993, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, ChairmanMr. Corrigan, Vice ChairmanMr. AngellMr. BoehneMr. KeehnMr. KelleyMr. LaWareMr. LindseyMr. McTeerMr. MullinsMs. PhillipsMr. SternMessrs. Broaddus, Jordan, Forrestal, and Parry, AlternateMembers of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMessrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron. Presidents of the FederalReserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, and Boston,respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and EconomistMr. Bernard, Deputy SecretaryMr. Coyne, Assistant SecretaryMr. Gillum, Assistant SecretaryMr. Mattingly, General CounselMr. Patrikis, Deputy General CounselMr. Prell, EconomistMr. Truman, EconomistMessrs. R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, Promisel,Rosenblum, Scheld, Siegman, Simpson,and Slifman, Associate EconomistsMr. McDonough, Manager of the System Open MarketAccountMs. Greene, Deputy Manager for Foreign OperationsMs. Lovett, Deputy Manager for Domestic OperationsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Madigan, Assistant Director, Division of MonetaryAffairs, Board of Governors1. Attended Wednesday session only.2. Attended Tuesday session only.Mr. Brady, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs,Board of GovernorsMr. Rosine, Senior Economist, Division of Research andStatistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Wiles, Secretary of the Board, Office of theSecretary, Board of GovernorsMr. Winn, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members,Board of GovernorsMs. Werneke, Special Assistant to the Board, Office ofBoard Members, Board of GovernorsMr. Siciliano, Special Assistant to the General Counsel,Legal Division, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Beebe, T. Davis, Dewald, Goodfriend, and Ms.Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal ReserveBanks of San Francisco, Kansas City, St. Louis,Richmond, and Atlanta, respectivelyMr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of BostonMr. Gavin, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank ofClevelandMr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank ofMinneapolisMs. Meulendyke, Manager, Open Market Operations, FederalReserve Bank of New York3. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee'sdiscussion of the economic outlook and its longer-runobjectives for monetary and debt aggregates.4. Attended portion of the meeting relating to the release ofFOMC information to the public.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofFebruary 2-3, 1993February 2, 1993--Afternoon SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Even though I have no legal authority atthe moment, I call the meeting to order. Governor Mullins has nolegal authority but he'll be Chairman pro tem.MR. MULLINS. It's my honor to nominate Chairman Greenspan asChairman of the FOMC for the coming year.MR. LAWARE. I second the nomination.MR. MULLINS. Are there other nominations? Withoutobjection. I also have the great honor of nominating PresidentCorrigan as Vice Chairman of the FOMC for as long as he may be with usand his successor thereafter for the year ending December '93.Without objection, you're now legal.MR. ANGELL. You mean an unnamed successor? What does thatdo to Jerry's confidence?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm not worried.MR. MULLINS. Well, you're legal.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm legal. We now have the issue of thestaff officers, and I'll request that Norm read the list.MR. BERNARD.Secretary and Economist, Donald L. Kohn;Deputy Secretary, Normand R. V. Bernard;Assistant Secretary, Joseph R. Coyne;Assistant Secretary, Gary P. Gillum;General Counsel, J. Virgil Mattingly;Deputy General Counsel, Ernest T. Patrikis;Economist, Michael J. Prell;Economist, Edwin M. Truman.Associate Economists from the Board of Governors:David E.Lindsey;Larry J. Promisel;Charles J. Siegman;Thomas D. Simpson; andLawrence Slifman.Associate Economists from the Federal Reserve Banks:Richard G. Davis, proposed by President Corrigan;Richard W. Lang, proposed by President Boehne;Arthur J. Rolnick, proposed by President Stern;Harvey Rosenblum, proposed by President McTeer; andKarl A. Scheld, proposed by President Keehn.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unless there are objections, I willassume that the Committee accepts this slate of officers. The nextitem on our organizational agenda is the selection of the New YorkBank as the Bank to execute transactions for the System Open Market2/2-3/93Account. Unless there are objections from the Committee, I willassume that that also is authorized.The next item on our agenda is the selection of the Managerof the System Open Market Account, the Deputy Manager for DomesticOperations, and the Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations. Ourrespective incumbents in these jobs, as you well know, are William J.McDonough, Joan E. Lovett, and Margaret L. Greene. Unless I hearobjections, I will assume that the Committee authorizes another termfor all of them.The next item is a review of the Authorization for DomesticOpen Market Operations, which I believe was circulated to the membersof the Committee. Unless somebody has any questions relevant to it, Iwill assume that the authorization is reaffirmed. [Secretary's note:No objections were heard with regard to any of the above items.]Mr. Truman will now take us to our next agenda item, which isa review of several matters relevant to the foreign [side].MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, there are four items to consider:the Foreign Currency Authorization, the Foreign Currency Directive,the Procedural Instructions, and the related agreement to warehouseforeign currencies for the United States Treasury. There is atechnical change proposed for the Foreign Currency Authorization andthe Procedural Instructions concerning the change of the structure ofthe management of the System Open Market Account and the new positionsof Manager and Deputy Managers. I will be glad to answer anyquestions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would you like to say a few words on theGonzalez letter relating to the purchases of the Mexican peso?MR. TRUMAN. We thought that the Committee ought to be awareof the fact that Congressman Gonzalez in one of his January 19thletters raised a number of somewhat garbled questions about the swapnetwork, foreign currency operations, and in particular the purchasesof the Mexican peso, all of which have been done in connection withswap operations completely covered by foreign operations. He asked usto provide material to him covering the history of these arrangementsgoing back to the beginning of time or pretty close to it--1962. Weare in the process of doing that. Almost all of what we're going toprovide involves documents that are already in the public record inthe form of the Managers' reports and excerpts from the FOMC policyrecords with regard to the Mexican swap arrangements and how they haveevolved since 1967.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unless there is an objection, the votethat we will now have would amend the Foreign Currency Authorizationand the two additional documents indicated by Ted only with respect tothe updating of the managers' titles. Would somebody like to move[their approval]?MR. KELLEY. So moved, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.2/2-3/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. The next item is the[report on the] examination of the System Open Market Account, whichhas been circulated. Unless there is a question or an objection, Iwill assume that that also is accepted.Having worked our way through the organizational items withseeming tranquility, we now get to the less interesting part of ourmeeting and I will ask somebody to move approval of the minutes of theDecember 22nd meeting.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Move it.MR. SYRON. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Gretchen, would youpresent the foreign currency operations [report]?MS. GREENE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Gretchen?MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, this is perhaps a question morefor you. Do we have any idea at this point what the attitude of theAdministration is with respect to intervention?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, but I've been having somepreliminary discussions with Larry Summers on precisely that question,and I should think we will get some judgments reasonably quickly as towhat set of principles they would like to be supportive of. I'vesuggested that we develop those principles jointly and, hopefully,that will be initiated sooner rather than later. In fact, I justdiscussed it with him this morning.MR. JORDAN. I was monitoring the Call from the Novembermeeting through year-end. As the news unfolded about the [domestic]economy being stronger than before versus Europe and versus the restof the world, I had no sense on a day-to-day basis that we werepositioned [correctly] for the environment we're going into. If youdidn't have the inherited position, would you wish to have a largerposition in foreign currencies or different currencies or a smallerposition? Do you feel you're positioned with the right portfolio forthis environment?MS. GREENE. Are you talking about the portfolio of theFederal Reserve and the Treasury?MR. JORDAN. Yes.MR. MCDONOUGH. Gretchen has done that remarkable thing,which is to flip the ball upward. Most of our reserves are in marksand yen, and those are certainly the two currencies that I think onewould want the reserves to be in. We hold for the two monetaryauthorities approximately $40 billion in total reserves now, whichwould impress me as at about the upper end of the reserves that onewould consider appropriate. What I'm less certain about is what thelower end of that is because I do subscribe to the view that on theday when we need them we surely don't want to have to pass the hat and2/2-3/93go get them. We have a few remnants of reserves from the past insterling and Swiss francs. I would think, as we move forward in ourdiscussions with the Treasury, that we might wish to concentrate onthe reserves of the two most useful currencies [for interventionpurposes]. If one starts with the notion that reserves are good tohave, which I do, I don't think the present level of our reserves istoo high. But I think it is at about the upper limit of what we wouldneed.MR. TRUMAN. I might comment that we don't always positionour holdings as if we were maximizing the [return] in our portfolio ina short-run sense. That's not the way the Domestic Desk runs itsoperations. If you were a private citizen, you might choose somethingelse.MR. JORDAN. If I could follow-up on that comment: I supposethe analysis as to whether we had the right amount or not would bequite different on the domestic portfolio than it would be on theforeign currency portfolio--assets denominated in foreign currencies.You would not make the same after-the-fact judgment about whether wehad the right amount or not.MR. TRUMAN. I think you're right in what you're referringto, but I think the ex-post analysis would be equally difficult sincewe don't really know until we've liquidated [our position].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions? If not, let's moveto the domestic open market operations and Mr. McDonough.MR. MCDONOUGH. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you have any sense as to how marketparticipants are viewing the size of the proposed short-term stimuluspackage and its impact on intermediate- and long-term rates?MR. MCDONOUGH. The growing feeling, prior to SecretaryBentsen's using the number $30 billion, had been that the likely sizeof the package would be in the $15 to $20 billion range. And I thinkthat was very thoroughly discounted and was being explained as aboutthe minimum the new President could get away with given the campaignpromises. When [the figure] gets up to about $30 billion--andcertainly anything beyond that--I'd say the market has not prepareditself for a fiscal package of that size. Therefore, when it getsbeyond, say, $25 billion, I think it could create something of abackup, especially in intermediate rates. However, this will all bedone against a background of what degree of credibility there is inlonger-term deficit reduction. So, the larger the number in the shortterm, the more convincing the package for longer-term deficitreduction is going to have to be. But it still will be looked at as apackage with a desire--not necessarily on the part of the Street firmsbut we think, [based on] what they say, of the ultimate investors--tobelieve that there may be a fiscal breakthrough. There seems to be adesire to believe as [investors] start moving out the yield curve andpicking up more duration that they will pick up more yield. It's arather emotional climate that can be easily dissatisfied. But it'ssitting there waiting to be satisfied. That is how I read it now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions for Bill? Tom Melzer.2/2-3/93 -5-MR. MELZER. Bill, do you have any sense of what the marketis discounting on the mix of this refunding package? Is there anexpectation of a significant reduction in the [size of the] bond[issue]?MR. MCDONOUGH. Until last Friday when the word came out ofRoger Altman's comments on the McLaughlin show, which was airedSunday, I think there was a feeling that the 30-year bond could bereduced in size to, say, as low as $8 billion. After Altman said whathe did, my guess is that the number has crept back up and that peoplethink the reduction, if any, will be more nominal. If I had to pick anumber now, I'd say they probably assume it will be $9 billion or afraction more.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Bill? If not,would somebody like to move to ratify the transactions?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. So moved.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Thank you very much.We now move on to Messrs. Prell, Slifman, and Truman and the ChartShow.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll give you a secondto locate the chart package that was put in front of you.MESSRS. PRELL, TRUMAN, and SLIFMAN. [Statements--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for our colleagues?MR. SYRON. Mike, you touched on this. What are you inclinedto think--I guess not terribly much--about these arguments on thecomposition of inventories? I've seen things about work-in-processinventories having declined more than inventories at the wholesale andretail levels.MR. PRELL. Well, there are longer-term movements one canobserve. I think manufacturers have made particular progress overtime in reducing materials and work-in-process. But basically ourassessment is that inventories are probably at comfortable to leanlevels at this point. Retailers reported stronger-than-expected salescoming out of the Christmas season, which suggests their inventoriesprobably are in good shape. And manufacturers' inventories would seemquite likely to be rather lean in light of the volume of shipmentsreported in December.MR. SYRON. The increase you have in inventories is notfocused in any one sector particularly?MR. PRELL. Not really. As I've said, we don't have a largeincrease. We just perceive that with sales seemingly on a clearlyupward path, [business firms] are going to want to stay closer to thattrend in their [inventory] stocking. Even so, as we indicated, we2/2-3/93 -6-still allowed for some downward tilt in the inventory/sales ratio.While the arithmetic of the current quarter is such that it looks likeinventories are a significant story, looking at the broader picture wedon't really see that as a key driver in the forecast.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Ted, what assumptions have you made in regard tothe international trade process including GATT and the likelihood ofdumping and possibly increased protectionism that might beforthcoming?MR. TRUMAN. Well, as far as NAFTA is concerned, we areassuming that it will be passed and put into force; if it isn't, thatwould be a negative factor on our forecast coming through Mexico. Asfar as the Uruguay rounds are concerned, we have made no assumptionsbecause we convinced ourselves that in the 1993-94 period it isirrelevant, if I can put it that way, in terms of its trade expansionimpact. That's not to say, though, that the failure of the Uruguayrounds in some form, or rather the wrong kind of failure, couldn't bea disaster looking out a little further. As far as other trademeasures are concerned, we have not taken explicit account of those--maybe we should have--partly because of our feeling that developmentslike this steel dumping and so forth and so on, although they arepolitically sensitive in both the domestic and internationaldimensions, are not sufficiently important quantitatively to have amajor macro-economic influence on the forecast. The other reason isthat, while there is considerable scope for those kinds of actions,they have long time tables on them. And most other forms of actionare precluded by international agreement, so there are someconstraints. So, we could have further dumping cases; but if theywere all filed tomorrow, we wouldn't get them implemented until latein the year, so that would have a relatively small--MR. ANGELL. But in the steel cases do we not [impose] thenecessity of posting bond so that already in the February--MR. TRUMAN. But the total amount of trade imports that areaffected by that is $3 billion.MR. ANGELL. I understand. But do you think any modificationof pricing behavior would be likely in this kind of environment?MR. TRUMAN. There is considerable dispute on that point.I've noticed articles in the newspapers and some commentary fromPresident Keehn, based on his contacts in the market, that theproducers are looking forward to this $3 billion, which is a non-trivial increase in sales, and the opportunity to raise prices behindthose dumping markets. On the other hand, the economists' argument isthat there are a lot of other producers in this world and quite a lotof competition around the margin from other U.S. industries. Thatwould suggest that the [prospects] of steel prices going up by the 15or 20 percent average margins being plotted here are pretty unlikely.In any case, in thinking about all this there are enough uncertaintiesthat we decided not to take explicit account of it.MR. ANGELL. Thank you.2/2-3/93MR. KEEHN. I can comment on that, Wayne. The people I talkwith say that the dumping suits ought to result in about a 4 millionton change in shipments this year. The production level in the steelindustry currently is about 80 percent of capacity. Based on this onechange it could go up to, say, 85 percent. And shipments this year asa result could go up to 88 to 89 million tons. In terms of price,there is a proposed price increase for cold roll, hot roll, and coatedproducts [scheduled] for early April, and they expect that increase tostick. This affects about 50 percent of overall steel production and,therefore, the anticipated overall increase in the price of steel is 2percent for this year.MR. ANGELL. Thank you. That's very helpful. It's aboutwhat I would have expected.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It actually sounds much larger than Iwould have expected. You said 4 million tons?MR. KEEHN. Yes, as a consequence of this change and thechange that took place late last year, imports will be down by 4million [unintelligible] 5 to 6 million tons.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. When I see it, I'll believe! PresidentStern.MR. STERN. One of my questions was along the lines ofWayne's on protectionism. My second question relates to this issue ofthe liquifying of home equity. Do we have evidence that that has anindependent effect--independent of the normal wealth effect we mightget as home equity rises? Is there something additional there?MR. SLIFMAN. Well, I think the main [effect] would be onthose households that might feel their liquidity is constrained. Thatis to say, the wealth is there but the [increased] ability of suchhouseholds to liquify that wealth could boost consumption. The otherpoint is that in the case of turnover of the [housing] stock, somewould argue that when capital gains are realized we do see evidencethat some of those realized capital gains are not plowed back into thehousing industry. One can see that from the mortgage debt data. Sowe have a feeling that some of [the capital gains] are being used tosupport consumption. We also note from the refinancing data that afair amount of cash is being taken out there, too. There is no directeconometric evidence, but other kinds of ancillary information seem tosuggest that this is going on.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. How sensitive do you believe job growth is toGDP growth? Suppose we ended up with GDP growth closer to 4 percentthan 3 percent. How do you think that would translate into jobgrowth?MR. PRELL. Well, at this stage we'd probably see a largeshare of that showing up in employment growth. One is hard pressed atthis time to pin down what the productivity trends are. But I thinkat this stage, given the shedding of labor that has occurred, we'dexpect to see a larger proportion show up in actual employment2/2-3/93increases. I'm not sure whether you're talking employment hoursversus numbers of workers.MR. BOEHNE. Numbers.MR. PRELL. Again, we'd expect it to show up to a greaterextent in numbers of workers rather than a lengthening of theworkweek.MR. BOEHNE. That's my question. We see these structuraladjustments by the larger firms. However, in talking to people insmaller businesses one gets the impression that there really is areluctance to add people, for obvious reasons, but that if theirvolume picked up they more or less would be forced into it.MR. PRELL. That's the thrust of my remarks. I'm sure thereis still some elasticity in many cases and they could [increaseproduction] without adding more workers. But I think we are gettingcloser to that margin here and, on the presumption that additionalgrowth is demand driven rather than an increase of potential supply,we'd look for additional hiring.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mike, you indicated that the difference betweenthe Blue Chip forecast and the staff forecast of real growth and whathas happened to the unemployment rate probably is not a sufficientexplanation of the difference in the forecasts with regard to prices.That difference is rather large. Is there any way to know, forexample, if they are making different assumptions about food andenergy prices that would explain the difference or if they have adifferent Phillips curve?MR. PRELL. Well, we're making some inferences here. Wedon't have any information about [their assumptions for] food orenergy prices. But it seems unlikely, given the general tenor of[developments] in those markets, that that would be a major factor.We've been seeing this pattern for some time. At this time in 1992 Ithink one would have perceived a difference in outlooks. And we feelsomewhat vindicated by events, which showed in fact that we could havesome decent growth with the disinflation trend continuing. Some of mycolleagues have suggested that this pattern is one that could beperceived in private forecasts over a number of years. That is, atthis point in a cycle, during the early expansion phase of a recovery,forecasters have tended to expect an acceleration [in inflation]. Ourinterpretation of history, some of which is visible in the chart, isthat that is not an empirical regularity; indeed, with significantslack the tendency is for inflation to slow. It is something of amystery why we're at odds with so many of these forecasters.MR. PARRY. Did you say that their forecasts involve a fairlysignificant increase in nominal interest rates at the short end, inwhich case they're probably assuming the same real short-term interestrates as in your forecast?MR. PRELL. Well, to a first approximation that may workhere. The Treasury bill rate in the fourth quarter of 1994 in theBlue Chip average is 4-1/2 percent, which is more than a point higher-8-2/2-3/93than our forecast. And there is a similar picture in the inflation[outlook]. So, yes, I think that may come out fairly close.MR. PARRY. [They are] much more pessimistic.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mike, on productivity growth we had a verygratifying 3 percent in 1992 but, although the expansion continues atmore or less the same pace, you are projecting that productivitygrowth is going to come off rather badly over the forecast period to1.8 percent and then 1.3 percent. Why?MR. PRELL. Well, let me emphasize that in a broad historicalperspective those numbers don't constitute bad productivityperformance. Those numbers are stronger than the trends in recentyears and would be above what we would regard as the likely underlyingtrend at this time. Basically, the typical pattern is that in earlyphases of recovery we get very large productivity increases as somestretching of the available work force occurs. This time we had a lotof labor shedding and we haven't had even the normal employment gains.And we think this process will only go so far before, harking back toPresident Boehne's question, [firms] begin to have to add some workersas they expand production. As I noted, there's probably some distanceto go in this labor shedding process--not so much for typical cyclicalreasons but because there are some large firms who probably have thecapital to hang in there for a long time and not make the adjustmentsthey should have made a long time ago in the size of their operations.I think firms like Sears or IBM are going to be shedding workers for awhile. That is an ingredient in the process that gives us what webelieve to be above-trend productivity increases.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. Mike, let me piggyback on Ed Boehne'squestion. If we get a significant upside miss on real GDP, say, to [agrowth rate of] 4 percent, what does that do to your inflationprojections? Would it make a significant difference?MR. PRELL. Well, that becomes a difficult question. One, wewould expect the unemployment rate, as a first approximation, probablyto be 1/2 percentage point lower at the end of a year--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But doesn't that also depend on what theassumption is on productivity?MR. PRELL. Indeed, as I noted before, I'm taking this[greater strength] as a surprise that comes more from the demand side.And one does need to specify that to be clear. If it were entirelyfrom productivity performance and we were accommodating, then it wouldnot have any inflationary consequences.MR. BROADDUS. I'm not thinking about the miss--MR. PRELL. A 1/2 percentage point lower unemployment ratewould give us a shade more inflationary pressure, but it wouldn't showup very much in 1993 given the normal lags in the process. The otherrisk, though, is what I alluded to before. Growth of 4 percent begins-9-2/2-3/93to be a noticeably faster pace of expansion, where perhaps one needsto worry a bit more about so-called speed effects. And that mightintensify the inflationary pressures relative to what I just said. Soit could quite possibly be a situation in which there is little, ifany, further progress in disinflation in 1993, especially if thatgrowth came early on and we were getting a rapid drop in unemployment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. I was just wondering in the revised greensheets why the nominal GDP for the fourth quarter went down so much?MR. PRELL. Well, in an accounting sense the implicitdeflator came in much lower than we expected. Relative to the fixedweight price index, that was largely a consequence of the behavior ofservice import prices. This is an artifact of the way they deflatethe insurance payments. In fact, we have some information thatsuggests that all of those price measures may be off by a few tenthsdue to an error that [BEA] made in their import price measures. Butthat still would leave a considerably lower number than we wereanticipating.MS. PHILLIPS. So, you think we might hear more on this yet?MR. PRELL. Well, not on this divergence necessarily, butit's hard to say. If there are vastly different inventory movementsor credit movements than they've anticipated, it could alter thesenumbers significantly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Al Broaddus asked my question.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions?MR. HOENIG. Just one question on savings. Given some of thedemographics you showed here, I'm curious as to why you are expectingthe saving rate to stay as low or lower than we might otherwise havethought.MR. SLIFMAN. Well, it's true, as my other chart shows, thatwe have this shifting of the baby boomers into peak life cycle savingyears and that demographic factor [tends to raise] the saving rate.But, as I suggested, working the other way are economic factors,primarily the fact that net worth positions are a bit stronger andthat household perceptions of income and job prospects seem to beimproving substantially. Both of those would tend to give you a lowersaving rate. Finally, though, there is the statistical question ofwho knows what the real level [of savings] is anyway!MR. HOENIG. Then this could be more of a temporary--MR. SLIFMAN. Yes. It is true that in some longer-run sense,all other things equal, we would expect the demographics to worktoward a higher saving rate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions?-10-2/2-3/93MR. ANGELL. Yes, I just want to follow-up. If there's anerror in [their estimate of] the deflator, would that be an error inthe nominal or in the real?MR. TRUMAN. Well, the error has to do with the pricing ofcapital goods imports. They put two large price increases in thefourth quarter through an error. That would feed through to give youa lower increase in the prices of imports, which contracts GDP andgives a slightly higher overall deflator everything else equal.MR. ANGELL. So then real GDP will go down?MR. TRUMAN. If we presume that their assumptions about thenominal value of capital goods imports are unchanged, it wouldincrease the real value of capital goods imports and would subtractone or two billion dollars from real GDP in the fourth quarter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any reasons to believeotherwise?MR. TRUMAN. No, but one has to understand that there's a bigerror band around what they assume. It could be wiped out completelyby other changes. That's all I'm trying to say.MR. PRELL. For one, we don't have the December trade datayet, so anything in this area is open to substantial change. We'vereceived a number of pieces of data since BEA published the fourthquarter, including the durable goods figures and the constructionfigures. Doing a sort of full accounting, adding up all of thesethings, we come out very close at this point to our Greenbook estimateof 3.6 percent. So, it isn't a material difference from what BEA hasat this point; we'll just have to wait and see what the additionaldata show.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions? If not, who wouldlike to start the tour de table? President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, with respect to our District,things are still looking pretty good both currently and prospectively.Economic activity in the region appears to be accelerating moderately.The improvement in residential construction nationally is helping ourregion quite a bit. Industries like lumber, textiles, furniture, andappliance manufacturers, all of which are [important] industries inthe Fifth District and are driven by housing activity, are all doingbetter. The most striking development in the District, though, iswhat I would call a markedly greater optimism, pretty much across theboard, about the near-term outlook. We see it in our directors'comments and we see it in our various surveys of real estate people,retailers, and manufacturers. Actually, this improvement in optimismhas been going on for several months but it strikes us as morepervasive, less tentative, and--as one of our directors put it--deeperthan it was before.One specific sectoral comment may be of interest. We areseeing what we think are pretty clear signs of a turn in the marketfor office space in some of our local areas, specifically inWashington, Richmond, and Charlotte. Absorption rates are rising;vacancy rates are declining. In particular, large blocks of space--in-11-2/2-3/93excess, say, of 30,000 square feet--are becoming increasingly harderto find, especially in the suburban office malls.Our forecast is very similar to that in the Greenbook. Infact, it is almost identical for both real GDP and inflation. In thatregard, I would point out that we do our forecast differently thandoes the Board staff. Specifically, we use a small VAR model as thebasis for our forecast, judgmentally adjusted, which is quitedifferent from a structural model. The fact that our forecast isclose to the Board staff's, given the fact that we do it differently,gives me a little bit of comfort. I would make the point that our VARmodel in recent months has done a particularly good job in forecastingthe decline in the inflation rate. I think what that means is thatour policy of maintaining sufficient monetary restraint has generatedimprovement on the inflation front. It has been in place long enoughto be captured by the data we use in the model. So, our longer-runstrategy is working and we are making some progress.MR. KEEHN. With regard to the national outlook, our forecasthas somewhat lower growth than the Greenbook. We don't have any majordifferences, but our numbers are a little lower across the spectrum ofcomponents. For example, our number for personal consumption, islower. We also have lower business fixed investment, exports, andhousing starts. There are more differences in consumer nondurablesand services than in durables.In terms of the District, I think there has been a decidedimprovement in attitudes about the underlying rate of expansion sincethe last meeting. The positive retail outlook coming out of what wasa strong Christmas held up surprisingly well in January. TheChristmas season seemed very strong, particularly in places likeMichigan where the Retailers Association reported that over 70 percentof their members experienced sales increases and that attitudes were"generally euphoric." An appliance manufacturer located in Michiganreported a fantastic fourth quarter, the best since 1978. They expecta good sales increase this year--not as strong as last year, but stilla good increase. In the auto industry, while the most recent salesdata have been a little on the soft side, first-quarter productionschedules have been set about 20 percent over last year. And withinventories currently at what seem like quite reasonable levels, thefirst-quarter production risk doesn't seem that high. I will say,though, that the industry is forecasting--or at least those we talkto--a somewhat higher sales number for the year than we are. Theheavy truck business continues to be strong. The industry's incomingorder rate is running at an annual level of 165,000 to 175,000 units.That's higher than current production rates, so the order backlog isbeginning to lengthen to a delivery [schedule] that the industry isnot comfortable with. And if this order rate is sustained, they arelikely to add to their production levels.Attitudes in the steel business understandably have improvedconsiderably since the dumping suits were announced. I've alreadycommented on the price impact that that is likely to have, but they dothink that the announced price increases on the products that Imentioned are likely to stick this time. I would point out, however,that the price increases that will result from that are from very,very low levels. Their pricing has been awfully soft for an extended-12-2/2-3/93period. With regard to inflation, the pricing environment continuesto be favorable. Very heavy market pressures are holding down priceincreases. But I will say that this time at least one or twocompanies did comment about some modest increases in theirexpectations regarding the cost of their raw materials purchases. Thesteel price increase is certainly a part of this, but there are someother parts as well. These are not significant shifts in terms of theamount; nonetheless, it's the first time I've heard this in quite awhile. Offsetting what I think are pretty good economic reports,almost every company executive that I talk to expects to continue toreduce their employment. Everybody says that they are simply going toproduce more this year with fewer people; this has come to be themacho thing to do. And, therefore, while the immediate outlook hasimproved, the question of sustainability continues to be the keyissue. Either employment and disposable income are going to increaseto support this higher level of consumption or we're going to seeconsumption come down a bit. So, while the outlook seems much morebalanced than it has been, I do think the risks, given this disposableincome issue, continue to be a little on the down side. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the Twelfth District economyremains mixed, but unfortunately there are new signs of weakness inseveral states. California's employment fell about 1.8 percent in1992 and the pace of decline has not slackened in recent months.Moreover, the California recession is no longer just a southernCalifornia phenomenon. Early last year we saw about 80 percent of thejob losses coming from southern California, which is far in excess ofthat area's relative contribution to employment. More recently, about60 percent of the job losses are coming from southern California.Other areas such as the Bay Area, the Central Valley, and other partsof California are also reporting losses that are not all thatdifferent from that of southern California in percentage terms.Concern also is rising in Washington state where Boeingcutbacks are threatening to choke off that state's recovery. I wouldpoint out that actual employment has been rising rather robustly inrecent months in the state of Washington, but Boeing as I'm sureyou've all seen--it was actually commented on in the Greenbook--hasannounced significant cutbacks in planned production beginning in thesecond half of this year. The specific layoff figures are not yetavailable but analysts in the region clearly are concerned and aretalking about the multiplier effects of any further job cuts.Hawaii's economy may be facing a recession this year. Weak tourismfrom the mainland, particularly California, is a concern and has beena problem. But a new and larger concern is that rising job insecurityin Japan, which is a very big source of money for Hawaii, couldeventually cut into the Japanese visitor count. Lending activityremains very weak in the District, with loans outstanding at largebanks in December falling 8.1 percent below the year-ago level.There are some bright spots in the region, however; we'vefound one or two! The drought conditions eased dramatically inCalifornia and the Pacific northwest. At the present time, waterofficials are reluctant to declare an end to the drought, butestimates of available supplies have increased sharply. Christmassales were not too bad. As a matter of fact, even in southern-13-2/2-3/93California Christmas sales were stronger than had been anticipated. Avery large retailer in our District indicated that sales continued tobe good in January and that January may turn out to be the best monththey've had for the past year. Utah and Idaho continue to reportstrong economic conditions, while Alaska, Arizona, and Oregon arereporting moderate growth.Turning to the national economy, the data released since thelast meeting have been encouraging; they certainly suggest that theeconomy is in a sustained moderate expansion. Our forecasts, if youassume no change in monetary or fiscal policy, are very similar tothose in the Greenbook. We project somewhat stronger growth ininvestment and less consumption than the Greenbook. With real GDPgrowing below potential we expect the downward trend in inflation tocontinue; our forecast for the CPI, for example, is that it willaverage around 2-1/2 percent this year. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, with respect to the District,the news continues to be quite good. In fact, I think I can nowchange the adjective that I've been using to describe growth in theSixth District from modest to moderate. I think the District is goingto outperform the nation; that's partly reflected in the unemploymentrates that we had at the end of 1992, which were below the nationalaverage for every state except Louisiana. Christmas sales were quitegood. People were very pleased with the performance in that area.And consumer spending in January appears to be holding up quite well,although not quite at the rate we had in December. Tourism continuesto be a positive factor in the District and that's represented notonly by domestic tourism but by foreign visitors as well.Manufacturers are reporting moderate gains in activity right throughmid-January and business lending is holding up fairly well in contrastto what's happening in the rest of the country. Housing continues tobe positive, and the housing-related industries like carpets,furniture, appliances, and so on are also quite good. We [seeevidence of] more interest in investment on the part of business,particularly for equipment and most notably computers.As some others have commented this afternoon, I too thinkthat attitudes are much, much better than they have been over the pastseveral months. And I think that's accounted for in part by morerealistic expectations on the part of business. As we came out of therecession most businesses were anticipating a much stronger recovery.Now they're beginning to understand that we're not going to get growthlike we did in past recoveries. There also is a sense of optimismthat the deficit reduction program will [materialize]. And perhapsmore importantly, there is a feeling among business people I talk tothat the fiscal stimulus package will not be excessive, and I believethat's helping attitudes as well.We do, of course, have negatives in our regional economy.Nonresidential construction continues to be one of them. We're havingsignificant declines in employment in major companies, particularlythe airline industry. The health services industry, which had beenaccelerating quite rapidly in terms of employment, is now beginning todecelerate a bit. The energy sector is still weak. The rig count was92 versus 88 one year earlier, so there's not much change there. And-14-2/2-3/93oil and gas production is not up to the levels that we had prior toHurricane Andrew. On the fiscal side, about half the states in theDistrict are likely to raise taxes or they are going to face pressureson spending. I don't hear anybody talking about price increases atall in the District, so I think inflation is not a concern. Puttingtogether those negatives and positives, I think the positives clearlyoutweigh the negatives. As I said, the economic situation is good inthe Atlanta District.With respect to the national economy, our forecast is verylittle changed from the last time. We have GDP expanding a bit fasterthan the Greenbook, the CPI marginally higher, and unemployment downby a little less. We don't have as much gain in productivity, and ournet export situation does not deteriorate as rapidly as in theGreenbook forecast. But these differences are very small. So, wethink that '93 will wind up pretty much the way the Greenbookforecasts it. In general, Mr. Chairman, I think we have reason to beconfident about the outcome this year. And I continue to be confidentthat this is a sustainable recovery, although I think the euphoriathat some people are demonstrating is being a bit overdone as was thepessimism earlier on. I'm a little concerned about the sustainabilityof consumer expenditures. And the biggest concern that I have interms of the impact on policy, obviously, is the situation withrespect to employment. These layoffs are getting more attention thanthey perhaps deserve and people are getting increasingly "spooked," ifI may use that term, by the media attention to the layoffs that areoccurring. But in general I think the situation is pretty good.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, our region of the countrycontinues to grow slowly, steadily however, with strong agricultureand construction sectors and less robust manufacturing and energysectors. First of all, I would say that our employment picture ismixed, with fairly decent employment growth in the Kansas City areaand in Colorado and New Mexico, and fairly poor employment growth inother parts of our region, particularly in Oklahoma. Although that isthe case, the optimism is uniformly good even in Oklahoma wherethere's less job growth. A lot of efforts are going forward toencourage employment growth where [possible]. In the agriculturalarea, as you well know, increased livestock prices last year kept farmincomes higher than originally expected. However, I'm pleased that asfar as the land prices go, there's a little speck of renewed optimismin that they have stayed fairly flat. Construction activity is verystrong, obviously helped along by residential construction. Andthough there has been some modest slowdown since November, ourconstruction levels are still a good 25 to 30 percent higher than theywere a year ago. Manufacturing is generally sluggish. There is astable environment in the auto industry, particularly at GM wherethere's a lot of uncertainty in our area. And [activity at] our Fordmanufacturing plants is very good. We, too, are affected by theannouncements of [cutbacks at] Boeing, which will affect our Wichitaarea. Generally that will be handled gradually, but it will be a dragbecause it's a very important part of that economy. Nevertheless,overall there should still be some good job growth in Kansas,particularly in the Kansas City area. In the energy area, natural gasdrilling has fallen off since the end of the year because of taxchanges. Nevertheless, the number of rigs operating is still 50-15-2/2-3/93percent over what it was a year ago and that is at least a positiveevent in our part of the country. So, overall, we [anticipate] steadygrowth for the region going forward.As far as the national economy goes, our projection, allowingperhaps for some differences in fiscal policy, is very similar to theGreenbook forecast. We have a little slower growth in the first partof the year but that picks up. For the year as a whole our projectionis very similar to that of the Greenbook both for GDP and for theinflation picture.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. In terms of our projection overall, we're at thehigh end of the central tendencies except, of course, for unemploymentwhere we're at the low end. I'd make several observations about theseprojections. One point I've made before is that because of the [wide]confidence intervals I think it's a very difficult basis on which tomake policy. And that's particularly true with respect to timeframesand inflation. Our inflation forecast for '93, even though it is atthe high end of the central tendency, is still what I would call avery benign forecast. But in a sense it's irrelevant because of theimpact of policy on prices and much longer time lags in that area.Just as an aside, Mr. Chairman, as you're thinking about the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, given particularly what I read on the questioningat some of the [previous] hearings, that might not be a bad point tomake about current price performance. I'm not making it the way youwould in testimony, but I'd suggest a little education about [the factthat] future price behavior is not necessarily governed by what ishappening right now with respect to prices.I have the general sense that the pieces seem to be in placefor a fairly strong cumulative upturn. So, in terms of the risk inthe forecast, I would say that there's a significant upside risk. I'mnot as confident that we'll see continuing declines in inflation overthe next couple of years as in the Board staff's forecast.District-wide we're seeing an acceleration of economicactivity. It's pretty consistent with what Bob Forrestal was saying.I guess a change from "modest" to "moderate" is probably reasonable,Bob. In the most recent three-month period we are seeing 2 percentemployment growth and before we were seeing growth in maybe tenths ofa percent. Still, we have more or less the same pattern--flat--inmanufacturing employment; the growth in the District is coming fromthe nonmanufacturing sectors. The other comment I would make is thateven in that 2 percent growth number we're absorbing fairlysignificant head winds in a couple of areas, specifically electricalequipment and construction. In that three-month period both declined3 or 4 times as much as they did nationally and [yet] we're stillshowing that kind of overall growth for the District. As far as realestate is concerned, the residential side is a strong point, as hasbeen mentioned for some other areas. We are seeing in the most recentperiod some weakness in the commercial area, but on an annual basis westill have significant growth in both residential and nonresidentialconstruction.As for anecdotal comments, what I've experienced is very muchsimilar to what Al Broaddus described. The tone of the comments I'm-16-2/2-3/93 -17-picking up--and I guess the sample where I have the most consistentexperience would be our St. Louis directors--has changed verydramatically in the last two times we've talked about monetary policyin that the comments are much more positive. What I sense is a lot ofcaution, though, with respect to getting too optimistic. In otherwords, I don't sense the ebullience that I have read into some of thecomments here; there is still a good deal of caution. And I think wemay be affected by [the fact that] this whole recovery and expansionprocess has taken so long that it's difficult to make oneself get tooconstructive about it. But the tone of the comments definitely haschanged.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. My sense is that the District continues to moveforward, but I don't think I've graduated up to the term "moderate;"I'd keep it at "modest." I think we're still lagging the nation.Manufacturing has been a relatively bright spot. The retailers,including the auto dealers, have been pleasantly surprised by how wellsales have been going. I'm increasingly impressed, however, by howdeep the hole is in commercial real estate construction. The more Italk to people in that area, the more I think we may have a problemfor much of the rest of the decade in terms of getting caught upthere. With regard to attitudes, it's not so much that there is animprovement in attitudes but a lack of complaining about what's bad.So, underneath, I think there is--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's called improvement.MR. BOEHNE. That's improvement. It's not an overt statementof improvement, but I do take heart in that. In fact, as one talks togroups of people, they want to talk about things other than theeconomy and monetary policy. They would rather complain aboutunemployment compensation, medical costs, and those sort of things. Itake that as a rather positive change in attitudes. I am impressed,though, by the variation in economic activity around a relatively asmall District; 75 miles in several directions can make quite adifference. New Jersey, for example, continues to operate at lowlevels, and the expectations there are not high at all. Pennsylvaniaseems to mirror the nation more and Delaware continues to do better.I do sense that people have made the adjustment toward the notion thatwe're in for a number of years of slower growth and that the decade ofthe '80s is not likely to repeat itself.I don't sense any price pressures coming. Someone made thecomment that it's almost a macho thing [for firms] to say they aregoing to hold employment down; I think that attitude is very strong.Lending, outside the consumer area, [particularly] business lending,continues to be fairly weak. I still hear comments that there's someaction in the pipeline but it's turning out to be a very longpipeline. It's not coming out the end of the pipeline to the pointwhere we actually see the loans on the books.Despite that somewhat less optimistic view at the Districtlevel, my sense is that we will do better in terms of growth at thenational level. [My view stems] not so much from pointing at thissector or that sector. I just have a sense from talking to peoplewith national businesses and looking at the national indicators that2/2-3/93this national recovery may be taking better hold. So my sense is thatif we err on GDP growth, it's going to be 3 percent plus rather than 3percent minus. I also have the feeling that if we are wrong on theinflation side, its performance may be better. I think we have somedisinflation momentum going here that we may be missing. What liesbeyond in '94 and '95 could be a different story, but I suspect thatinflation in '93 will turn out to be better than the numbers in theGreenbook. Having said all that, if I were a professional forecaster,I probably wouldn't be all that far from the Board staff's forecast.But I'm not a professional forecaster; I can wing it a little, notthat the staff wings it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, the favorabletrends that have been under way in the District for quite some timeare continuing and, if anything, probably strengthening a bit. Butrather than run down all the sectors, the one exception that standsout is probably commercial construction, which is quite mixeddepending on [the area]. Attitudes, I'd say, are generally good,although I continue to come across comments, as soon as GM or Sears orsomebody makes a major restructuring announcement, such as: "How canyou consider this a recovery when that kind of thing is going on?" Ithink that does reflect some of the concerns that are still lingering.As has also been the case for some time, there really is notmuch, if any, sign of inflationary pressures. Business people areincreasingly resigned to price stability, I might say, and are willingto live with it! That may have to do in a way with what we're seeingin productivity; if so, it would certainly augur well for at least thelonger-term outlook. We're not a District that's particularlyintensive in manufacturing, but I might mention that the manufacturersI have spoken with have generally been positive. One report was a bitof a surprise and I'll just pass it on: A businessman with operationsin the Twin Cities as well as in the Seventh and Twelfth Districtssaid his business was improving in all three locations. But in theTwin Cities he has difficulty hiring and retaining entry-level workersat $6.00 an hour. There's an automatic bump in that to [a wage] inexcess of $7.00 an hour after a year.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the first time I've heard thatphrase in years.MR. STERN. Well, I thought it was interesting. I don't knowthat it can be generalized, although certainly the help wanted signs--at least in the Twin Cities--are popping up with greater frequency.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's not as good as Boehne's "wingingit," though.MR. STERN. I'm going to get to the winging it part, the partderived from our model! With regard to the national outlook, unlikeRichmond, we run a big complicated VAR model. For better or forworse, it also produces something quite comparable to the Greenbookforecast in terms of real growth in 1993 and is even more optimisticabout inflation in 1993. My own views are perhaps a little moreoptimistic, at least as far as real growth is concerned. My views arebased in part on the tenor of the anecdotes I've been picking up and-18-2/2-3/93in part just on the notion that I didn't see any great aberrations inthe second half of last year and, of course, the economy grew at abouta 3-1/2 percent annual rate. I have a hunch that it can do somethinglike that again in 1993.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I listen to this, itreally is striking how much variance there is, not only around thecountry but within areas. I would say the tone in New England is verysimilar in many ways to that in San Francisco. The economy remainsmixed although improved from the first quarter of last year.Retailers had a much improved Christmas and their inventories arequite lean now. There are the usual complaints about margins; peopleexpect to be able to increase margins, and there haven't been thepost-Christmas sales we often have seen in the past. One strongsector has been the nonbank financial services sector, particularly ingreater Boston. That has had an impact not only on the housingmarket, which has stabilized and actually turned up a little, but alsoon the commercial real estate market, which also has stabilized.However, [commercial rentals] have stabilized at around $22 a squarefoot, I'd say, for top Class A space, which translates to the spacebeing worth somewhere around $120 to $150 a square foot; it was builtat $250 to $400 in a lot of cases. So, there is an adjustment clearlygoing on.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They doubled [in] New England dollars!MR. SYRON. That's right. We used to be a manufacturingintensive District but the manufacturing that we still have is reallysoft now, I'd have to say. There's a little strength in somespecialties--instrumentation and that sort of thing--but manufacturingis not doing well at all. A lot of that [reflects] unique structuralproblems. There are a lot of complaints, though, about softening inEurope because trade is very important for us. We see a lot of thisrestructuring that people mentioned is also going on elsewhere. Prattand Whitney, which produces aircraft engines, is in the process oflaying off 10,000 workers, and that is having a very strong impact;that's nondefense related, but there are other defense cuts in thatarea. The cumulative impact of all these things is that in NewEngland anyway employment is still declining at about a 2 percentannual rate. In the states that we have data for we tried tounderstand the difference, similar to [the way we look at] thenational data, between the household series and the payroll series tosee if new firms [help to provide an explanation]. A little diggingshows no increase in such things as telephone or electric companyhookups, which one might expect to be associated with new firmsstarting up.As far as the national economy goes, I have little differenceof opinion with the Greenbook. I continue to be concerned about theexport situation. I think none of us understands the full dynamics ofthis restructuring process and its impact on prices and employment.Now, we think in a simple two-sector model a lot of this stuff wasproduced in the defense sector and it wasn't entering the measurementsfor consumer prices anyway. There's a lot of labor flowing from thedefense sector into the other sectors of the economy, which isconsistent with the decline in real wages we've seen and makes me more-19-2/2-3/93optimistic, actually, on the price front. Really, I'm quiteoptimistic on the outlook for prices for some time to come.Consistent with that, if I had any question, it would be whether wewould see the roughly 130,000 per month increase in employment shownin the Greenbook. That's the one concern I have. As a final point, Iwould say that while I'm very optimistic on prices, we have paid a bigprice for this; and that in my mind emphasizes the value of keepingthe gains that we've had. We don't want that to be in vain.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. There's nothing really new or remarkable toreport in the Eleventh District this time except that we haveAmerica's team and their win assures the country of a rise in stockmarket prices!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Who are they, the Arkansas Razorbacks?MR. KELLEY. Arkansas is in the St. Louis District!MR. MCTEER. It seems to me that the fourth-quarter GDPreport was about as good as it could get. The 3.8 percent real growthrate got the attention but final sales were much better, at 4.5percent. And the [individual] categories were good. Not only did wehave strong consumption but investment was even stronger andgovernment was weaker. About the only way it could have been improvedwould have been for exports to have improved a little. And the coupleof numbers that have come out since the fourth-quarter GDP releasehave been very, very positive--the durable goods orders and thepurchasing managers report. So, we've got a lot of good momentumgoing right now and it's very encouraging.But we don't make policy looking back at real variables;we've been making policy looking ahead at nominal variables and themonetary aggregates. Last year we benefited from strong growth in M2velocity that more than made up for the shortfall in M2 below themidpoint of the target range; growth in velocity was in excess of thatdifference and we were very fortunate. But while we benefited fromvelocity growth looking back, I'm a little nervous about counting onthat to continue over the next year. It's one thing to benefit in thepast but it's another to count on it happening again. And I thinkwe're probably on the verge of acquiescing in a near-term decline inM2 rather than just a slow growth. We've had negative M2 growth inthe past two months in the context of a slowing M1 growth. So far,the economy feels okay. But as Governor Mullins put it last time,we've been running on fumes for a while now, with velocity growthinstead of money growth and with productivity growth instead of jobsgrowth. And given the rapid productivity growth that we've beengetting, perhaps we've been too cautious about the potential growth ofthe economy. Maybe that potential is at least temporarily higher andwe ought to be a bit more ambitious in the way we're planning tostimulate [aggregate demand].It's tempting to call for further ease in this context, butI'm not sure what ease would look like. Short-term interest ratesappear low enough. I look at those and see no need to have them anylower, and there's nothing we can do to push long-term rates downexcept to be cautious at the other end. I really believe that if we-20-2/2-3/93eased, we could cause M2 and M3 as currently measured to shrink evenfaster than they have been. But if we do believe that, and I think Ido, we need to do a better job of explaining it and selling it to thepublic. I think it's dangerous for our future to have the politicalspectrum from Milton Friedman on the one hand to Paul Samuelson on theother bashing us for tight money based entirely on M2 when we couldmake the case that slow M2 growth reflects easy money rather thantight money. We need to figure out what slow M2 growth means and theneither change it or defend it a little. And as far as our publicposture goes, I also feel we're in a bad situation, seeming toacquiesce in the lack of job growth. I'm afraid we're going to comeacross as being satisfied enough to have productivity-led growth inthe absence of job growth. I just worry about what our silence onthat question might do to us. In sum, I worry about how we areperceived right now. But as for the economy itself lately, it hasbeen going strong and our expectation is that in 1993 it will bestronger than in the Greenbook forecast. But that's winging it!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I must say that forthe last year or so I've been arguing that the dynamics of the economywere in large part based on the confidence factors that were presentor not present in the economy. And now we seem to be entering or atleast approaching a new era of good feeling, based on what I've heardaround the table in general terms. This may sound a little tooempirical, but I think a large part of that was based on campaignpromises that began to emerge in the third quarter and that raised ageneral expectation that things were surely going to be better. As aresult, economic activity began to pick up in the third quarter andcontinued to do so in the fourth quarter, and it was rather a dramaticchange. But the negative factors in the economy are still there. Wehave export markets that are a lot tougher than they have been for awhile. We have the defense cutbacks continuing and in all probabilitythey're going to get steeper. We continue to have this commercialreal estate slack, which is not going to resolve itself quickly. Andwe still have the overhang of the remaining resolutions in theResolution Trust Corporation. We have this phenomenon of corporaterestructuring, which I believe is a phenomenon of the '90s that isn'tgoing to go away in just another couple of years. I think it's goingto continue for some time. And that means layoffs, plant closings,and CEO executions.Now, on top of all of the continuing uncertainties, we see areneging--or a back-pedalling at least--on some of the [campaign]promises that were made. We see wobbling on deficit reduction; we seethe job stimulus programs [and other] fiscal programs being cut backin terms of what everybody was expecting; we see middle-class taxreductions being talked out of the picture; we even see gays in themilitary not going to happen. So, some expectations in almost everysector of the society have been disappointed or are about to bedisappointed. Coupled with that we have the new and unexpectedthreats from the architects of national sacrifice. We have adiscussion going on right now about the possibility of reduced SocialSecurity COLAs. Now, that sounds like a minor event, but the greypanthers of this country are a very powerful force and they are a veryimportant part of the consuming public. We have the possibility ofhigher taxes on Social Security income, a move from taxes on 50-21-2/2-3/93 -22-percent of it to taxes on 85 percent of it. We may have highermiddle-class taxes instead of reductions in middle-class taxes; wehave the possibility of energy taxes, which really touch everyAmerican where his love is [greatest]--his automobile--and also hisoil bills. The cumulative effect, it seems to me, could be to reversethe confidence in recovery that has been so important to this recenteconomic performance, and it could choke off all this consumption-driven growth that we're experiencing. The problem, as I see it, isthat there's probably not a darn thing that monetary policy can doabout it. I agree with the observations that there is not a lot ofmoving room for monetary policy as far as further stimulation to theeconomy is concerned. So, even though I feel some of that era of goodfeeling, I'm nervous about these other effects out there that couldbegin to choke it off a bit.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The original era of good feeling lasteda while!MR. LAWARE. Yes, and hopefully it will happen again!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that we're the only game in townin regard to economic policy, and the only explanation for thesignificant rate of recovery that has been under way has been monetarypolicy. And that has been occurring in an environment in which thehead wind seems to be decreasing because monetary policy has worked tostrengthen the net interest margin of the banking system, and thatdoes mean that a great deal of impediments to lending are moving away.When I look at my forecast for 1992--I know the performancecame in at 3.0 percent Q4 over Q4, which was higher than I anticipated--I ask myself why I underestimated the performance in 1992. And Ithink it centers on the fact that I anticipated that the saving ratewould rise more than it did and consumer spending as a result turnedout to be much higher. Indeed, if we look at gross domestic purchasesin the second half of 1990, they were declining at a 3.7 percent rate;and in the second half of 1992 gross domestic purchases wereincreasing at a 4 percent rate. That's a rather significantturnaround. If we look at real GDP in the second half of 1990, it wasfalling at a 2.8 percent rate and in each half-year period since thattime it proceeded to move up from negative 2.8 to negative .7 topositive .9 to positive 2.2 to positive 3.6. And I ask myself ifmonetary policy was successful in generating this acceleratingrecovery--though it was very modest at first--what in the world isgoing to stop it at this stage? Will it be our interest rates? Thestaff is forecasting lower interest rates in what I think are the mostrelevant portions of the yield curve, so that wouldn't seem to be afactor. I must admit that I'm not quite as optimistic on long-termand intermediate-term interest rates as the staff is in its forecast.When I look at commodity prices I ask myself, Mike: How, after somany FOMC Humphrey-Hawkins [meetings] of having the Federal Reserve'sexperimental commodity chart in [your Chart Show] did you happen totake it out just at the time that the commodity prices are beginningto show something? The ex-food, ex-energy experimental commodityprice index shows a rather significant change upward, which for thefirst time really goes with the kind of economic recoveries that wehad in 1983 and 1987. This rise in commodity prices may not be2/2-3/93sustained. How could commodity price moves ex-food, ex-energy be asstrong as they are with M2 growth very slow and [recently] declining?Well, I just don't know how to judge M2 growth, but I do know thatwhen commodity prices start moving upward it is an indication ofwhat's happening on monetary policy showing through. So, the bottomline is that I end up with a forecast that I guess is the highest ofthe lot, or at least at the top of the range. I end up being slightlyless optimistic than the staff on inflation for the first time sinceI've been a member of the Board of Governors. I've been equal to thestaff's expectation of the CPI but I've never been higher in anyprevious discussion.I do think FASB 106 is still going to be somewhat of a dragon productivity. But I think there's a modification here in that thecompanies that had the high post-retirement medical benefit programsare the ones that are contracting and the small to medium-size firmsthat do not have the generous post-retirement programs are where theexpansion is. So, I end up with a somewhat lower unemployment rate atthe end of the period. All of this makes me a bit puzzled to bepositioned as I am in relation to the staff, but I'm going to behonest with you about it and not try to cover it up!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. To differentiate with other times![Laughter]MR. ANGELL. I don't know. I must admit that I really feltthat 4 percent [GDP growth] was quite likely but modesty and restraintin regard to a drag from net exports caused me to bring that backdown. I do think we need to recognize that the personal bankruptcysafety net means that this adjustment period for consumers is not assevere as it was in other long major cycle adjustments. And it seemsto me that that's consistent with the consumer spending that we have.I, like Bob McTeer and others, worry a little about what we aretargeting. I don't have any appetite for targeting M2. But the lackof appetite for targeting M2 does not make me feel comfortabletargeting interest rates as a means of running economic policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, Bob McTeer made a reference toAmerica's team. Being at least in the resident state of the otherside, I have a little different view of that. But there is somethingabout the Super Bowl that crossed my mind too, Bob, which is that Ithink we're at a point here where we have to be a little careful. Atthe end of the game it didn't matter that a defensive lineman wascruising down the field with the ball hanging out there and somebodycame along and swiped it out of his hand. Well, I don't think we canafford to have that happen here, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If monetary policy fumbles...!VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. For me [the picture] is a littlemore complicated than I think it is for some others. Clearly, on theanecdotal side, the tone is better across the board. Big business,small business, the man on the street, the woman on the street--andas a matter of fact coming back to Bob Forrestal's point of reference,even the CEOs that are still on the job in the big companies--seem tohave graduated from flat to modest, if that puts things in a little2/2-3/93perspective. I forget who made the point--it might have been BobParry--that he had gotten some anecdotal reports about surprisinglystrong retail sales in January coming on top of what were very strongretail sales in the Christmas season. We, too, have heard that. Onthe other hand, and several people have made this point, we still aregetting the same message from small and big businesses that thisrestructuring has by no means run its course. And some of themultinational companies are conveying a sense of their experience inEurope that I translate [as indicating weaker economies there] thanthe standard forecast, whether it's our own or the IMF's or theOECD's. Now, those are obviously not sophisticated forecastingcomments, but I interpret the attitudes of big companies that have[operations] in Europe as worse than most of these standard forecastswould imply. If we took our own forecast--and I don't know preciselywhat that forecast method is, whether it's a Stern version orwhatever--when I put my own body English on it I end up with aforecast that you could just about put a postage stamp over itrelative to the Greenbook. They're virtually identical. But I myselfdon't have any real conviction at this point as to where the riskslie. On the one hand, I am worried that in part because of therestructuring and all the rest that even modest employment gains maynot be as readily forthcoming as would seem to be the case. And ifthat is not the case, then I think the consumer sector is not a "gimmeputt," even though I appreciate some of the arguments that the savingrate may have a little more give in it than it might seem just bylooking at the raw numbers. Similarly, the net exports sector, asI've said before, is a real risk in part because of this impression Ihave about Europe but also because I think there is a rapidly buildingfinancial constraint on our export performance to the developingworld, especially Latin America. So, it wouldn't take a whole lot forsome downside risks [to materialize] that are not inconsequential.On the other hand, I think we do have a situation where wesee some signs cumulating on the up side. Indeed, if I let my mindwander a little, I could easily see a 3-1/2 percent growth rate ormaybe more. And that worries me because, while I'm a firm believer ininflation being fundamentally related in a technical sense to slack inthe economy, we could start to see some deterioration in the inflationoutlook sooner rather than later, even with slack, because I think thespeed factor is still a reality. I don't think the business communityand the economy at large have yet bought zero inflation by a longshot. Now, putting that together, one could say that's the way itshould be. A forecast should say there is this risk and that risk andthey all tend to wash out. But that's not how I look at it. As amatter of fact, I feel fairly certain that 1993 will not look like theforecast. But I can't quite decide on which side is the greater risk.And I might add that either side has problems. So, it looks like anice easy walk in the sun for the next couple of quarters or so, butI'm not so sure of that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. John LaWare's comments reflected the kind ofthings that I've been hearing over the last couple of months inconversations with directors and others around the District. In thefall, during the latter months of the campaign, there was thisattitude--reflected in the media, of course--that we were not gettingall the government we were paying for, that something was wrong and-24-2/2-3/93nobody was fixing it. And now there's a very sharp increase inconcern that we may in fact get all the government we're paying forand it's not good. The numbers look not so bad to me. The attitudes,if anything, have deteriorated. I'm not sure yet. I have not been inCleveland a full year and in traveling around the District I don'tknow whether I have to seasonally adjust them; maybe it's simplyimpossible to [be optimistic] at this time of year in that region ofthe country! We have had very good employment numbers recently. WhenI point that out, people say: "But it's not the right kind of jobs.It's minimum wage jobs; we're losing high-wage jobs for low-wagejobs." We had very good sales numbers in December; everyone was verypleased by that; they expected sales to fall off in January and theydid not fall off. Again, there's no comfort in that, but concern thatthe pickup still is not sustainable. I look at initial claimsnumbers. In January we were 32 percent below a year ago, indicating abetter job market; but none of the business leaders among my directorsor the labor leader on my board point to any of these things with anyencouragement. The headlines are still dominated by stories oflayoffs all over the District. Maybe it's a part of being an oldmanufacturing District that is still restructuring, so the news aboutwhatever's going on in motor vehicles continues to pervade everybody'sattitude. Even the small businesses do not indicate a willingness totalk in terms of employment increases. They talk about theirproductivity gains and they talk about improving profitability withoutprice increases, but they do not talk about adding workers.When I discuss the issue of inflation, and I tend to be onthe more optimistic side [expecting] lower inflation, I'm met withtotal skepticism. As for the idea of price stability being whereinflation does not enter into the decisions of people, it is certainlyentering into the decisions of these people. They believe thatinflation is going to pick up. And I certainly haven't had anysuccess in persuading them that anything can and will be done aboutit. There's an inconsistency, especially among small manufacturersand [a] few of the large manufacturers outside the motor vehiclesindustry where they say they see no prospect of increasing prices intheir businesses. They are not worried about their cost side,especially from labor. However, they believe national inflation isgoing to go up. In banking, consumer lending was very good in thelast couple of months. C&I continues to be flat; there's nothingthere. In fact, some banks are still indicating declines in C&Ivolumes. Mortgage lending fell off after the boost in the fall.When I look at the national forecast in the Greenbook, mymain problems with it are on the [underlying] assumptions. I tend tothink the inflation outlook is going to be better than the Greenbook.We probably put a little more weight on the P* kind of relationshipthan what's built into this. But I have trouble with the velocityassumptions. When I look at the conditions of a year ago versustoday, we were coming off two quarters of very little growth in thesecond half of '91. If I look at the yield curve, the components ofthe various aggregates, the M1s and M2s, or the level of interestrates, I don't see any of the conditions that I think contributed tothe rise in velocity that we had in 1992, so I'm simply notcomfortable with that set of assumptions. That is, if we were to getthe kind of outlook shown in the Greenbook, especially in terms ofnominal spending growth, I think it's going to be associated withfaster growth in money. If we have the kind of broad money growth-25-2/2-3/93that's suggested by the Greenbook, I am skeptical that we're going toget the nominal GDP growth.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I would agree that recent data remain quiteencouraging. Many observers have pointed out that the fourth quarterwas very good--about as good as it could get, as someone said--butmany observers view that as unsustainable. They viewed the thirdquarter as unsustainable. There's a preliminary indication that wemay have yet another quarter of unsustainably high growth and couldhave a string of unsustainably high quarters for as long as the eyecan see. We really don't have any data yet on this quarter, althoughthe purchasing managers report was surprisingly strong as were theorders data for December. The job growth is not evident. I can'thelp but believe that with a string of quarters around 3 percent wewill break through into some real job growth. The saving ratecontinues to be a concern. The observation that the Chairman made andGary Stern raised again about realized capital gains on residentialhousing I suspect has something to do with it. Coming from Boston, Idon't speak with recent personal experience of large capital gains.With the lower long rates, I see the housing market continuing as alittle mini-engine here. Businesses, I think, have gone a long waytoward cleaning up their balance sheets. We still have pretty lowrates and high stock prices and I think they will turn now to capitalspending. And we should see some of the effects of pent-up demandsboth from businesses and consumers, the deferred spending. I wouldalso agree with the Greenbook that inventories appear to be able toplay a supporting role.There are a lot of uncertainties, and I get some sense ofwhat President Corrigan talked about in terms of discontinuities. Alot of the uncertainties focus on fiscal policy. There are questions,such as how much fiscal stimulus does an economy growing at 3 percentneed. There are questions about the deficit implications of theAdministration's proposal. Also, there are the microeconomicproposals of the Administration, which we haven't talked about, whichmight somehow be worked in through the years. Here again there seemsto be some reason to be encouraged. All indications are that the newAdministration might propose only a modest stimulus program. But justin the last few days the talk has gone from $15 billion to the $31billion presented in Mitchell's office last night, according to thereports. The Administration also seems very serious about deficitreduction over the medium term. And it is true that long rates havecome down a lot just in the last few weeks. When you look at theimplied 1-year forward rates and the yield curve, I think virtuallyall the reductions have been concentrated in the short- andintermediate-range, suggesting that it is fiscal restraint which isprimarily responsible for the reduction in rates and not thespeculation about the change in the issuance of long-term Treasuries.Here, too, there's plenty of room for skepticism. First, one wouldhope that this deficit reduction package, to pull it along, would belegislatively linked to the stimulus package. But we stilloccasionally hear that [the Administration] would like a quickerstimulus package. I'm sure they have plenty of people, such as Mr.Rubin, who understand the importance of that, because I wonder howwell the deficit package will fare if it is a separate stand-alonepiece. More generally, it has to be very encouraging that a-26-2/2-3/93Democratic Administration appears to be willing to take on deficitreduction, but the jury is still very much out as to thisAdministration's ability to get a credible deficit reduction packagethrough Congress. Given how the markets have set this up, it could bevery disappointing to the markets and, as Governor LaWare mentioned,to the confidence that seems to be building. But it could beespecially disappointing to the markets, it seems to me. Of course,even if we had this credible deficit reduction package and long ratesfell, it's not clear that we should respond by lowering short ratesbecause we could have a stimulus program in the short-term, thestimulative impact of a fall in long rates. But the actual fiscaldrag from the deficit reduction would be in the distant future, sothat could total up to a fairly stimulative outlook.I think our best course continues to be to keep our eyes onthe important indicators of our monetary stance, money and creditgrowth, and to respond should those misbehave in either direction forwhatever reason. I will admit that this argument would be morecompelling if those indicators were not misbehaving as I speak or ifwe had more compelling [evidence] on what the important monetaryindicators are, because I share some of the concerns that Bob McTeerand Wayne Angell raised about targeting and trying to explain M2 andalso about depending on an increase in velocity when by all accountsthe head winds have diminished this year.So, we must make policy amid these uncertainties. I, likethe staff, took a look at the Blue Chip forecast this time, and Ithink Mike Prell has pretty well worked it over. I looked at it foranother reason. At a recent NBER conference, Bob Hall and GregMankiew presented a study suggesting that the Fed should take theseconsensus forecasts pretty seriously looking out a year or two becausethese [forecasters] have a strong economic self-interest toincorporate all information in the forecast. And if that forecast isway out of line with what we expect, we should have reason to pause.They tried to show evidence suggesting that these consensus forecastsare very good indicators of the future path of nominal income and thatadding M1 and the federal funds rate add virtually nothing to thembecause they already incorporate these variables. It's a fairly naiveapproach, I would admit. But the idea is that they do it for aliving, they've heard and evaluated our public statements, includingall the arguments about velocity, they've observed slow M2 growth,slow credit growth, fast M1 growth, fast base growth, and they useeconometric models and judgments and come up with a forecast. Mikehas presented that forecast; it's very similar to the Greenbook exceptprimarily that inflation, instead of trending down as the Greenbookhas it, turns up again and is 1-1/4 points above our forecast by thefourth quarter. This is not explained by the speed factor. Their GDPgrowth is about the same. Their unemployment is a bit lower, but thatcan't explain it. Short-term interest rates are much higher thanwe're projecting and real rates are about flat; that answers BobParry. The only thing I would add to this is that the Blue Chipconsensus is indeed a consensus. For 1993 only three of the 50forecasters see inflation as low as or lower than in the Greenbookforecast. But it is true that for 1993 10 of the 50 forecasters do atleast see inflation below 3 percent. By 1994 only 2 forecasters outof 38 have inflation as low as the Greenbook. Only 4 of 38, about 10percent, project inflation below 3 percent, while 6 project inflation-27-2/2-3/93above 4 percent; two-thirds of the forecasters see inflation asgreater than 3-1/2 percent by 1994. So, it's not close.The overwhelming majority of Blue Chip forecastersessentially see about the same growth, about the same unemployment,higher short rates, and higher inflation. There are many hypotheses;I won't go through them. Perhaps the best is that they just madedifferent analytical judgments and they're wrong while we are right.We have analytical bases to make these judgments. Some might suggestthat they are projecting an upward impact on measured inflation fromsome of these Administration proposals for business mandates andtaxes. I think that's not likely this early. Others might suggestthat they are somehow sensitive to the fact that this Administrationhas signaled that the number one short-term goal is eliminating slackin the labor market. But I think what they're probably doing is justbetting the odds, because from an historical perspective 1992inflation was very good. You have to go back two decades on core CPIto find a better performance and about a couple of decades, it seemsto me, on overall CPI with the exception of 1986. In the employmentcost index, the wage component was the lowest ever in the 17-yearhistory of the index. And if you take into account the measurementbias in the CPI, actual inflation was probably in the 2 percent rangein 1992. So, I think they're saying, given the historical precedent,that this disinflation trend is simply too good to be sustained in agrowing economy. I'll admit I have no punch line to this analysis,just as Mike didn't, and I wouldn't overstate the significance of thisdivergence. It's probably not so significant. We're likely right andthey're likely wrong. But I would only note, as we wrestle with thevagaries of velocity and the metaphysical meaning of M2 and M1, thatprivate forecasters who do this for a living are observing this debateand looking at all the indicators and projecting that inflation willbe going up.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I am more optimistic than thestaff about 1993 and more pessimistic than the staff about 1994. Twomeetings ago I made a comment regarding the difference between theexpectation of fiscal policy and the reality of fiscal policy. I'mtrying to think how an academic would put it delicately, but I think Igot the coefficients right and the sign wrong. I had beenanticipating that there would be an expectation of stimulus withoutthe reality. Instead, what I think we have is the expectation ofdeficit reduction without the reality. As a result we got a fall ininterest rates, particularly on the long end, buoyant attitudes, andyet no bite from either tax increases or spending cuts. I, as agambler, would say that the deficit reduction package isn't going tohappen. And I get that feeling from everyone I talk to inside theBeltway. I'm not a big believer in conventional wisdom about anythingthat happens inside the Beltway, and that's what we're talking abouthere. First of all, I think the Administration is sincere. In Mr.Panetta and Mrs. Rivlin in particular I can't imagine more sinceredeficit cutters. Unfortunately, when we go down the list and compareit to whom they're going to have to offend, it gets tough. Someone, agood friend inside the Administration, told me that the February 17thdate was picked because they had to get out of this endless circle ofnot being able to find something to cut and it was a way of imposing adeadline on themselves. Students of political history remember that-28-2/2-3/93Ronald Reagan did this very, very effectively. But that's why we'rehaving it inside the Administration. If you look at anyone on theHill such as the trade associations and the truckers, they have thexeroxes all lined up to go out as soon as February 17th's speech isover about how you can't raise gas taxes without putting it into atrust fund and infrastructure improvement. I'm sure AARP has theirFebruary flyers all ready to go. Even the recent experience with gaysin the military shows that Congress won; they know it and they'refeeling their muscles. So if I may mix some metaphors, I heard heretoday that the deficit reduction train is moving on fumes and WallStreet is inhaling.My other fear, Mr. Chairman, has to do with the supply side.I have some fears about what is happening in that regard. I think the$10 billion tax number is almost a mind-boggling one--$10 billion morein tax receipts largely because of expectations of what is going tohappen. To put that in context, $10 billion is about 2-1/2 percent ofall personal tax receipts. But a more meaningful number is that it'sclose to 15 percent of tax receipts from people making over $200,000.Another way of looking at it is that it is larger than the combinedannual gains we would get by putting in both the 36 percent bracketand the millionaire surcharge. So, we're talking about big swings infiscal policy in the anticipation of what's about to come. Second,Labor Secretary Reisch mentioned a minimum wage. That was the firsttime I heard that one. I'd heard of it being indexed but the word [heused] was "increase." I think that's a sign that adverse supply sidepolicies are in the making. Finally, just before this meeting, I metwith Griff Garwood who's in charge of the Consumer and CommunityAffairs Division [here at the Board]--this would be a seasonallyadjusted factor--and he mentioned three agencies that want to talk tous about ideas that we would not consider good ideas. I'll leave itat that. All three of those agencies do not have their politicalappointees in place. I remember this from when I signed on in theBush Administration on January 31st. The first thing that confrontsyou is a pile of absolutely horrible ideas that are percolated up frombureaucracy. My sense is that that pile of ideas is not undercontrol. So my fears are, first of all, that the market is going tobe disappointed with what is actually going to happen on deficitreduction. I don't know when that will happen, but when it does Icould see a rise in real rates. Second, and this will be a longer-term effect, as supply side effects take effect growth and employmentgains will become more difficult. And I'm afraid that's going to leadto increased frustration in the Administration and Congress. And thatunfortunately is where monetary policy is going to come into thestory.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. Well, my story is probably going to be a bitlike Larry's, but let me start with the economic situation. Certainlywe have the strongest or best prospects we've had since I've been atthe Fed in terms of growth, production, productivity, and spending.The financial sector, something we haven't discussed much, does seemto be in better shape, not just the banking system but the financialsystem generally, for a provision of capital. Consumer confidence isdramatically improved, perhaps stronger than the fundamentals wouldimply, which is exactly the opposite of what we were talking aboutsome six months ago here when we were saying that confidence wasn't as-29-2/2-3/93strong and should be stronger based on the fundamentals. The varianceamong the Districts, from what we've listened to in this discussion,seems to be widening. The report from Bob Parry is that the TwelfthDistrict doesn't seem to be getting any better. So, that's certainlya disturbing wrinkle on the economic scene. As John LaWare said, westill have some of the same continuing drags that we've had in thepast. We're making some progress, but we still have [weakness in]non-residential construction, the international slowdown may in factbe worse than even we've been led to understand, the federal deficitis still there, and state budget constraints are still there. So, wehave a number of the same kinds of constraints that we've seen before.As for the balance sheet adjustments that we've all talkedabout, we are clearly making progress but I don't think anybody reallyknows how much or how much more progress we still have to make. Whatis the right amount of debt either for corporations or forindividuals? There is this whole question of operating restructuring--Si Keehn's macho terminology, or right-sizing, down-sizing, and de-layering. We're seeing a lot of it. The corporate executives who arelosing their jobs are certainly affecting all the other corporateexecutives who are not and who might be feeling the heat from some oftheir boards of directors. I suspect that is going to keep pressurein the area of remaining tough on layoffs. Certainly there are somereal things that are driving this restructuring: the drive for anincreasingly competitive international environment, increasedproductivity, and so on. Nevertheless, we've been saying for a longtime that computers were really going to change our lives and now theydefinitely are changing our lives and changing the way corporationsare assessing their needs in terms of their work force. And it goesnot only from middle management analyzing these various kinds ofstatistics to all of us who are now getting more facile at looking atthe statistics directly, but also to just-in-time inventorymanagement. We're seeing it even in manufacturing. Somebody, I don'tremember who it was, has labeled this the second industrialrevolution. The social acceptability of these moves in corporateAmerica seems to be continuing. So, I think we're going to continueto see those pressures. I think the employment situation remains thekey to the sustainability [of economic growth]; it's certainly whatthe market is watching now. People are not watching as much what'shappening with the new growth measures but are waiting more now forthe employment reports. So, that remains a concern. I'm hopeful thatwe're going to get that 130,000 a month increase in payrollemployment, but that may be a bit optimistic.I'd like to follow up on some of Larry's comments withrespect to the new Administration. If you just watch your [computer]screen for a couple of hours, you can see trial balloons going acrossthe screen at an increasing rate. I'm certainly encouraged by thegeneral direction that the new Administration is taking with respectto trying to address the deficit [and to enact] a small fiscalpackage. Certainly the stated goals are something we'd all like tosee happen in terms of jobs, deficit reduction, and even bankingreform. We're hearing some discussion about the need to examine theregulatory environment. As a former manager I recognize, as I thinkwe all can, that good ideas are in fact a lot easier to come up withthan actually to get done. I certainly hope that we're going toachieve all of these things, but I think we have to recognize thatwe're still in the trial balloon stage now.-30-2/2-3/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Cleanup hitter.MR. KELLEY. Cleanup hitter, yes sir.MS. PHILLIPS. My gosh, I wasn't last. I can't believe it!MR. KELLEY. You caught Norm Bernard's eye too quickly! Itbecomes a cleanup hitter to be brief and I'll try to do that, Mr.Chairman. I'm comforted, as I think all of us are, by the statisticsin the last couple of quarters. And I certainly like what I'm hearingfrom most if not all of the Districts about the tone of things. WhileI do feel better, I must say that I can't really get comfortable aslong as this restructuring continues and as long as all of thesestructural imbalances are still being worked away. We cited theliterature two or three times here today as we have many times before,and we've got some problems on our hands. I think Governor Phillipshit the nail on the head a minute ago: The tale is going to be toldin what happens to employment. If we get an adequate number of jobsin the next few quarters, this [recovery] will probably get going andbe self reinforcing. If we do not, then [the economy] could easilyslide back. And I think it's a pretty doggone close call as to whichway it's liable to go. This leads me to be in the camp of those whoview the Greenbook forecast as being the best bet. I guess it wasJerry Corrigan who said a while ago that he thinks it's probably goingto be wrong but he doesn't know which way. I think what happens inemployment may turn out to be [the key to] which way it swings. Iwill remain concerned about the downside risk until we begin to seethese imbalances and restructuring begin to work their [way] out ofthe economy, and I don't see that yet. So, I continue to fear that wehave some downside potential there, although I'm optimistic that we'regoing to get over the hump and achieve the Greenbook forecast orbetter.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The meeting has come to a temporarypause and we will reconvene at 9:00 a.m. tomorrow morning. In fact, Ihave to read a note that Norm has given me, which says that Bob Parryhas scheduled a meeting of the presidents in room 4001 immediately.MR. LAWARE. In five minutes.MR. PARRY. Five minutes, okay.MR. TRUMAN. We have some reading material for the Committeethat we will pass out. This is what was promised in the last line ofthe memorandum that Don circulated. It relates to the last item onthe agenda [concerning the release of confidential FOMC informationand covers announcement practices] and organizational structures ofmajor foreign central banks. If you have insomnia tonight, you canread some of this.[Meeting recessed]-31-2/2-3/93February 3, 1993--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. Let's continueon [our agenda]. Don Kohn will brief us on the long-run ranges forthe monetary aggregates.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be referring tothe Bluebook in the course of my remarks. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don?MR. BOEHNE. Don, I respect your judgment in this a good bitand I think you've approached it in a reasonable way, given all theuncertainties. I wonder, however, if you were debating with yourselfand making the case that M2 might grow several percentage pointshigher than you estimate, how would you go about making that case?MR. KOHN. Well, first of all I'd like to say that I thinkour forecast of 2 percent M2 growth in 1993, given the Greenbookforecast, is balanced. I wouldn't want to leave the impression that Ithink all the risk is that M2 will come in higher and velocity will belower. I think I'd go about making the case for higher M2 by sayingthat as the economy gets going, bank lending should pick up some andbanks should be a little more aggressive in seeking deposits. Thecase might also be made by saying that we've had a lot of portfolioadjustments so far. Time deposits have been running off for a whileand the sticker shock aspect of seeing new low rates on time depositsshould be wearing off, so perhaps an awful lot of that adjustment maybe behind us and only a little more ahead of us. Also, banks havebeen rather prompt to reduce deposit offering rates and maybe thoserates won't be coming down quite so much in 1993 as one ordinarilywould think since they've done a lot of that ahead of time. But forevery argument I just made I could make a counterargument.MR. BOEHNE. Right.MR. KOHN. One of the counterarguments might be to look atthe first quarter. We are getting very, very weak money growth; theeconomy looks okay. And, if anything, we're going to get ourprojections of 7 percent plus velocity increases in the first quarter.MR. BOEHNE. Thank you.MR. PRELL. Could I add a point that Don and I have discussedmany times? One thing you want to remember is that our money numbersare conditioned on our forecast. The members' forecasts for nominalGDP are a bit higher than the ones that were built into this, whicheasily could add a fraction of a percent to what you might want toanticipate for M2 growth.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Don, I know that table on page 8 is based uponthe new Feinman/Porter model, but there's one thing I would just askyour opinion about: Do you find it rather hard to believe that 1/4 or1/8 point variations in the funds rate are likely to produce suchdifferences in the levels of real output and prices?-32-2/2-3/93 -33-MR. KOHN. No, I don't find it incredible. I think whathappened in putting the simulations together is partly driven by thatmodel. We've speeded up the changes in long-term interest rates. Ithink I noted here two changes in short-term rates. So, a givenchange in short-term rates has a bigger effect because it's almostforward-looking. You could argue that perhaps that's not a terribleidea although the model hasn't done too badly with this backward-looking yield curve so far. So, the baseline has the declines inlong-term rates that Mike noted and actually extends that out. Andthen the easier policy has even sharper declines. So, if that wouldadd some bigger changes in the funds rate, that has the same real--MR. PARRY. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Don, do you have any estimates of what thesemoney projections would look like if they were adjusted for growth inthe stock and bond funds?MR. KOHN. We haven't projected the growth in stock and bondfunds. I think a memo was circulated to you yesterday about lastyear, and my rough guess would be that those would taper off a littleover time. Part of what's going on here--look at the baseline pickingup over the time period--is that the yield curve is flattening andsome of the yield curve effects, of which the bond and stock funds area symptom, are ebbing over time. So, I would say we'd probably add acouple percentage points in '93, maybe a few less in '94, and then seeit ebbing over time as the yield curve flattens and as the portfolioadjustments have already been made.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Was the chart on velocity that you sentto the Board members that included the bond funds distributed toeverybody?MR. KOHN. I think so. Was it, Norm?MR. BERNARD. Yes, it was.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How does that chart look for theopportunity cost figures?MR. KOHN. Well, when we've been trying to work on this issueof an alternative monetary aggregate--adding back the bond and stockmutual funds--one of the problems is defining the opportunity costswhen we have bond and stock funds in there because we've got interestrates all up and down the maturity spectrum. It's really theopportunity cost relative to spending, I guess. It's not clear whatthe alternative asset is as one makes the monetary asset definitionwider and wider. So, one of the problems in working with this isdefining a demand function that has prices in it. Obviously, it'srelated to income and spending or wealth perhaps--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That velocity looks so much better thanI would have expected.MR. KOHN. The old opportunity cost isn't operative.2/2-3/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I understand that, and that's thereason I raised the question.MR. KOHN. In the back of the Porter/Feinman study, you'llremember, there is a section about these alternative monetaryaggregates. They found, looking at things like the variability ofvelocity and whatnot, that the velocities of the [money] stock withthe stock and bond funds were slightly more variable than M2 anddidn't do as well over time in these Granger causality tests withincome. But the world is changing over time--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think, as Governor Mullins mentioned,the check capability of a lot of these funds is a relatively novelsituation, and that may be a relevant consideration.MR. KOHN. My memory is that that has been developing overtime. There was some capability even back in the late '70s but it hasspread to more and more--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Back then you were allowed two checks orsomething; that's per generation! Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Don, on page 8, assuming that the fed fundstargeting is really designed to produce those M2 changes and nominalGDP changes, I noticed that with a fed funds rate of 3-1/4 percent, V2is 3.1. And then when the fed funds rate is brought down, eased to 3percent, V2 moves up to 3.3. When it is brought down to 2-3/4percent, V2 in a nonlinear fashion moves up to 3.8. What happens toV2 if, for example, [the economy is weaker or stronger]? JerryCorrigan was saying yesterday that he has this feeling that it mightbe stronger. On the other hand, it might be weaker. Suppose we endedup with a weaker [situation], so much so that the fed funds rate weretaken down to 2-1/2 or 2 percent. What in the world happens to V2 at,say, a 2 percent funds rate? Does it accelerate the way it does herein a nonlinear fashion?MR. KOHN. Well, there are a couple of things going on here.One is that there are lags, and it's hard to line things up year-by-year. The other is that velocity is being driven a lot by the long-term rates and the spread. The Porter/Feinman M2 is pretty darninsensitive to short-term interest rates. So, in effect, if you had aweaker economy--I'd have to hear the rest of the story, say, in theCorrigan scenario--and short-term interest rates were lower, I'dexpect somewhat more M2, somewhat less nominal GDP. Maybe you'd havetwo offsetting effects on M2; it's hard for me to sort them out.MR. ANGELL. Okay, what you're saying is that since youreally have intermediate rates trickling off a fed funds rate, Ipresume that that would be a scenario in which the intermediate ratesare moving downward anticipating the fed funds rate to produce thatkind of V2.MR. KOHN. Right.MR. ANGELL. Now, to put another scenario out: Suppose wewere to have a rather aggressive easing of the fed funds rate ahead ofanticipations of weakness that might cause intermediate rates to move-34-2/2-3/93backwards, as they did after our December '89 fed funds rate cut,instead of moving with it?MR. KOHN. You could get a perverse effect on M2, as I thinkPresident McTeer was alluding to yesterday.MR. ANGELL. Yes.MR. KOHN. In general, I'd expect that the decline in short-term rates would mean we'd have smaller increases in M2 velocity.Now, that's what happened in 1992; if short-term rates hadn't beendeclining, velocity would have been even larger. So, if we did havethis perverse effect--if we had short-term rates declining and long-term rates going up--then the yield curve effect would outweigh theshort-term effect and we could get a smaller M2. It's not clearwhat's being held constant here, but for the same number--MR. ANGELL. Of course, I think we have to keep in mind thatsince May of '89 we have had that perverse effect almost 1/4 of thetime we've been easing; other times we've been able to do it in a wayin which we haven't had that perverse effect. Would this be relevantto the Chairman's Humphrey-Hawkins testimony in some sense regardingthose who argue that the Fed made a mistake because we did too littletoo late? One might look back at the lack of perversity--that theintermediate yield when we were too little too late resulted in betterM2 growth than we would have gotten if we'd been more aggressive.MR. KOHN. I think the more general point, and one thatChairman Greenspan has made when challenged on this issue, is that ina sense we were working through this period with market expectations,as we discussed yesterday, that had inflation turning around,especially if you think about the [time around the] middle of the oilcrisis. The Federal Reserve had to be fairly cautious or had to takeaccount of market expectations when making its policy moves. [It hadto consider] consequences I think more serious than just what wouldhappen to M2 growth, but what would happen to long-term rates, marketexpectations, and the balance sheet/portfolio restructuring process ifinflationary expectations had gone the wrong way.MR. ANGELL. In other words, I'm not misreading the bottomline here that if the economy [developed] further weakness and wedelayed our easing but were forthcoming as the market expected, wemight get better movement in intermediate rates and consequently moreeffect on M2.MR. KOHN. I agree with what you just said.MR. ANGELL. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Don, at Monday's staff briefing, you mentionedsomething that did not come up in your answer earlier to PresidentBoehne. It has to do with what happens to M2 when there are capitallosses in stock and bond funds. We had an experience of that in 1986.I was wondering if you thought that might be another reason why M2growth might in fact be better.-35-2/2-3/93MR. KOHN. Right. If, contrary to our expectations--contrasting the System's expectations with the market's--long-termrates were to go up, then we might have some people surprised by that.We had some evidence of that in 1992 as far as the [unintelligible].This is a bit in response to Chairman Greenspan about what theopportunity costs are. Are realized capital gains to be included inthe returns and all that sort of thing? It's a little hard to seeexactly, but one can make a case I think that those flows slowed downfor a little while, particularly when the stock market and bond priceswent down on a few occasions. I think if there were a majorturnaround in the market, the initial reaction of investors would be,of course, "I've got capital losses; these things aren't as safe andas liquid in some sense of certainty about return as I thought theywere." Now, the end result would be a steeper yield curve. So, Ithink the initial reaction might be [a move] out of stock and bondfunds, assuming both the stock and bond markets were going down at thesame time, for a while and perhaps a little less enthusiasm over time.But I would have a steeper yield curve in the end, so that would beworking perhaps over the longer period of time a little against M2.But I agree with your analysis. If we had a major break in stock andbond markets, I think that would make people think twice about wherethey were putting their time deposits.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. Don, at these Humphrey-Hawkins meetings youusually show some alternative longer-run projections done with aforward-looking model, which took greater explicit account ofcredibility effects. I notice you didn't do that this time, but itstrikes me that that might be especially interesting now. Did you doanything like that?MR. KOHN. No, we didn't. I think actually, PresidentBroaddus, in the past we've done what we did this time, which was touse the same model but note in the write-up of the tighter policyscenario that if there were credibility effects things would bebetter; we'd have lower sacrifice ratios and a faster return to pricestability. I don't think we've ever done a simulation. Now, we havedone the P* simulation, but given these projections for M2 and theimplied shifts in V*, the P* model, which is on the last page of theFinancial Indicators tables, shows deflation in 1994. We thoughtthere would be some internal dynamics. For instance, if that's whatwas happening, M2 growth would be faster if we weren't getting theshifts somewhere showing this.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. Reading this and then listening to your openingcomments about this table on page 8 of the Bluebook and where theeconomy is, I was struck by the emphasis on how close we are topotential output or full employment, in part because it reminded me ofsome of the discussion that we heard in the late 1970s about heavyreliance on the gap of potential and NAIRUs and all that. I also wasstruck [by the fact that] in this table we get this after just twoyears of 3-1/2 percent real GDP growth, [which] suddenly drops to 2.2percent under the alternative III with the idea that [unintelligible]after 2 years or so of that kind of growth. It looks rather modest.In view of all the discussion that we've been having in this group and-36-2/2-3/93discussions among members of the profession, over the last year or soanyway, about the restructuring that's going on, the informationtechnologies, the tremendous amount of churning especially in theindustrial sector of the economy, how comfortable are you talkingabout potential output or where the NAIRU is?MR. KOHN. Well, Mike may want to comment on this, but Ithink we take account, as he did yesterday in his Chart Show, of anincreased trend in productivity in calculating the potential that'simplied here. Also, as noted in the write-up, there's a sense thatperhaps the NAIRU right now might be restructuring itself; raising thegrowth rate of potential might also raise the NAIRU since there are alot of people between jobs who need to find jobs. The matching of thejobs and the people, which is one of the things determining the NAIRU,might be particularly difficult right now--especially with thedownsizing in the defense industry and in other areas as well. Wecould see more frictions in the job market. We've actually assumedhere for the purpose of these simulations that the NAIRU is 6 percentfor a couple of years before dropping back to the 5-3/4 percent thatwe think it was over the last few years.MR. PRELL. I think Don has covered the point. We've alwaysbeen uncertain; the concept itself is not airtight. But even inestimating it, one has to [allow for] some considerable range eitherwith the potential output concept or the NAIRU. But I think the twoare working in opposite directions, as Don suggested. For one, we maybe getting faster expansion of potential output currently but thereare many displaced workers. And experience suggests--from thechurning we saw in the first half of the 1980s in the manufacturingsector when the dollar appreciated so much and we had what seemed tobe a lot of restructuring in manufacturing--that displaced workerstake some considerable length of time to find their way back intojobs. One can see the likelihood of some of this happening again.That may be one of the reasons some private analysts seem to have thisworse inflation/output tradeoff in the short run. I wouldn't want topush that far, but I think there is the risk that this structuralelement in the unemployment situation now might be a little greaterand that we have effectively less room to run in terms of reduction inunemployment before we get those labor market pressures. The marketsfor particular skills that are useful in this automated environment--people who can do the programming and so on--may be relatively tight.We can see some of the dispersion in recent wage numbers.MR. KOHN. It might take a higher real wage to get them tomove from southern California.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Tom.MR. HOENIG. Don, I've read this and listened to what yousaid. One thing that bothers me as we look at these simulations ofalternative strategies is that you've given reasons for and againstwhy velocity can increase, but this is very dependent upon having thevelocity at a rate that has only been reached, I think, three times indecades. How confident then can you be on the arguments for whyvelocity should continue to be very high?MR. KOHN. Well, obviously, there's a wide spread around this[forecast]. As I noted, I think the spread is evenly distributed-37-2/2-3/93around it. I can think of reasons why [velocity] might be evenfaster. So, it's not a tight relationship, particularly given that aslast year went on, there was [considerable] evidence that the creditflows continued to bypass the banking system. The banks are facedwith restraints on growth or at least incentives to keep very highcapital ratios or face increasing costs of regulatory depositinsurance. That would cause them not to bid so aggressively fordeposits. Businesses and households are both borrowing in long-termmarkets. They're not seeking bank credit or thrift creditparticularly, and that's being accommodated as they leave the bankingsystem and go into the bond and stock markets through the mutualfunds. I think this process will continue, and I'm fairly confidentthat under the Greenbook projections for nominal GDP and relativelyflat interest rates, even without necessarily the decline in the long-term rates, that we will have a reasonably substantial increase invelocity this year--whether it'll be 3-1/2 percent or something else.I find it much easier to predict an increase in velocity than flatvelocity. There's enough evidence that this readjustment/restructuring process is continuing.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's called the demise of commercialbanking.MR. KELLEY. I'm afraid that's right.MR. KOHN. And the thrift industry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Don? If not,let me get started on the round table. As I've said before, I thinkthe evidence continues to mount that as the result of the policieswe've put in place--wisely or luckily--we are looking at what seems tobe a continued disinflation path. That is bringing the consumer priceindex and the general inflation indicators to what I suspect is aglide down a path to as close to a noninflationary environment as onecan get in the real world. We obviously are beginning to get thesigns that individuals are responding in a way that several of youmentioned. It's fairly apparent that as expectations of priceinflation in the longer run diminish, we begin to get therestructuring actions that a lot of companies are undertaking. Inother words, rather than endeavoring to increase profit margins bymoving prices, they are being forced to take it out of the cost side,which is another way of saying that productivity is improving. AsGovernor Angell mentioned the last time, as I recall, we are beginningto see the effects of price disinflation on output. If one looks atthe characteristics of the way one wants the economy to function, onewants businesses to be improving their profit margins by taking it outof the cost side and not moving on the price side. And in thatrespect I think that we are on an extraordinary path, as I say[unintelligible]. Nonetheless, it seems to be working out that way.That essentially means that if we sit still and do nothing atthis stage, we're likely to be very pleased with [developments] bothon the economic activity side and on the price side. In fact, they'llbe basically related. This raises the very important [question] ofwhat is the policy role of targets. Targets were imposed on us in theHumphrey-Hawkins legislation and we have been employing them eversince, first with M1 and then M2 and M3. We go through the process offorecasting what these targets are pretty much in the manner Don-38-2/2-3/93described. And for want of a better term, it's essentially aprojection of nominal GDP, and a forecast of the money supplies,whichever ones fall out from an analytical procedure that strives toget velocity. While there are some obvious interactions, it is mainlyfunctioning in that manner. We have looked very closely and haveadjusted policy on innumerable occasions when credit behavedabnormally, when the money supply behaved abnormally. But I must say--I don't know about the rest of you--that as far as I'm concerned Ialmost never cared in those instances if we were making a judgmentthat something was abnormal about where the money supply was relativeto the targets we had put together sometime earlier in the year. AndI think what we're viewing at this particular stage is something whichis basically related to this. I frankly don't think that whatevertargets we agree to today are going to make the slightest differencein the way this Committee functions in the next year because whateveris going on we will respond to it. What we decide today will be aninteresting thing to look at, but I would be very surprised if anybodyhere really is driven by the fact that we are on one edge of thistarget [range] or the other. I may be exaggerating for some of thepeople around this table, but I'm not exaggerating for myself!This leads me to conclude that the target issue that we arediscussing today is not a policy question. It's a politicalperception question. Having said that, I then get to the question ofwhat we know about the perceptions that are likely to happen. Thefirst thing I ask myself is how good a forecaster are we of what wenow define as M2 with all its components. And I must say that theverdict on our forecasting capabilities is probably not publishable.Take a look at how badly we have done in the last year! We have, withthe most sophisticated analytical techniques, veered continuously offthe actual short-term path, which is another way of saying thatmonetary policy per se is not likely to make all that much differenceas to where M2 shows up one way or the other. Don suggested that ifwe were to lower the funds rate by 1/2 point or more as he put it--Iheard the "more" very loudly--we might edge growth of M2 up 1/2percent. Well, I submit to you that whatever happens to M2 over thenext year, 1/2 percent is going to be in the de minimis area; no onecould care less. What is going to drive M2 probably has very littleto do with what we do; it will have to do with the outside marketforces because the disconnect that has occurred between bank reserveson the one hand, and the monetary base, the funds rate, and M2 isreally quite extraordinary. [In response] to talk that says we cansignificantly influence this--or as the phraseology goes that if welower rates, we will move M2 up into the range--I say "garbage." Thechances of that are at the lower end of the probability ranges of whatwe're talking about. I don't know where M2 is going. My own guess isthat Don's forecast is as good a forecast as we can get. But I'd hateto have to figure out what the standard error of that forecast isbecause it has to be awfully large on the basis of all the otherthings that we don't know.Having said all of that, I then ask myself: "What should webe doing?" Well, we have a statute out there. If we didn't have thestatute, I would argue that we ought to forget the whole thing. If itdoesn't have any policy purpose, why are we doing it? By law [wehave] to make such forecasts. And if we are to do so, I suggest thatwe do them in a context which does us the least harm, if I may put itthat way. And that is the reason why I think we should view what we-39-2/2-3/93do today in terms of the perceptions as distinct from policy and thinkin terms of policy in a somewhat different context, which we will bediscussing later. In any event, I conclude from all of this that weprobably would be best off by moving the targets down 1/2 point--inother words adopting a 2 to 6 percent range for M2 and probably 1/2 to4-1/2 percent for M3, leaving the debt range unchanged for the reasonsDon mentioned. I would have some sympathy for leaving the upper endof the range for M2 alone. I don't feel strongly one way or theother. My concern about doing that, frankly, is that it would beinterpreted, I regret to say, as our caving in to pressures from anumber of our friends on Capitol Hill. If it weren't for that, Icould see the logic of it, remembering that we are viewing it as aperception question not as a policy question. Having been exposed toat least two [Congressional] hearings and the type of responses thatwe got on this issue, I would congratulate our [colleague], GovernorKelley, who was very perceptive at our last meeting in suggestingsomething not dissimilar to what has been going on. As a consequence,I would merely say that I find the arguments overwhelming for us to dosomething modest, define it as a technical issue, not get involved inthe policy questions, and leave it at that. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, you can count me on board as nothaving exaggerated my feelings in regard to [the role of] M2. Iwholeheartedly agree with your statement. I also agree that it's apolitical perception question that we're dealing with here and I'dlike to ask you a question in that regard. Since it's a politicalperception question, if we go to a 2 to 6 percent range--which meanswe've made a move--and if actual growth comes in below 2 percent, arewe not putting ourselves into a very difficult political situation?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would say it depends wholly on what ishappening in the economy. If the economy is doing what it's doingnow, that issue will just fade into insignificance.MR. ANGELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If the economy is doing poorly, we're introuble even if the money supply goes up.MR. ANGELL. Well, for political perception reasons, I wouldprefer to go to 1 to 5 percent on M2, [lower] M3 to 0 to 4 percent,and leave the debt range alone. My reason is that in my mind we aregoing to take political heat for the 1/2 point [reduction]. And we'regoing to take 90 percent of the political heat if we go to 2 to 6percent that we would take if we went to 1 to 5 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we've already gotten thepolitical heat at 1/2 point; that's what everyone expects. I thinkwe're taking on more than we need to; I frankly don't see the purposeof doing more.MR. ANGELL. My view is that there's just too muchuncertainty here. Let's suppose we move this range [down by 1/2percentage point] and the economy is performing just like the staffforecast and it is not adequate to get the kind of job growth thatpolitically is desired. I believe that with our staff forecast andthe lack of job growth and a range of 2 to 6 percent, if M2 is at 1.8percent, we'd be in a pack of trouble.-40-2/2-3/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me say this. If we were to go downa full point, all we would evoke is Senator Sarbanes re-quoting PaulMcCracken's story about that guy who shot a hole in the [barn door].All I can tell you, Wayne, having been up there, is that it is not anacademic discussion;This is raw politicsI must tell you that I would feel far more comfortable goingup there with a 1/2 point [reduction] and I wouldn't even mind if wekept going under that; I don't think that's a particular problem. Ithink we would be provoking more noise than is necessary by going morethan 1/2 point, and I must say that I would prefer not to do that.MR. ANGELL. Okay. By and large in this case, this is yourstory in the Humphrey-Hawkins setting, even though I don't quite agreeabout the political risk. That is, I would rather face his continuedunhappiness right now when I think we're okay than I would to take iton the chin a year from now. As far as the members of the Committeeare concerned, if we were to go to 1 to 5 percent or even 2 to 6percent and if conditions changed--for example, if the velocitypicture changed and other leading indicators were suggesting that M2ought to be growing [above] the top of the range--I would feel it verystrange not to be able to accommodate such growth of M2 under someconditions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I agree with that. In fact, one issuethat I think ought to be on the table here is whether in the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony we should suggest that. How to play it is aninteresting question. But as a policy question, I absolutely agreewith what you're saying.MR. ANGELL. Well, I'm not going to vote against a [1/2point] decrease in these rates, particularly in this situation whereit seems to me that what we're doing is backing you up as the Chairmanmaking a presentation. Even though I like 1 to 5 percent a lotbetter, I think in a sense that it's your call. I feel ratherstrongly about it, but at the same time I feel very supportive of yourposition.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I support what you suggest. Ithink you're right that, given the relative variances coming fromthings we can control and things we can't control, there isn't anypolicy consequence within the ranges of change that we're talkingabout here. I would think in that environment that if we had notalready committed to doing something--I'm attracted by the notion ofdoing something modest and the limit of modesty is nothing--I'dprobably do nothing at all. But I think we have committed to it; andif we have to pay the price, I think we have to do it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, doing nothing now would look likewe caved in.MR. SYRON. Exactly for that reason I think we have to do it.But I have some sympathy for widening the range to 2 to 6-1/2 percentbecause that is consistent with the notion [of how we view] thisnumber. If we were really being honest about it or if we wereunconstrained--I'll put it that way--from a political perspective,-41-2/2-3/93we'd say, given what we would like to see happen to the economy, thatthis number could be anywhere between -1 and +10. That's anexaggeration, but I [wouldn't] go up [to testify] with the same range,even though it is a slightly wider range than it was at some earlierpoints. Widening the range says something; it's consistent with thenotion that this is a very uncertain thing to think about. And ifwe're going to widen it, I think you're right that we're committed tolowering the bottom band; it would look like we were caving in if wedid not. But I would leave the top at 6-1/2 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I think your point is well taken;this is largely a political decision. Politically, I think we can allagree that 5-1/2 percent nominal GDP is good, so it won't cause us anytrouble. And I understand your case for lowering the average range1/2 point. I would suggest a slightly different twist. If I weregoing to go out there and with a straight face use these M2 ranges asa political signal, the signal that I would send is that the firstthing we want to do is to prevent a relapse into recession. Andsecond, I would want to signal a willingness to prevent a resurgenceof inflation. That adds up to me that what we want to do is cut thetop end to, say, 5-1/2 percent and leave the bottom end at 2-1/2percent. If we really believe what we're saying about 3-1/2 percentvelocity, then 5-1/2 plus 3-1/2 is 9 percent nominal GDP growth. Ican't imagine anyone seriously thinking they would support a policy of9 percent nominal GDP. On the other hand, 2-1/2 plus 3-1/2 gives us 6percent GDP, which is only 1/2 point higher than where we think wewere last year. So, I would say that if we believe the forecast, whatwe want to do is maintain the bottom end of the range and cut the topend of the range.There's a second possibility and that is that it's not whollya political issue. I would recommend the NBER Conference Papers,though I was not able to attend the conference. Academic economists--it's almost a shock compared to what we're thinking--not only want usto focus more on M2 and nominal GDP but they actually have quarterlyadjustment processes; [they suggest] that we should look at whathappened last quarter to determine what we should do with money nextquarter. And that is so far from what we're talking about at thistable--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And reality.MR. LINDSEY. And reality. But given that academiceconomists can be our most important constituency when times gettough, if we are moving that far out of the academic ranges, we shouldbe a little concerned. I have the numbers in front of me. It waspointed out earlier that in the last 7 years on a quarterly basisthere have been only 3 out of 28 quarters where velocity has been morethan 3-1/2; there have been only 5 when velocity has been more than 3.I would think that, if anything, the conditions that led to a largevelocity shock last year are less in place than they are this year.As President Jordan said yesterday, we've had no big increases in thenarrower monetary aggregates. In addition, there's more bankaggressiveness, not less, going on. Restructuring has occurred more,not less, than a year ago. And we've already seen a substantialamount of CD runoff. So, I would say that if we want to avoid what-42-2/2-3/93Jerry Corrigan was afraid of, and that is an outcome outside our rangeof expectations, we'd want to have a range of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent.That's just to throw another option on the table.MR. MULLINS. A narrower band?MR. LINDSEY. A narrower band.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I would support the recommendationas you have made it. It seems to me it would be desirable to make 3points in the testimony. The first is the one you emphasized, thatthis is a technical adjustment designed to accommodate a decline inmoney demand and, therefore, it wouldn't be expected to produce lowergrowth in 1993. The other thing that might be worth noting is thatthe adjustment is really consistent with our prior inflation goals anddoesn't represent any attempt on our part to increase the pace ofdisinflation. And, finally, we all have been talking about theuncertainties associated with this whole exercise, and I think it maybe well just to confront very directly the possibility that M2 and M3could undershoot even this adjusted target; I'd make that point clear.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I had some similar thoughts, but I would favoralternative II, though I could certainly live with what you havesuggested. I think some reduction in the M2 range is important. Idon't think one can emphasize too much this credibility point that youmade and [the need to avoid] any perception whatsoever that we'recaving in to political pressures. It's not just a question of theFed's credibility as an institution. I think it's very important toU.S. economic policy right now in general that we guard thatcredibility. I have suggestions similar to Bob's with respect tothings that could be said. There is the technical issue. I think theway to deal with Bob's point on inflation may simply be to saysomething along the lines of: "Just recognize the progress that hasbeen made in bringing inflation down." That in a sense is a technicalargument, too, that ought to be recognized in the ranges as atechnical point without any implications with respect to rattling thesaber. As to the future, I think Bob's point on controllability is agood one, as is what you said about controllability; it's somethingI've agreed with for a long time. I think the value of M2 when it wasbehaving was never as a target but as an indicator of what was goingon in nominal GDP and not something that we could influence. I guessthat raises another possibility in terms of things you might say, a laSteve Axilrod's suggestion, but it might not be a bad idea to pointout at this time that we need to look at a broad range of things:other monetary indicators, the behavior of the economy, etc. It'sjust a good time to make the point that we're required to set these--you've made this point before--but we look at a broad range ofindicators in making policy decisions. When you said "forget thewhole thing," I trust what you were talking about was that at thispoint in time, given the uncertainties, it would be a mistake if we asthe central bank backed away in a long-term sense from trying tounderstand the behavior of money and having money in some sort of---43-2/2-3/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I was referring wholly to the targetissue.MR. MELZER. At this point in time?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. At this point in time.MR. MELZER. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not backing away from money. Thefinancial system is what we respond to. Money is one of the proxieswe employ to understand that system. We can't get away from that.It's merely the rigidity of the Humphrey-Hawkins statutoryrequirements--MR. MELZER. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would feel more comfortable droppingthem at this stage, but we don't have a choice. President Stern.MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have someconsiderable sympathy for the position you've taken and for theconsiderations that go into it. I'll only add two observations. One,it seems to me that one consideration to lower the range, andparticularly the lower end, is of course that we got 2 percent or sogrowth in M2 last year. And to the people who want to attribute thatto us it would be a rather strange commentary if we say that in somesense we are unwilling to have that kind of growth again this year.So, I think that consideration suggests that the range ought to godown. In listening to your discussion, it seems to me that whatyou're suggesting, and I certainly agree, is that M2 and the otheraggregates are information variables. We have a whole host of thosevariables that we look at constantly. Having some sort of range,aside from the fact that it's required, is a good idea because we needto evaluate the incoming information against something. If we were tofollow that approach rigorously, we would establish a range that wouldbe either centered around the midpoint of Don's forecast and/or wouldbe centered around a growth that we consider consistent with anoninflationary environment in the long run. I think both of thosewould imply lower ranges than we're talking about today, and I don'tthink this is the time to move that aggressively. So, I'm comfortablewith what you're suggesting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I would support the plain vanilla 1/2percentage point cut on both ends. I'm not attracted to cutting thelower end to 2 percent and leaving the upper end at 6-1/2 percent,first because I think it appears to be a bit cute. Politically, Ithink we would hear about drawing the target out just a bit to capturethat last shot. And I don't think people are too worried about veryrapid M2 growth and our slamming on the brakes right now; they'reworried about slower growth. So, I'm for a plain vanilla, 1/2 pointcut on both ends.I am growing a bit concerned about this whole targetingprocess, even though I'm comfortable with policy. I think we'reheaded for trouble because even if the economy performs well, we're-44-2/2-3/93going to show a negative [growth rate for M2 and M3] in the firstquarter of 1993. And if real GDP is 3 percent, we're still going tohear the criticism--not just the political criticism but the academiccriticism--that we are holding back the pace of this recovery,restraining it. This is what we've heard even though we've had twoquarters of 3-1/2 percent GDP growth. I've become a littledisenchanted with trying to explain it as velocity changes because Ithink that's not selling especially well. We're simply not targetingM2 at the current time in the sense that low M2 growth will not leadto a policy change. We are jointly targeting M2 and velocity, whichsuggests to me that we're implicitly targeting nominal GDP. I feelmuch more comfortable with a nominal GDP target than I do with an M2target, but in some sense we're not revealing the nominal GDP target.So, this causes a lot of confusion. As this goes on, I think we'regoing to have to explore other more structurally satisfying ways toexplain this phenomenon. I like the notion of capturing thedistortion in the other aggregates and, for example, pointing out thatM2 adjusted for the yield curve is growing, M2 plus bond funds aregrowing, and M2 and bank deposits are growing; it's only the S&Ls thatare not. Obviously, I don't think at this stage that we shouldconsider monitoring ranges or anything like that. All theseaggregates have problems. But something is going to remainunsatisfying about a process in which we show very, very low M2 growthand then say it's sort of okay, we'll make it up on velocity. Again,for the time being we're on this path and I don't think we can do muchabout it except that we should continue to think about it becausewe're going to be forced back to the issue. In the interim, I thinkyou're exactly right: The least disruptive thing to do is to take aplain vanilla 1/2 point cut, which I believe is fully discounted.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is one thing we could do to cometo grips with your question and that is to publish a couple more Msand put targets on them.MR. MULLINS. Or we could have monitoring ranges. I don'tknow that we'd want to paper the world with Ms just to try to confusethe issue!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN(?). I think Arthur Burns had 7 Ms.MR. MULLINS. [Having more Ms] does get more directly, in anunderstandable manner, to what is happening in that it involves movingout the yield curve. And we could actually show that some broaderaggregates would be growing, which might be encouraging. So, I thinkwe should continue to work on these and supplement our velocityargument. I, too, have been surprised, even in the academic setting,at how unsuccessful the arguments on velocity have been even thoughthey're very logical. I think people can't see behind velocity. Itmight be easier to look at an alternative measure. As you havepointed out in other settings, there is a distressing shortage ofscapegoats in the political arena.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I understand where you're comingfrom on your proposal and I don't see many options. Like othersaround here, I am very bothered by it because we are setting a targetthat we know we will not be making any time in the near future. And-45-2/2-3/93that will cause us a lot of grief as those who are pushing us followup on this and see that we cannot and did not make it. That perhapsemphasizes Governor Mullins' point that we've got to find a way toexplain by other means what we're doing or we will be under heavy,heavy, criticism going forward despite the fact that we dropped therange down 1/2 point. But it's a 1/2 point that I think we're notgoing to make right away and that really bothers me.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think Governor Mullins has raised avery important issue here. And it might not be a bad idea for us tobe thinking about this prior to the next meeting and see how we canconfront this. In principle, in a very long-run sense we really havebeen targeting nominal GDP. The trouble with GDP is that it's a veryfuzzy number; it gets revised; and it's always late. We don't knowwhere we are; it's not forward-looking. And we've always used some ofthese financial aggregates as advance signals or informationalindicators of where in fact GDP is going. If the indicators collapse,one goes back to the original source and looks at it directly. But wemay well be able to find a number of different proxies that we mightwant to publish in a supplementary sense. And I will tell you that todo so would diffuse a lot of the politics because [observers] wouldnot know what to think at that point. It's as if we were to dropsmall time deposits from M2 and republish it. People would have aterrible time [evaluating M2] because the argument as to why it's outof the range--I don't care what we say as to why it's out of therange--almost doesn't matter. They would be looking at a number [thatsimply could not be interpreted.] It would be very tough to make ajudgment as to what really is going on.MR. HOENIG. You're suggesting that if we dropped small timedeposits out we'd have a fairly fast growing M2, which would only addmore confusion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's right.SPEAKER(?). But we already have M1! [Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I will suggest to Don Kohn, however,that he give some thought to this, and perhaps we ought to spend alittle time at the next meeting in March and go a little further onthis question. I think we'll learn a lot, depending on how theHumphrey-Hawkins testimony ultimately emerges, and we'll know a lotmore about first-quarter GDP. At the moment my guess is that thestatistical risks of the first-quarter GDP forecast are on the upside, not on the down side. Remember, we're [now] looking at thefourth quarter. It looks as if fourth-quarter growth is going to beunder that in the third though, to be sure, the third quarter wasrevised down. But the first quarter may surprise us, and that will doa lot to the configuration of how we are perceived [and] how webehave. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, I would personally prefer a fullpoint drop in the M2 range to 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent. I think Donmakes as strong a case as one can make for any forecast. Butobviously there is plenty of uncertainty in forecasting money demandand velocity, and your approach of 2 to 6 percent would certainly beacceptable to me. I think the one thing we can't do is nothing. Thatwould be absolutely the wrong signal. The bond market would punish us-46-2/2-3/93severely if we tried something like that. In that connection, I agreewith Governor Mullins' [comments] yesterday in that I would have someconcern about widening the range. I think people would perceive thatas trying to have it both ways. And that could do some damage to ourcredibility. If we adopt 2 to 6 percent, Mr. Chairman, it strikes methat you might want to consider saying something in your testimony tothe effect that the Committee will take a particularly close look atthe current range when we review it at the July meeting. And youmight even go so far as to say that in the current circumstancesthere's some possibility we would consider lowering the ranges at suchtime. Historically, if I'm not mistaken, we typically have not made amove on the current range at the July meeting. I know we'revulnerable to the McCracken kind of story, but it strikes me that inthe current situation, with all the technical problems we face, thatthat would not be an unreasonable thing to do.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. I have a lot of sympathy for a number of thingsthat have been said here as far as descriptions of the way theCommittee functions, [including] some of Larry Lindsey's remarks, TomMelzer's, Dave Mullins', and your own comments about it. I don'treally care at all where the debt or M3 targets are set because, withthe tools available, I can't imagine any action by the Federal Reservebeing influenced by whatever they do. What a central bank does is toset the discount rate, reserve requirements, and open marketoperations to peg the funds rate, letting that be endogenous. When Ilook at what actually is done, even M2 does not seem to have anyrelevance to what the Committee does or what the [Board of] Governorsdoes. It would seem to me [reasonable] in the circumstances, [given]a sense of efficient markets and trying to improve the quality ofinformation to decisionmakers, to say that we're going to put out anM2 range but it's not a target at all. It's a staff forecast and theFOMC has no intention of doing anything to try to stay within thatrange. I can imagine a set of circumstances, without putting aprobability on it, where the yield curve could flatten dramatically,we could get 1 percent M1 growth and 8 percent M2 growth, and as longas we were getting something close to the central tendency [of ourforecasts] or the Board staff projection on nominal and real GDP thisCommittee wouldn't do anything. It's inconsistent in my view to say"Here's a target for M2" and not seek institutional arrangements thathelp us hit it. It's not a target if we don't try to do something tohit it. So, why not explain that this is not a target and that wedon't really have targets. We can set up monitoring ranges for M1 andthe base, which might be useful for some purposes [in terms of] wherewe think they may fall, but they're not targets for the Committee.What is a target is either nominal GDP or various real indicators.And for better or worse, if that's the way the Committee is conductingits affairs, then I think that ought to be explained.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, as you went through your openingcomments I completely agreed with what you said and how you said itbut, honestly, I thought you were coming to a different conclusion. Ithought you made a very good case for leaving the ranges where theywere and not making a change. In a perfect world, frankly, that'swhat I'd prefer. But I do understand that we aren't in a perfect2/2-3/93world and that there are some political perceptions out there that weneed to deal with. But there seem to have been enough changes sincethe correspondence we received indicating that we might reduce ourranges--and certainly the incoming data for this year suggest that thenumbers are moving even further away from our expectations--that onecould make a case that developments have taken place that make achange not seem appropriate. The uncertainties are very, verysignificant and, therefore, I would leave the ranges where they are.I'd prefer to keep them where we tentatively set them last July, but Icertainly don't feel strongly enough about it to dissent. Therefore,I would support the case that you made because you seem to feel morecomfortable in a political context with what you've said, and I'dsupport that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. Clearly, we have a lot of politics floatingaround; a lot of the discussion does seem to center on politics.Unfortunately, politics is a lot perception, and at some pointperception and reality start to merge. And I worry some about ourdeveloping our own platform for criticism. I think we clearly have todo something and I think whatever action is taken shouldn't need lotsof explanation. The action should speak for itself, which is one ofthe reasons I like the idea of lowering the bottom end but notnecessarily the top end because I think [a wider range] would conveythe increased uncertainty. Having said that, though, [one could] saythat the top end is probably the most irrelevant part of the wholerange at this point. I wouldn't wait until March or until our nextmeeting, though, to start discussing in the text that we are lookingat some other types of Ms.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry, what text are you thinkingof?MS. PHILLIPS. The text of Humphrey-Hawkins.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The report itself, you mean?MS. PHILLIPS. The report itself. I might not shower themwith all kinds of Ms, but I think an indication that we have beenmonitoring more than just M2--that is to say, we are looking at M2plus bond funds, plus stock funds, adjusted for the yield curve, andso on--would be [appropriate].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You mean as a means of trying to explainthe velocity question without getting to this velocity--?MS. PHILLIPS. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's an interesting idea.MS. PHILLIPS. One could think of it even as a sort ofsurcharge during this period when things are so unusual that it'sappropriate to deviate from looking just at M2 or the traditional[measures] and to start looking now at more---48-2/2-3/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What you're suggesting is unbundling theFeinman/Porter analysis in a way that is more readily describable andnot econometric.MS. PHILLIPS. Right, understandable! So, I guess mypreference would be President Syron's approach. I probably would endup supporting the 1/2 point [reduction] but with more explanation orsome monitoring ranges [besides] just M2.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I buy into your recommendation on this. Givenwhere we are, I think it's the least harmful way to deal with it. Iwould stress the technical side. I'd like to comment on the broaderissues that have come up having to do with our explanation of theproblems of M2. I think the velocity approach is a loser. I don'tthink it has gotten us anywhere. I view our strength as aninstitution as a real world strength: that we understand markets,that we have a feel for these, and that we understand institutions.So I would explain this in English rather than econometrics. And Ithink it has to do with long-term and short-term rates and thediminishing role of banks in the financial flows of the economy. Thatto me is the way to do it. And I would hope that you can do that inyour testimony and maybe even elaborate with an appendix. I would besomewhat wary, however, of dropping M2 anytime soon even if we thoughtit seriously flawed. A better approach is to continue to have M2 butto get people used to an M2-A or an M2-B and to have several of thesethat we can look at over time. Then, as time goes on and people getused to these, M2-A and M2-B can become M2; but I think we have to getpeople used to the change. If we make definitional changes toodramatically without these kinds of parallel alternatives, I think wewill run into some real problems. We can make this case better thanwe have made it and we can make it in a real world sense. We can usesomething else that the eyes can look at and then down the road we canmake the definitional change and the shift [to a new M2 measure]. Ibelieve it can be handled, and I think we ought to get on with it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, first of all I'd like to saythat I appreciate the long-term outlook that has been provided in theBluebook; I think it was a very useful exercise. I agree entirelywith your statement that the setting of these ranges doesn't serve anyparticular policy purpose. But we're faced with a statute. If wewere operating in a nonpolitical context, the logic would suggest thatwe set the ranges to encompass what we think M2 is going to do.That's the honest thing to do. Unfortunately, we don't operate in anonpolitical context and in my judgment the political considerationshave to be paramount here. Not to do anything would play into thehands of our political opponents in the sense that they would sense avictory that might have adverse consequences in the market. So, Ithink the compromise, if I can describe it that way, of 2 to 6 percentis the right way to go. I think it would be confusing to everyone totry to fine-tune either the lower end or the upper end of theseranges. I would do it straightforwardly by a 1/2 percentage pointreduction. I think Governor Mullins is exactly right: This issue isnot going to go away. And I'm not persuaded that the technical issue,or the velocity issue, is a salable argument.-49-2/2-3/93 -50-Many of the points that have been made are good ones in termsof your testimony. I would be inclined to stress the performance ofthe economy and the improvements in inflation and GDP, notwithstandingthe lower range for M2. I just don't think this is the time for us towaste a lot of political capital on this issue. We're going tocontinue to get some heat, but I think setting a range of 2 to 6percent is the best way to [proceed]. Let me say one final thing.You've taken already a lot of heat; you're going to take some more,I'm sure. And I would just hope that the Committee would becompletely supportive of you in this because you're going to have atough time, I suspect; I think we should be behind you all the way.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation forthe reasons that you gave. But I would like to join everybody else inhelping you write your testimony! [Laughter] I'd include what yousaid this morning: That if we weren't required by law, we probablywouldn't be doing this. I would say that very honestly and directly.I would call attention to the unusual behavior of M2 and M2 velocityin the past year or so and refer to it not just as a technicaladjustment but explain what has been happening in very common senselanguage. I'd describe the bypassing of the banking system ordisintermediation and point out that it's disintermediation caused bylow interest rates rather than high interest rates, unlike what peoplelearned earlier disintermediation was caused by. I'd point out thatother measures of money--the base, M1, and so forth--have been growingat very rapid rates; and I'd point out that if we make very logicaladjustments, such as adding in stock and bond funds, M2 would havebeen in the middle of its target range. I have a draft here thatadjusts M2 for stock and bond funds minus IRA and Keough accounts, andit shows us right in the middle of the target range. I don't thinkmany people understand that. When Milton Friedman and Paul Samuelsondon't seem to understand it, I think there's an economic educationproblem out there that we have to deal with! If we don't publish alot of Ms at least we need to talk about a lot of Ms. Maybe we shouldinclude an appendix, as someone mentioned, and follow the rule Isuggested to you earlier that we shouldn't even show a chart for M2without having other Ms on the same page so that they can't beseparated. You might even refer to an earlier period in the '80s whenwe had the opposite problem, when the money supply was growing abovethe target ranges and nobody seemed to be complaining about that. So,I think there's almost a requirement that we do a better job ofeconomic education. I realize that we're not going to convince thecritics, but a lot of people watch C-Span and it's very depressingthese days. But I support your 2 to 6 percent range for M2.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, a 2 to 6 percent formulationis a slam-dunk for me. But I have to say that I find some of thediscussion around the table troubling on several points. First ofall, as someone who has had nothing but distaste if not disdain forM2--even when people thought it was good--I'm not quite ready to2/2-3/93accept the point that there is no policy purpose to be served in thecontext of this discussion, even though I have no confidence in M2.But I also find troubling the amount of emphasis that you put on thepoint that this is basically a political thing we're talking abouthere. I don't agree with that. I think in the first instance thechoices before the Committee are substantive choices. They arechoices that in the current circumstances have to be [viewed] more ina context in which there's a lot of noise in the numbers as well aselsewhere. But I view this as substantive. And in my own kind ofbimodal risk analysis I think it becomes very substantive, whether onelikes M2 or not, because depending upon how the economy evolves, itcould make a tremendously important difference in terms of both theperceptions about policy and policy itself. So, as I said, I'm notaltogether enamored by some of the body English that has gone withthis discussion.I am also terribly concerned about throwing all these Ms outthere. Now, you pointed out, Mr. Chairman, that that's what ArthurBurns did. Chairman Burns may have succeeded in confusing theCongress but he may have confused himself because, looking at theresults of policy in that era, I'm not so sure they are something Iwould want to be associated with. I think there is a grave dangerthat if we get all of these Ms out there--[up to] M27 or something--everybody's going to be happy with one of those Ms but it's not goingto be the same for everybody and we're going to end up with aconvoluted policy. So, I've got to help you write your testimony too,but unlike almost everybody else I'd keep it really simple. I thinkwe have a pretty good story to tell in terms of the whole policyprocess and what has happened in the economy. Go back to 1989 and thefact of the matter is that a soft landing in the economy has beenachieved with a degree of success and precision that is almost beyondthe human mind's capacity to imagine. I'd rather talk about that thanM27.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I want to say something. In fact, we'realready on that track with respect to early discussions about thetestimony.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As I said, the 2 to 6 percent M2range is a slam-dunk, but I would try to keep [the explanation] assimple as possible. I would not get into these comments about howwe're going to have to take another close look at this in July; it'sjust another trap. Here it is. Let's go with it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, I can also very happilysupport your suggestion and I will do so. We're dealing with largeuncertainties, vitally important unknowables, and we don't use [M2]anyway for running policy. While a logical case can be made forvarious [ranges] that are a little higher or a little lower--one canbe made as logically as another--they are not that much absolutelydifferent anyway. So, it does indeed become a political question. Ifone is not responsible for conducting policy, it's very easy to staywith the tried and true, or at least with what seems to be the triedand true. That's done on a very sophisticated basis in academia andin a much cruder and more simplistic basis politically and perhapslargely in the media. But we are responsible, and we cannot rely on-51-what has seemed to be tried and true even though it might silence some critics in the short run.  We know that it could get us in very bad 
trouble in the long run; we just can't do that.  I'm delighted to hear comments around the table this morning, and certainly would like to add my voice, about the need to explain these facts in much more 
accessible ways and maybe to use more available and hitherto ignored 
channels to get out the story of what we're trying to do, why we're 
doing it, and how we're doing.  We need to do that in language that's 
accessible to the media and the general public and our political 
critics and our political friends.  So, I think the suggestions that Bob McTeer and others have made are right.  Perhaps we're being forced into it; we'd prefer not to be there; historically, we may not have 
had to do it but that's where we are today.  But to return where I 
started, I certainly think that your suggestion is as politically 
viable a way to project these targets as any other would be. 
 
 CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Thank you.  I propose that we vote on 
the following ranges:  M2, 2 to 6 percent; M3, 1/2 to 4-1/2 percent; and debt, 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent.  Read the-- 
 
 MR. BERNARD.  I'm reading from page 22 in the Bluebook or, if 

you're using the other form, starting at line 36:  "The Federal Open 
Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will 
foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  In furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at this meeting established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 2 to 6 percent and 1/2 
to 4-1/2 percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 
1992 to the fourth quarter of 1993.  The Committee anticipates that 
developments contributing to unusual velocity increases could persist 
during the year.  The monitoring range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for the year.  The behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in 
the light of progress toward price level stability, movements in their 
velocities, and developments in the economy and financial markets." 
 
 MR. LINDSEY.  Given the sentence on what we're expecting in 

regard to velocity, shouldn't we also make it clear that if those expected velocities come to pass we would expect M2 to be at the lower end of the target range? 
 
 CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  We do that in the testimony as distinct 

from here.  Call the roll please. 
 
 MR. BERNARD. 
 Chairman Greenspan 
  Yes  Vice Chairman Corrigan   Yes 
 Governor Angell    Yes 

 President Boehne    Yes 

 President Keehn    Yes 

 Governor Kelley    Yes 

 Governor LaWare    Yes 
 Governor Lindsey    Yes 
 President McTeer    Yes 

 Governor Mullins    Yes 

 Governor Phillips   Yes 

 President Stern    Yes 

 
 CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.  Do we vote for coffee at this stage? 
2/2-3/93[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The discussion we have just had led meto think about how successful we have been in keeping our discussionswithin this group. You recall that up until the last several meetingswe had what I thought was a very difficult problem for discussions ofthis group, and I think it's important to recognize that we have beenexceptionally tight[lipped]. In the last several meetings I've seenno evidence whatever of any comments about the content or anything inthese meetings getting out. And I would particularly advise that wenot become lax, because the ability to be as frank as we have been isvery important for policymaking. If we start to loosen up again, Ithink we're going to lose that capability. Having said that, I willcall on Don Kohn to take us to the next stage of our discussions.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I don't see a lot ofshort-term policy issues in front of the Committee today, so I will bebrief. I also heard Committee members say that they were militantlyignoring M2. I also note that it's crossed out of the table, but ifwe could devote about 2 minutes to that--. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don? Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. My question is not so much for Donbut for Mike Prell; this has nothing to do with current policy. Mike,do you have any concrete sense as to what this $30 billion fiscalpackage is and particularly whether it involves one-time [items] or[programs] that are going to be with us?MR. PRELL. I don't have any inside information on this atall; I know only what I've read in the newspapers. My presumption hasbeen, for what it's worth, that if there is an investment tax creditit will probably be a permanent feature. That's more consistent withthe longer-run growth strategy that was outlined during the [election]campaign. That has some implication for how big the bang would be inthe very short run. And we've assumed that on the infrastructure whatthey still seem to be talking about probably would also be more than aone-time shot, but in what magnitude I don't know. We've assumed thatwould be folded in and just overwhelmed in terms of the deficiteffects by the other things in due course.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm sorry for the interruption; itwas out of context.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Don? If not, whydon't I get started. As has been indicated, I don't think there'svery much terribly new here. I do think, however, that we arebeginning to see some evidence that overall investment is beginning tomove. We're seeing it obviously in capital goods; we're seeing it inresidential construction. And I suspect inventories may be preparingto move, which is important in the sense that when we're asking wherethe job growth is coming from and where the income is coming from tosustain consumption expenditures--unless we believe that the lowsaving rate is a statistical artifact and there is at least some[evidence] that indeed that might well be the case--we really cannotcontinue to get moderate real growth unless it's investment-led in oneform or another. Obviously, defense [spending] is coming down andthere's no big element involved on the government side, even with-53-2/2-3/93whatever the Administration has in mind. But I think the reason whywe are seeing some momentum still coming through here is that weprobably are getting a definite investment push, which is spillingover into consumer incomes and probably is a significant support ofthe levels of activity. I do think, as discussed earlier yesterday,that the turnover in existing homes and the realized capital gainsthat are being engendered as a consequence, coupled with therefinancing, are making a major contribution. But that can't go onindefinitely; it certainly can't grow.However, the most unusual thing that is beginning to emergeis that as a lot of the negatives begin to fall away--as homebuildingstarts to look somewhat more buoyant, as retail markets start to firmup, as the debt-service burdens seem to be declining--there now seemsto be increasing evidence that the commercial real estate problem ishaving a larger macroeconomic effect than I think we fully realized.There is the issue of the value of these assets in the financialintermediaries, not only in the banks but especially in the insurancecompanies. There is clear and I think increasing evidence that theuncertain values in these markets are having a major impact oncommercial banks' lending patterns. As I put it in the testimony Iwas presenting the other day, the fact that a lending officer orexecutive of a commercial bank cannot presume that commercial realestate mortgages can be unloaded expeditiously at a price that isreasonably forecastable has been a major factor stunting the growth inlending, despite the obvious very heavy liquidity of the commercialbanks.There has to be a reason why lending is as dull as it is.And while we can argue that it's fundamentally demand that's gettingless and less credible, if you look at the aggregate amount of lendingthat's going on outside of the financial intermediaries, there has tobe some very extraordinary reasons why voluntarily the commercialbanks are moving their book capital ratios up as rapidly as they havebeen moving them up. One obvious reason is that it's a proxy foruncertainty with respect to the reserves for nonperforming loans. Ifthat is the case, I suspect that as the underbrush is being pushedaside and all the negatives seem to falling by the wayside this hard-core element is sitting there. And, clearly, we're not going to getany rise in real estate values for years. But the question is: Arewe going to begin to get a market which is increasingly liquid? Therewas an article in the New York Times--I think it was Sunday--in whichthere was an interesting review of all of the RTC operations. Itdiscussed the extent to which a number of commercial banks aresuccessfully unloading some of their dead loans, the non-performers;and there's some evidence that finally the offering prices of propertyare beginning to hit the bids and that we're getting some increase intransactions. But the [commercial real estate] markets still feeldead; there's nothing out there. Every time we do a survey, the thingis barely moving. And I suspect that we're going to find ourselvesdealing with this issue for quite a long while. That's all the morereason why low mortgage rates, especially in the commercial area,probably are one of the most important vehicles for policy that onecan look at. I've been trying to push the issue, and with somesuccess I hope, that short-term stimulus to the extent that it movesintermediate rates up may well be counterproductive. But, so far asthe general outlook is concerned, this [sector] seems to me to be theone remaining major factor holding the recovery back and I think it's-54-2/2-3/93not an insignificant one. It's a very small part, obviously, of thegross domestic product, but it is a very large part of the collateralfor the financial intermediary system and a horrendous part of thenonperforming loans which are particularly important becauseintermediaries are very highly leveraged. And if this doesn't go awayfor a number of years--I can't see how it will--at least we can expectto find a means by which we can get some liquidity into this market.Even if it happens that the prices are 50 cents on the dollar, I thinkwe might--while we may not get a lot of construction--very well beginfinally to get some lending in the small- to medium-size businesses.The employment issue might be taking hold. And hopefullythis recovery will lose all of its head wind, if I may use that phrasethat I've got myself involved in. But as I said earlier, I think thatpolicy is beginning to look better by the day in retrospect. And Ifind it hard to think of any reason why we would want to [change thestance of policy] over the next 6-week period. But if somebody hassome great new insight, I would be most interested in hearing it.Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your prescription. Iam very tempted, of course, to believe that we may be falling behindin regard to maintaining price level targeting by targeting the fedfunds rate at 3 percent. I think all of us know the difficulty oftargeting M2; we've all discussed that. Certainly, there's difficultyin targeting the fed funds rate. We know that's really no way to runmonetary policy under changing conditions. Also, targeting nominalGDP poses real political dangers for us because it's just so difficultto go before the Congress and explain why we like 5-1/2 percentnominal GDP better than 6-1/2 percent when there's clearly arelationship between GDP and the unemployment rate. The unemploymentrate at 6-1/2 percent GDP would be more desirable than the one at5-1/2 percent. So, with Humphrey-Hawkins suggestions that we[emphasize] price stability as a second to employment and ourknowledge that employment benefits from improvement in the inflationoutlook, I'm inclined to believe that we ought to be thinking abouttightening at this stage. But I just don't have the stomach for doingit, Mr. Chairman; I lack the courage to be what I think would be seenas somewhat rash. And it was that prediction of lack of courage on mypart and your part that caused me some meetings ago to suggest that atsome point in time we might find ourselves with the need for a verylarge-scale move. If you would turn to Chart 6 in the FinancialIndicators package that Don has provided as he always does--I wasmistaken in thinking the charts were missing from the other documentbecause they're always in this document--you will see on that bottomchart for all commodities ex-food and ex-oil a price move that issomewhat of a preliminary indication of what happened at the end of1982 and what happened in 1987. I don't have the courage to vote totighten at this point, Mr. Chairman, because I'm hopeful that thiswill get reversed. And the price of gold being--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How much is lumber in there?MR. ANGELL. Well, lumber was up 43 percent year-over-yearthe last time I looked.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And it jumped to the limit in the lasttwo trading sessions.-55-2/2-3/93MR. ANGELL. Yes, but of course the beauty of thisexperimental ex-food and ex-oil commodity index is that it's not a[unintelligible] phenomenon with lumber; it [measures] actual houseconstruction that is moving up and increasing demand; and it providesan indicator not only of price levels but also of real economicactivity. Now, if you look at the top chart on all commodities, whichis the best predictor of CPI inflation, oil's decline and the behaviorof food prices do not worsen the inflation outlook.Well, Mr. Chairman, I would prefer the alternative ofasymmetric toward tightness, but I certainly never find myself in theposition of dissenting over the question of symmetry. However, I dowant to call the Committee's attention to what I think is apossibility of our getting behind the curve by maintaining the fedfunds rate at 3 percent for too long. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. I agree with your recommendation, Mr. Chairman,but I may require some hand-holding over these next few weeks becauseI never dreamed that my first vote on this Committee would be a voteto shrink M2 and M3. As indicated on the chart following page 19 inthe Bluebook, there are three alternatives and all of them are aimingdown. And that reminds me of last November when Harvey Rosenblum andI went hunting. It was the first time for both of us. We werenovices and our guide was concerned about our safety. The maininstruction that I got from our guide was: "Always keep your gunaimed up; never let your gun be aimed down. If your gun is aimeddown, you might shoot a dog." And I'm afraid we might shoot a doghere by aiming down. All the alternatives are down, so I guess "B" isas good as the others.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I agree with you. I would optfor alternative B and a symmetric directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I would agree with "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I agree with "B" symmetric. I would just like tooffer a thought on the earlier discussion about the disaggregation ofM2 or looking at alternatives. It's just a note of caution. I thinkwe ought to do that and see what we can learn. But I would be verycareful about making too much of anything at this juncture. While wecan undoubtedly find one or more adjusted aggregates that we mightlike the looks of at the moment, my guess is that in two or threeyears, unless we are very careful, we're not going to like the looksof them. So I would be more than a little cautious about rushing to aproliferation of Ms at this stage.-56-2/2-3/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think you will find that theenthusiasm we all exhibited got toned down by the Vice Chairman, and Ithink advisably so. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. "B" symmetric, Mr. Chairman. But I would justlike to say that I have a lot of sympathy for Governor Angell'scomments.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. "B" symmetric, sir.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. In the earlier go-around I was commenting moreon what I think is. Now, to be normative, I will comment on what Ithink should be. And that is that we should take monetary targetingseriously. I don't disregard what Wayne emphasizes about thecommodity index, but I also don't disregard what P* and long-runrelationships between M2 and the price level are telling us. Thelatter would suggest to me that we ought to find a way to do somethingto avoid a contraction of M2.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I favor "B" asymmetric toward tightening, but Icould support symmetry. I have sympathy for what Wayne said, and in asense it was all summed up in the discussion yesterday about ourinflation forecast versus the Blue Chip forecast. If our staffforecast is right, 3 percent is probably not a problem; if the BlueChip forecast is right, it's probably a big problem. And I think wehave to be very sensitive to that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is well said. Tom Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I support "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I will vote for "B" symmetric. Iam thinking about aiming down. It's one thing to shoot a dog, and Ilove dogs. It's another thing to shoot yourself in the foot, which is-57-2/2-3/93a bit lower still. So, that may be a case for "A" rather than "B,"but they are all down to me.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think there's a fair consensus on "B"symmetric.MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, what do you want to do about thelanguage?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Don Kohn has] suggested alternatelanguage for the operational paragraph on page 23 of the Bluebook.Norm, why don't you read it.MR. BERNARD. The alternate language involves the lastsentence but let me begin from the start: "In the implementation ofpolicy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain theexisting degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the context ofthe Committee's long-run objectives for price stability andsustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration toeconomic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly greaterreserve restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint would beacceptable in the intermeeting period." The change would come here,though the sentence would start the same: "The contemplated reserveconditions are expected to be consistent with..." And substitutingfor the rest of that sentence would be "little change in M2 and M3over the period from January to March."MR. LINDSEY. How little is the change?MR. KOHN. In the Bluebook we had a small plus for M2 and asmall minus for M3. My guess is that the small plus for M2 has turnedinto about zero after the revisions today. That is, we had a +.4percent for M2 over the two months and a -.7 percent for M3. Now, Iguess it probably would be about zero for M2 and -.8 percent orsomething like that for M3.MR. LINDSEY. That's little.MR. KOHN. That's at an annual rate!MR. BERNARD. Mr. Chairman, in the paragraph that has to dowith the trade-weighted value of the dollar, Mr. Truman proposes anupdating change given the fact that the dollar is now up somethinglike 3-1/2 percent. When we wrote this we were looking at about 2percent. The change would be in line 23. Very simply it would justinvolve dropping the word "somewhat" in line 23 so that it comes outto "rose on balance over the intermeeting period."MR. ANGELL. You have unanimous consent!-58-2/2-3/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection! Can we vote on "B"symmetric?MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Lindsey YesPresident McTeer YesGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Phillips YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Incidentally, before we go on to thenext subject I'd like to mention that any revisions in the forecastthat you submitted to [Mike Prell] can be made through close ofbusiness on Monday.MR. KEEHN. Could I just ask relative to the testimony thepresidents will be giving on the 10th of March: If we are askedspecifically how we voted on the long-term ranges, given thevisibility this issue has gotten, how do you want us to respond? Iguess an issue is whether you are going to cover in your testimonyanyway how we decided on that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You mean the range?MR. KEEHN. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh yes. In fact we're required to.MR. KEEHN. I know, but are you going to say how the votewent? What if I'm asked in the testimony: "How did you vote on theranges?"CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If you're asked, I think you're requiredto answer.MR. KEEHN. At that point the minutes will not have beenreleased.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. On occasion that has been done. Inother words, it's not--MR. KOHN. I think in the past Mr. Chairman, both you andChairman Volcker have answered whether there were any dissents withoutnecessarily naming names. In this case it won't matter.MR. KEEHN. If you cover that, I think that will be a usefulway of setting the stage for defense.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I wouldn't volunteer it because we neverhave, obviously.-59-2/2-3/93MR. KOHN. Right.MR. KEEHN. No.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I should be able unless--MR. KEEHN. Well, if you don't say it, it's likely to come upwhen we're asked and--VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The easy way to deal with it ifyou're asked, even if the Chairman is not asked, is to say the votewas unanimous.SPEAKER(?) Yes.MR. KEEHN. If that's all right, I think that's fine. I justwant to be sure that's okay.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think that's the way to do it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's no down side to that that I'm[aware of].MR. KEEHN. That's my view.MR. MCTEER. I wanted to ask this anyway but I think it fitsin very well with Si's question. I thought Governor Angell'ssuggestion that we change the language in the directive on the rangeswas a good one. The way it reads now it says: "The Committeeanticipates that developments contributing to unusual velocityincreases could persist." I think it would support us much better ifit says "The Committee expects that to persist."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's better handled in thetestimony where we're actually explaining what we're doing.MR. MCTEER. Do you think there's a down side to having itreflected in the directive as well?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm not sure. Don, what's your view onthat?MR. KOHN. Well, that sort of indirect language is there togive a sense of the uncertainty about it. The fact that it suggeststhat the Committee expects it but does so in this indirect language Ithink gives it the sense of maybe yes or maybe no.MR. MCTEER. If we're really uncertain, I think we made afoolish vote. I think our vote was predicated on our confidence thatit is going to happen.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that is a point. Does anybodyobject to changing it as President McTeer suggested?MS. PHILLIPS. Where is this?MR. MCTEER. Page 22.-60-2/2-3/93 -61-MR. STERN. Why don't you just change the "could" to "would."MR. PARRY. I thought of the same thing.MR. SYRON. That's a good idea.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a good idea. Why don't we justdo that; it helps a little. I think you're quite right.MR. KOHN. "The Committee anticipates developmentscontributing to unusual velocity increases would persist during..."MR. ANGELL. How about "are likely to"?MR. MULLINS. If we say that, it certainly will not--MR. SYRON. "Probably would."SPEAKER(?). "Are likely to."MR. KOHN. "Are likely to," yes.SPEAKER(?). I like that.MR. ANGELL. That's better.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's "are likely to."MR. MULLINS. "Are not unlikely to"?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Now that you have the floor, you're onfor [the next agenda item]. You may recall that we have discussed thequestion of confidentiality of FOMC information. We have a veryinteresting staff memorandum on this and Governor Mullins will leadour discussion.MR. MULLINS. Don Kohn has provided for the Committee anoutline which summarizes the issues identified by the subcommittee andalso gives our tentative conclusions. It is provided as background tothe Committee for thinking about these issues and as background forthe Chairman in preparation for Humphrey-Hawkins testimony. It's notclear exactly what we would like to do with this today except toinform the Committee where we are. We consider this in some sense aninterim report. There's work left to do. You saw some of it in thememo, which Ted handed out yesterday, on the arrangements in othercountries. We would also like to do more research and get analogousinformation on release issues in other parts of the government,independent agencies and the like, to get as much background aspossible. We don't yet have that. I won't go through the detailbecause it's pretty self-explanatory. The way we conceptualized thiswhole area was to suggest that our number one job should be to makethe best monetary policy decisions we could. That is our chiefobjective. In a democratic society we should do that in a mannerwhich is as open as possible consistent with making the best monetarypolicy decisions. And to the extent that the process is not publicbecause we feel that a more open process would adversely affect thequality of monetary policy decisionmaking we felt that we would bear2/2-3/93the burden for making the case because there is this presumption ofopenness.Now we will look through the several different proposals. Asyou see, the results were that we felt virtually all of them hadproblems in terms of adversely affecting the quality of monetarypolicy decisionmaking. The one in which there was some possibilityfor additional discussion, we felt, was the proposal to announceactions on changes in the federal funds rate target immediately. Somefelt that would increase the efficiency of monetary policy by makingit easier for the Desk to operate. Others were concerned that itwould reduce our flexibility in very uncertain times and also have anannouncement effect which could deter action. The other thing we gavea little thought to, but not much--and we would invite thought fromthe Committee--was the possibility of other options for meeting theobjective of openness. Some that people mentioned were increasedpress conferences and things of that nature, which may draw moreattention to the policy record. We actually put out quite a bit ofinformation, although it doesn't get much publicity. We compared [ourpractices with those of] other countries; I think they testify a lotand they probably give more public press conferences. I've noticedthat Henry Kaufman recently suggested that the President meetperiodically with the FOMC; that was not high on our list. So I thinkit would be worthwhile, instead of just taking the suggestions thatChairman Gonzalez has provided us, for all of us to give some thoughtto what else we might do to contribute to the sense of openness.Also, I would invite Tom Melzer, Ed Boehne, Mike Kelley, or Don tomake any other comments on our process or results.MR. KELLEY. Let me make one quick comment if I may. As weconsider changing how we do things, I'd say that the discussion thattook place here before the break today is a very, very dramaticexample that we might consider. That was a very important discussion,a very useful discussion, and one might speculate that it simply wouldnot have happened if we'd been on some other regime such as those thathave been suggested as possibilities.MR. MULLINS. Yes, I think that's a good point.MR. SYRON. Are we going to have a discussion of "E" at somepoint? I completely agree with what Mike [Kelley] just said and itseems to me that the only thing we might consider doing is thesuggestion labeled "E." But how will that be pursued?MR. MULLINS. I don't know; it's up to the Committee. Don,what did you have in mind on that?MR. KOHN. I think the idea was, Governor Mullins, that wewould like to know whether the Committee agrees with the conclusionson "A" through "D" and then whether the Committee thinks that "E"should be explored further. And then we would do that extra--MR. MULLINS. We'd schedule a time to do that?MR. PARRY. I think this is a good effort and certainlycovers some of the drawbacks of these different alternatives. I camepretty much to the same conclusion: That "E" seems to be the one withthe fewest downside risks. One thing I was thinking about, though, is-62-2/2-3/93that it would to me be [ideal] if our actions could be expressed interms of the effects on reserve pressures first. If we then wanted tobe specific about the funds rate, that's fine. But there may be sometime in the future when we'll be focusing on something other than thefunds rate and that will then enable us to move quickly intosubstituting any discussion about the funds rate with maybe anaggregate or something like that. We do, of course, in the directivenow start out by talking about reserve pressures and I think thatcommunicates something standing by itself and obviously can besupplemented by [comments on the] funds rate or whatever.MR. MULLINS. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. Let me first say that I think the subcommitteehas done an excellent job of laying out the options and their pros andcons. And I agree completely with a number of the tentativeconclusions. I agree that if we revive the Memorandum of Discussion,it should not be released promptly. I agree that any videotaping orliteral transcription of the meeting is a bad idea and I agree that anexpanded policy record with individual attribution probably wouldn'tbuy us very much. But I have at least a few questions about some ofthe other conclusions. I might just quickly make three points.First, I think that immediate release of the operational paragraph ofthe directive deserves some further study. It's possible that furtherstudy would show that the benefits are equal to or might outweigh thecosts. For me the strongest argument against doing this, as the memomakes clear, is that fear of adverse public or market reaction mightmake the Committee reluctant to take actions that it should take. Onthe other hand, one could argue that it might be helpful in a lot ofsituations for the Committee to be able to have a vehicle for[preparing] the public and the market for major changes in short-termpolicy, especially changes in the basic direction of short-termpolicy, by being able to move to an asymmetric directive in thedirection in which we expect to move and have that move be visible.For example, lately a lot of people expect that we will have totighten policy at some point in the next couple of years, and it mightbe nice to be able to give a less disruptive first signal of that witha visible move to an asymmetric directive tilted in that directionbefore we make the actual move. Let me emphasize that I'm not by anymeans convinced that this is a good idea; I'm simply saying that Ithink it deserves some more consideration. It has some strongadvantages. If we did that, we would be releasing all of the decisioninformation we have and it would deal with the leak problem prettycategorically. So I think it has a lot to recommend it.The second point I would make is that I hope we can find away to revive the old Memorandum of Discussion, which I remember frommy early days in the System, with a long delay in its release becauseI think there's a good bit that can be learned about monetary policyand about the monetary policy process from scholarly investigation ofa detailed record of FOMC meetings. But as your memorandum pointsout, obviously the problem is being able to maintain a long delay inthe release. And if we can't do that, I think we just can't have theMemorandum. But I would hope that we satisfy ourselves completelythat in fact we cannot protect the Memorandum from a forced disclosurebefore we give up the idea completely.-63-2/2-3/93MR. MULLINS. Al, what would satisfy you and make you feelcomfortable that we had adequate protection?MR. BROADDUS. That's the point. I guess if we had veryspecific legislation I would feel more comfortable, but I may not havethought that through. It may be impossible to do it and I recognizethat. All I'm saying is that I would hope we think that through verycarefully to make sure there's no way we can protect it definitively.The final point I would make, and this goes to option "E"which the subcommittee appears to favor, is that I certainly agreethat it's worthy of further study. But I would simply underline whatthe subcommittee itself recognizes: That there's some risk that thisoption would tend to lock us in to the current operating procedure,which amounts to fairly rigid funds rate targeting, and might make itdifficult to move back to something like a borrowed reserve target orfree reserve target or nonborrowed reserve target, in which case thefunds rate would be noisier. That worries me. Still, if we go withthis option, I hope we would consider that point.MR. MULLINS. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Have we heard from the Desk on this? In otherwords, have they commented on what the effect of--MR. MCDONOUGH. We've been in close consultation on the studythrough Don. The subcommittee's work certainly had the full benefitof both Joan Lovett's and my views on the subject.MR. LAWARE. Which were positive or negative?MR. MCDONOUGH. On releasing the fed funds rate [target] wecame down in balance that it should not be done, essentially for thetwo reasons cited in the study: That there can be emergencysituations like the fall of 1987 in which our principal concern isliquidity and the last thing in the world we would want to do is tosay what the targeted fed funds rate is; and secondly, that it wouldbe very, very difficult, as has just been suggested, if we startedpublishing the fed funds target to ever get away from funds ratetargeting. Those were the two reasons that led us to believe that itshould not be done.MR. MULLINS. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. I was going to speak in support [of the workdone]; I thought the document was very good. My only comment was onyour side comment about Mr. Kaufman's idea. I'm a great believer inthe providence of the President of the United States. I don't see anyreason why we should have any objection to the President of the UnitedStates meeting us whenever he deemed it appropriate. I don't think weshould invite such a meeting and I would not necessarily counsel thePresident to meet us frequently, but I don't see any reason why weshould not be open to that.MR. MULLINS. I doubt that we'd turn him down.MR. LINDSEY. I doubt it too, yes.-64-2/2-3/93 -65-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Would he come here or we go there?MR. MULLINS. At the Treasury maybe.MR. LINDSEY. David, I wasn't sure whether your commentreflected that.MR. MULLINS. I think it's worthwhile to try to think ofother mechanisms we might use to contribute to this goal of openness.And it's not clear to me that meeting with the Administration isconsistent with this topic; it may be consistent with other topicareas. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I was very sympathetic to Al Broaddus' statementand would associate myself with believing that continuing to look atthese tradeoffs is somewhat worthwhile. In my letter to ChairmanGonzalez I came down on balance for not having the study, believingthat it was better to end up supporting the position of the Committeeon this topic. But the problem that I had, Al, in terms of gettingthere without further study, was whether or not early release of thedirective would tend to cause us to be less likely to go to anasymmetric directive. And my conclusion was that early release wouldcause us to be less likely, but I don't know the [unintelligible] ofthe information available and that [unintelligible]. So, I would beopen to the study.MR. MULLINS. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. First of all, let me say that this outlinehelped to identify all of the issues and to focus the discussion.With respect to option "E," I agree that that's an area that we shouldcontinue to look at. I'd give some consideration just to making anannouncement if there's an actual action and not making anannouncement [if there is not]. And I probably wouldn't go with anyexplanation. At least at this point that's what I'd be thinking interms of.MR. MELZER. What do you mean by an "actual action"announcement?MS. PHILLIPS. An announcement of an easing move, forexample. I'd make an announcement if we were going to change thefederal funds rate or make a big change in the [degree of] pressure onreserves.MR. MELZER. How about intermeeting moves? How would youview those?MS. PHILLIPS. The same.MR. MELZER. Okay.MS. PHILLIPS. I just see that as less confusing to themarket--to announce when it's an intentional move as opposed to justbeing consistent with what was in the previous directive.MR. MELZER. Okay. And that's embodied in "E," as you'vesaid, right?2/2-3/93MS. PHILLIPS. Right.MR. MELZER. Okay. I misunderstood what you were saying. Ithought you were going beyond what was in "E."MS. PHILLIPS. No, I don't think so. As for the othersuggestions that were made, I think doing some kind of summary of thepolicy directive probably would give us a better chance of gettingmore coverage because a lot of information does go out and it seemsnot to get very much attention. It's partly just laziness on the partof the press. If we have a one-pager for them, they'll cover it.MR. KELLEY. And we get our own [spin].MS. PHILLIPS. Right. With respect to periodic pressconferences, I'd give some consideration to that. I say that but Idon't have a strong feeling about how often and so forth. But rightnow our major public forum is Congress and that's a bully pulpit. So,I think it might just give us a different forum for making astatement.MR. MULLINS. Are you volunteering for the press conferences?MS. PHILLIPS. No. I think you'd be great, David!MR. MULLINS. Would this be after decisions or after FOMCmeetings or quarterly unrelated to--?MS. PHILLIPS. What I'm suggesting is that those are thethings [to be considered], like you did with the rest of this outline.I'm just raising it as a possibility; I don't have strong feelingsabout [whether to do it] regularly or periodically. I would urge afollow-up on the items that were suggested in the appendix: the FOIAcoverage, the practices of other agencies and the legislative andjudicial [branches]. I think those are all fruitful areas to explore.MR. MULLINS. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Three points. One is, as other people have said,that I thought this outline was very useful to crystallize things.I'm in favor of further exploration, but I think we need to becautious. And this outline process of listing the pros and cons isvery useful to be sure that we've covered most things. I have somesympathy for what Al said except that as a practical matter Icertainly wouldn't want to revive the Memorandum of Discussion if wedidn't have legislation [to delay its release]. And I surely wouldn'twant to see legislation just to be able to publish a Memorandum ofDiscussion. Finally, I think there is something to be said forpursuing option "E," along the lines of what Governor Phillips talkedabout. I guess my interest in that is somewhat tempered by what Bill[McDonough] said, but I have a question on that. It's not clear to methat, say, in the '87 case--if the Desk were doing something thathopefully was transitory in nature and wasn't a major change in policyand there wasn't a Committee meeting--that we'd have to go out andmake an announcement that said in effect that because of thedisruption in the markets, etc. we're changing what we're doing. Iwould presume that in such circumstance we'd always be able to dosomething like that.-66-2/2-3/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I'm not sure that we wouldnecessarily have to indicate a federal funds rate [target] if weactually were doing that because it always--MR. SYRON(?). Exactly.MR. MCDONOUGH. No, we could certainly choose not to. On theother hand if, as is presently the case, we didn't have the policy ofsaying what the fed funds rate target is then there's no issue and noadditional uncertainty in an uncertain situation.MR. MULLINS. It seems to me that we can have uncertainsituations in which we don't know what the market is like. Oneadvantage of not having announced something is that the market mayblow through something in very uncertain times. So we do havemarginally more flexibility not announcing. But I guess your point isthat in emergency situations we could--MR. SYRON. I don't know all the details of this but Iwouldn't think in that kind of situation that we'd have a very precisetight notion of where we wanted the funds rate to be.MR. MULLINS. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Just a couple of points. I think a very goodway to handle this whole thing is to study it more. But I have somereal reservations about announcing a federal funds rate [target] forthe reasons that have already been expressed. I think it would lockus in to that modus operandi. I wouldn't have any objection toresurrecting the Memorandum of Discussion, as I said in my letter toMr. Gonzalez, provided that we had specific legislation that wouldprotect it [from early release]. I think, though, that we reallycould go a step further. I really don't find any major risk toreleasing the policy record as soon as it can be prepared after ameeting. It comes out six weeks later anyway. An earlier disclosurewould not really be all that harmful and might very well gain us a lotof credibility; and it might silence some of this criticism about thefact that we're not open enough. There are some objections; obviouslythere may be some reservation about moving to an asymmetric directive.But I think the benefits to doing it would outweigh those small risks.MR. MULLINS. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. I think alternative "E" should be pursued andlooked at more carefully because we are starting with an agreed uponpremise that we should be as open as we reasonably can. And I don'tthink announcing an action, whether it's [in terms of] the fed fundsrate or reserve pressure is inconsistent with that; I think it isconsistent with being open. And I doubt that it's going to compromiseour ability to have discussions and come up with reasonable policy.So, that is one avenue that we ought to pursue pretty vigorously.MR. MULLINS. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. I thought the outline was an interesting piecefor indicating the pros and cons of some things, but what didn't comeout clearly was the ultimate criterion for information that weprovide. Even the purpose of the Memorandum of Discussion [published]-67-2/2-3/93with a long lag is not to foster PhD dissertations but studies thathelp improve the execution of policy to achieve ultimate objectives.And that's the criterion that should be used for announcing whatever.In the short run it should be that it helps us achieve our twoobjectives. I don't see how announcing the federal funds rate woulddo that. In fact, the way the Committee is operating right now, Idon't see what would be useful to achieve the objective of pricestability.MR. MULLINS. Other comments? President Stern.MR. STERN. Most of what I would have said has been coveredand I won't repeat it. I agree with those who find at least somemerit in a variety of these proposals and I think they deserve furtherconsideration as a consequence. But I am particularly attracted toyour other possibilities under "F," in part for the openness reasonsthat we've been discussing. But related to that--and I think GovernorPhillips mentioned this--one of the things that has troubled me inrecent years is that we seem to be in a position of either reacting toor not commenting on various press reports and interpretations of whatwe're up to and why. That was a bigger problem when there were leaksthan it has been recently. Nevertheless, it strikes me that we canput some of that to rest through vehicles like press conferences,calling attention to things in the policy record, and so forth. And Iwould give some serious consideration to doing that because I think itwould benefit us as an institution.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would you have scheduled pressconferences?MR. STERN. No, I would do it on an as-needed basis when wehad something that we wanted to communicate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but a regular press conferencedoesn't automatically suggest that there's some important event. Ifwe announce a press conference, it has an announcement effect.MR. SYRON. An announcement effect of the announcement.MR. STERN. Well, there's always going to be a transitionproblem whenever a new procedure or a new rule is introduced.Certainly the first couple times we announce a press conference Isuppose people will sit up and take notice and cut positions and soforth. But ultimately they will come to learn the circumstances underwhich we do these things.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Then they'll start [unintelligible]further press conferences.MR. STERN. Well, they won't precisely know their content.MR. MULLINS. Vice Chairman Corrigan.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Fundamentally I have sympathy withall of the tentative conclusions. Now, if we could get the protectionin Freedom of Information Act terms, I could associate myself withsome kind of Memorandum of Discussion type document, but I don't knowif we can get that protection. I also agree that the funds rate-68-2/2-3/93[announcement] may be the most fruitful avenue to look at further. Idon't worry so much about the very short-run problem of a stock marketcrash; that I think we can deal with. But I do think that theslippery slope here is making a conclusion, as I think Al said, in acontext in which that conclusion is dominated by a mind-set that[involves] funds rate targeting. I don't think it's quite as portableto other policy regimes and that's the aspect of it that I think hasto be thought about more carefully. The first crisis situation wecould always [unintelligible]. Contrary to Gary Stern and GovernorPhillips and maybe a couple of others, I'm not at all into this pressconference thing. I just don't see how we can turn that into awinner. The closest institution that I know of to the Federal Reserveis the Supreme Court. I have some trouble with the thought of theChief Justice deciding he's going to have a press conference toexplain a couple of recent court decisions. The analogy stinks, but Ithink you do give up something when you get yourself into thatbusiness. I don't know, Dave, about your own experience but in theold days, which predated you, the Treasury never did [pressconferences and the like] and then they got into it in spades. ButI'm not so sure what the net effect of that has been in terms of[enhancing the] credibility of the President and the way it isperceived. If the Chairman really has something to say, I think hecan always find a way to do it. Any time he wants an audience JoeCoyne can get him an audience [with no difficulty]. So I don't thinkthe Chairman lacks instruments to get [a message] out there when hewants to. I think the press conference option is a very slipperyslope. And if it ever slid into the perception that the Fed wasmarketing itself in some sense, I think it would be disastrous. Anddoing [press conferences] I don't think will cut off the kinds of[problems] Gary was referring to. So I am very dubious about that.But I know that is clearly an area where reasonable men and women candiffer.MR. MULLINS. Okay, that was very useful. The subcommitteewill reconvene in the future. I guess I heard about the same type ofdisagreement [we had in the subcommittee] on the "E" issue on federalfunds rate announcements. That's something we'll take another look atgiven the issues that have been raised. A number of issues have beenbrought up that were not raised by the subcommittee. Also the issueof whether there isn't something else we could do, like pressconferences, is worth looking at. The experience of the Treasury andothers who have gone to that is that it's tough to get [the genie]back in the bottle. Is there something we could gain in terms of theperception of the reality? I think we should take a look at that withsome caution. Again, maybe the early policy record disclosure--thequestion there is how early could we do it--would make a difference.But that would get us into the problem of [using] the asymmetricdirective and things of that nature. We will continue to compile [theinformation referred to in] the appendix because I think it isworthwhile to have a sense of where we fit within the broader contextof other institutions. Another thing we'll look at is the point thatJerry Jordan raised, which is that another way to look at this wholearea is [to consider] what we could do that would contributepositively to the quality of monetary policymaking. [We can see] ifthere is anything else we might find useful--as opposed to the way welooked at it, which was to start with the assumption that openness isa threat to the quality of monetary policymaking, as it clearly is ina number of these areas.-69-2/2-3/93-70-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. This Committee will standadjourned until March the 23rd. We can go to lunch.END OF MEETING