TRANSCRIPTFEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETINGSeptember 23, 1993Prefatory NoteThis transcript has been produced from the original rawtranscript in the FOMC Secretariat's files. The Secretariat haslightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding.Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription,the notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances,words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought orto correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement.Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fullyedited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it wasintended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record ofthe Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not beenreviewed by present or past members of the Committee.Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader'sunderstanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount ofconfidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses,and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages areindicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manneris exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedomof Information Act.Staff Statements Appended to the TranscriptMr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign OperationsMs. White, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkMr. Prell, EconomistMr. Truman, EconomistMr. Kohn, Secretary and EconomistMeeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeSeptember 21, 1993A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systemin Washington, D.C., on Tuesday. September 21, 1993, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, ChairmanMr. McDonough, Vice ChairmanMr. AngellMr. BoehneMr. KeehnMr. KelleyMr. LaWareMr. LindseyMr. McTeerMr. MullinsMs. PhillipsMr. SternMessrs. Broaddus, Jordan, Forrestal, and Parry,Alternate Members of the Federal Open MarketCommitteeMessrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents ofthe Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,St. Louis, and Boston, respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and EconomistMr. Bernard, Deputy SecretaryMr. Coyne, Assistant SecretaryMr. Gillum, Assistant SecretaryMr. Mattingly. General CounselMr. Patrikis, Deputy General CounselMr. Prell, EconomistMr. Truman, EconomistMessrs. R. Davis. Lang, Lindsey, Promisel,Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld, Siegman,Simpson, and Slifman, AssociateEconomistsMr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations,System Open Market AccountMr. Ettin, Deputy Director. Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMr. Madigan. Associate Director. Division ofMonetary Affairs. Board of GovernorsMr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Division of Monetary Affairs, Board ofGovernorsMs. Browne, Messrs. T. Davis, Dewald, andGoodfriend, Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Boston, Kansas City,St. Louis, and Richmond, respectivelyMessrs. Judd, King, and Ms. White, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco.Atlanta, and New York, respectivelyMr. Gavin, Assistant Vice President, FederalReserve Bank of ClevelandMs. Krieger, Manager, Open Market Operations,Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkTranscript of Federal Open Market Committee Meetingof September 21, 1993CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. We welcome ourtwo new colleagues [at the end of the table] from the Federal ReserveBank of New York. I'll ask as a starter: Would somebody like to movethe minutes of the August 17th meeting?SPEAKER(?). So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. I call upon our ViceChairman for nominations for slots now open for Manager for ForeignOperations and Manager for Domestic Operations.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As isevident by the fact that we have two nominations, our recommendationis that we revert to the method which has served the Committee verywell during most of its life, and that is to have separate managersfor the domestic and foreign operations. You'll recall that we havehad two managers except for a very brief period in the 1970s and thenfor an even briefer period when I had the joint responsibility. A bitof background: We are doing some recasting of our research area atthe Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and we needed a very capablesenior economist with a strong international background to move inunder Dick Davis and take care of [international] economic studies.And the perfect candidate for that was Gretchen Greene. So, Mr.Chairman, I would like to recommend and nominate Joan Lovett asManager for Domestic Operations. Joan is a graduate of AlbertusMagnus College and the New School for Social Research from which shehas an MA. After two years at the U.S. Treasury she has been with theFederal Reserve Bank of New York since 1968; she has spent most ofthat time in the Open Market function although she did also haveexperience in the foreign exchange area as well, which I think isattractive. She has been the Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations.Further, I would like to recommend and nominate Peter Fisher asManager for Foreign Operations. Peter is a graduate of HarvardCollege and Harvard Law School. He's made his entire career at theNew York Fed, originally in the Legal Division where he spent fiveyears. He spent two years in Basle, Switzerland and was the principalscribe of the Lamfalussy Report. Then he returned to join the ForeignExchange Department and has been responsible for day-to-day operationsfor about the last 20 months.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I just want to note that Joan Lovett wasnot able to join us today because her mother died late last week andwe have Betsy White here as her temporary replacement. Nominationshave been made. Are there any further nominations for either of thoseposts? If not, I will ask for a motion. May I have one from you?VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. So move, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. All in favor say "Aye."SEVERAL. "Aye."9/23/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Opposed? The "ayes" have itunanimously. We congratulate you, Peter; and I trust that similarcongratulations will be extended to Joan at the appropriate time. Whydon't we start off with Peter with his inaugural analysis of theforeign currency operations.MR. FISHER. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Questions for Peter? Ifnot--MR. FISHER. We need to approve the System's $82.5 millionparticipation in the intervention operation of August 19th.SPEAKER(?). So moved.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Now, I call on BetsyWhite. Although she has been at several FOMC meetings, she too ismaking her inaugural presentation.MS. WHITE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Questions? If not, wouldsomebody like to move to ratify the actions of the Desk since the[last] meeting?SPEAKER(?). So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Let's now move on tothe staff report on the economic situation. I call on Messrs. Prelland Truman.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.] That concludes ourpresentations.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd just like to raise a question withMike or Ted. We discussed very briefly last night this interestingpath of long-term rates relative to the simplistic model. There's aninteresting question that's implicit in this; namely, that if, infact, this is a primitive model, one could postulate that we coulddrive the funds rate down to zero, hold it there for a very longperiod of time--which we have the physical capacity to do--andtherefore look forward to a significant further decline in long-termrates. Now, obviously, I don't think anybody here believes that thatprocess would happen. That raises an interesting question as towhether the relationships that are being picked up in the model are9/23/93basically the result of the fact that short-term rates are generallyperceived not to be significantly out of line with productivity andthat the events that surround the short-term market will eventuallybegin to affect the long-term market. And so long as the FederalReserve does not endeavor to force the short-term rate away from whereit otherwise should be, that model is merely reflecting the fact thatthe same forces affecting the short-term rate will ultimately affectthe long-term rate. But I seriously question whether we can inferfrom that sort of relationship any significant policy issue because Ihave this suspicion that were we to try to drive that relationship bymonetary policy, we would automatically find out as of that day thatit doesn't work any more. I was just curious to get your response tothat [issue which I raised in] our conversation last night.MR. PRELL. Well, I think you hypothesized a situation inwhich the consequences are obviously explosive. If you held short-term rates too low for too long, initially through this term structuremechanism lowering the cost of capital below the equilibrium rate inthe intermediate- and long-term end, you would generate excess demandand inflationary pressures. Those inflationary pressures would mountover time. Something would have to give; presumably at some pointmonetary policy would have to adjust in the proper direction. But oneof the reasons I have reservations about the model is that in a senseit doesn't include a place for people to recognize where things areheaded and to have a more forward-looking response. The latter couldintroduce an inflation premium earlier on and tend to override whatthis model's formulation would suggest. And perhaps because we didn'tmove into those patterns of behavior the model didn't have those kindsof experiences from which to estimate. So, I grant that this likelyhas limitations. If I didn't feel that, we presumably would have asignificantly different kind of forecast. But the one thing thatgives me pause, as I suggested, is that this model has workedremarkably well in the past, even the past decade. I noted that itwas fitted over 1958 to 1983, and even during the 1980s when there hasbeen an acute sensitivity to inflation risks and what had happened inthe past, the model has tracked quite well. Other versions of themodel, with the same sort of formulation, [have also tracked quitewell]. So it has gone through some difficult times and I think itdoes capture one element of human behavior, its adaptive expectationsformation as people become accustomed to given rate levels. But Iwould agree with you that in the extreme it's likely to break down.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for eithergentleman? President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. The funds rate has been unchanged for a littleover a year now. So, it seems to me useful to look back over theperiod to see what else has been unchanged or what has changed and inwhich direction and to try to make some sense out of it. In reviewingthe successive Greenbooks in the period since a year ago, one of thethings that struck me was how little your forecast of nominal GDP forthe second half of 1994 has changed. A year ago at this time you[extended the forecast] another year, so I am curious as to what your1995 projections will look like once we get those, but that's not mymain question now. The funds rate has stayed at 3 percent and [yourforecast for] nominal GDP growth still is on the order of 4-1/2percent or a little more for the second half of 1994; that hasn'tchanged much even though a lot of other things have changed in the9/23/93meantime in successive Greenbooks. Then, I see that your estimates ofpotential real output have been revised up, partly because of the newbenchmark numbers. Actual output has been somewhat below where weanticipated and it continues to be projected on the low side in '94,so you've got a bigger gap. There are two essential elements to yourframework. One is that the gap says something about future inflationand that nominal and/or real interest rates say something about realoutput growth. Bond yields are lower than you had anticipatedearlier; I don't know about real rates, but at least nominal rates arelower. Short rates are the same and inflation [is higher], suggestinglower real rates. So, ex ante, one would look at this set of thingsand say: Well, your forecast should have implied that the split ofnominal GDP would be less inflation and more output. Instead, we getthe opposite. We have a bigger gap yet we have lower output growth byalmost a percentage point in 1994, and with that bigger gap we havehigher inflation. I'd be curious [to learn] what other things musthave changed, because other things equal we would have gotten theopposite. We would have expected more output, less inflation. So,what were the things that changed in your framework to produce thiscombination of higher inflation and lower output for the same GDP?MR. PRELL. Well, President Jordan, that's the kind of verycomplicated question that I'd have to have in writing a week inadvance, I think, to be able to do justice in answering it. I don'tthink I've absorbed all of the threads. We do have, obviously, in ourforecast for 1993 a substantially less favorable mix of outputincrease and inflation. We've gotten much lower growth than weanticipated and inflation has been running somewhat higher. Now,curiously, the unemployment rate has not been higher than weanticipated; it has been lower, and that needs to be taken intoaccount as well. Furthermore, looking at the revised national incomeaccount data and at both the actual growth and our estimate of thepotential growth, the output gap we've estimated tentatively at thispoint is somewhat smaller than we thought, not larger. The actualgrowth has been revised up more than our estimate of potential growth.So, in a sense the gap here that is exerting disinflationary pressureisn't larger than you thought; it's probably smaller. Furthermore, wehad earlier in the year what we view to have been some response to thesurge in activity. We think that is unwinding now, but on net thusfar this year I don't think it has been helpful.I would really have to review a lot of detail here to be ableto give a better answer to your question, but I don't think our basicmodel, in the sense of how this works, has changed. We've had a fewsurprises. What I've suggested in regard to the current forecast isthat we see some underlying confirmation here of the scheme that we'vebeen applying in our forecasting. And that has led us to be a littlemore confident that we can extend the disinflationary trend goingforward. And we think that if growth for '95 remained moderate andunemployment remained close to where we have it, there would be anongoing disinflation. But we have not seen quite the favorabletradeoff that we anticipated, and the slack has been a shade less onaverage thus far.MR. JORDAN. Can I follow up? I expected you to put a littlemore stress on the fiscal package.9/23/93MR. PRELL. Well, we don't think that has affected thetradeoffs here but, as you know, at the beginning of the year wedidn't introduce a fiscal package because of the uncertainties. Thenwe introduced one that included fiscal stimulus because we wanted tofollow the President's lead on this. Ultimately, there was no near-term fiscal stimulus in the package; in fact, it probably moved therestraint forward in time beyond what anyone would have anticipatedearlier. And we now have a substantial amount of fiscal restraint inthe forecast damping aggregate demand but not affecting theunemployment/inflation tradeoff. Well, there are some elements here,[such as] gasoline taxes; an excise tax impact in a sense gives you ashort-run deterioration in the tradeoff. And there are other thingsthat have been going on and that could still happen that will tend toraise the price level in the short run relative to what everyone--MR. JORDAN. It raises some interesting implications for theCommittee's policy because on the second page of the Greenbook summaryyou say "Achievement of this middling expansion path may requiremaintenance of relatively low real short-term rates--to counter thecontractionary effects of fiscal restraint, uncertainty aboutgovernment policies, and, at least in the near term, slow growth offoreign industrial economies." That's a stronger statement--I wouldcall it advocacy--of monetary policy than we typically see in theGreenbook. The Greenbook is typically a little more neutral in termsof an assumption of monetary policy. And if it's the case that thereal output projection is being influenced by fiscal actions, and ifit's the position of the Committee generally that monetary policycannot be used to correct mistakes of other parts of the governmentsector, and if you advocate a monetary policy in the future that isdifferent than it would have been in absence of the fiscal package,then that is saying that monetary policy is being adjusted because ofthe fiscal regime.MR. PRELL. Well, there are two things one could say. One isthat monetary policy can't be adjusted to offset shocks such as achange in fiscal policy. I don't think there's an economic basis forthat statement. There may be difficulty in doing that because wecan't anticipate with precision what will be occurring without a shiftin monetary policy and there are uncertainties also about what theeffects of a monetary policy change will be. So, all thoseuncertainties may lead you to think it might not be desirable toattempt to engage in fine-tuning. Certainly the Committee over therecent decade or so has in one way or another repeatedly made thestatement that it realizes it would be impossible to be fullyeffective in fine-tuning and that there would be some risks inattempting to do that.In terms of advocacy, I would view that statement more as apositive statement than a normative statement. It simply says that ifyou wanted to achieve this growth path, it might require low realshort-term interest rates for a longer span. We didn't advocate thatparticular outcome. That's clearly the Committee's decision to make.[It's up to the Committee] to weigh the risks that might attend thepolicy movement or no policy movement here in terms of whether youmight end up with less output or more inflation or whatever than youdesire. We're attempting to be as neutral as possible here by takingas our essential assumption that the nominal funds rate remains fixed.We aren't advocating that necessarily; we were just taking that as a9/23/93baseline and giving you something you can adjust from based on whetheryou feel the risks are different or that the fundamentals are going topush things in the stronger or easier direction.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. Mike, your projection for real personalconsumption expenditures for the third quarter, given the high Julylevel, implies a decline on average in August and September, if Icalculated it right. Is that right?MR. PRELL. We have a very marginal increase in September forPCE. We see a pretty healthy gain in the third quarter because of thedata already in hand. Real consumer goods expenditures other thanmotor vehicles seem to be well above the level of the third quarter,and service expenditures were running very strong early in the summer.So, we think we have the likelihood of a strong advance there. We seea flattening out, and arithmetically that works in the direction of amore moderate increase in the fourth quarter. But we are basing thaton income trends and attitudes and all the other factors that onemight look to in explaining the prospects for consumptionexpenditures.GOVERNOR GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Ted, did you have a NAFTA [assumption]?MR. TRUMAN. We have continued with the same NAFTA assumptionwe've had in the past, which has been that the legislation will pass.We noted in the Greenbook that in light of recent noise, if I may putit that way, that may be somewhat less of a "gimme" putt than weregarded it earlier. And we thought a bit about what the implicationsof that might be, which largely--at least in the short term--revolvearound the impact on Mexico, not the secondary impact on the UnitedStates. We have seen this year that Mexican growth has slowedsubstantially. That appears to us to be a combination of tighterpolicies in Mexico in the face of what had been a rising currentaccount deficit and some uncertainties associated with NAFTA and thelevel of capital inflows. Therefore, for next year, on the assumptionthat NAFTA would pass, we had moved up Mexican growth somewhat byabout a percentage point. In the absence of [NAFTA], we regard thatincrease in growth as problematic--I think that's the way we put it inthe Greenbook. Moreover, we think there would be some downwardpressure on the peso and, therefore, there would be some drag onexports for the United States as a result of the failure of NAFTA.That's about as far as we've gone.MR. ANGELL. I have two questions for Mike. Mike, when Ilook at those interest rate forecasts that you have in place and thenlook at the ECI numbers on page I-14 of the Greenbook, I'm wonderingwhat happens to the pension contributions. For any period in whichinterest rates behave as you have them forecast, assuming that beforethe end of 1994 there might be some upward pressure on short-termrates, would that make much difference in regard to the impact on theECI if pension plan fundings come under pressure--that is, given someof the assumptions on rates of return that are built in?9/23/93MR. PRELL. Well, we've alluded to this problem in the lastcouple of Greenbooks and there has been a great deal more discussionabout this in recent weeks in the press, some of it by investmentbanking firms such as Salomon Brothers who have been calling attentionto this issue. It appears that a large number of corporations are inserious risk of having major underfunding in their defined benefitpension plans with these kinds of investment returns. They've beenvery optimistic in maintaining high expected returns, [i.e.] in theassumptions they've used for determining their contributions. They'regoing to be under significant pressure to make those more realistic.And we would expect that there will be upward pressure on thatcomponent of employment costs. That is not likely to be a giganticeffect. We don't really have a good enough handle on it to size this,but we feel there's probably something there that is of significancein buoying increases in benefit costs. While other items may becoming down, the overall deceleration seems likely to be limited bythis factor.MR. ANGELL. At the same time, for persons who are retired orapproaching retirement and are counting on short-term fundedinvestments, is there likely to be current and continued downwardpressure on consumer spending from this segment due to the fact thatthere is a perceived reduction in investment income?MR. PRELL. I think it's possible. It's also possible--Idon't think we have much evidence, though I've asked a few businessmenwhether they can perceive this--that people may not opt for earlyretirement to the degree that they have in recent years because theymay have lowered their expectations about what their assets will earnin the way of income over their retirement years. I don't think wecan see anything yet in labor force participation data to support thisnotion, but things may work in that direction. We may see sometendencies toward a little less of that 55 to 64 year old maleretirement that we've seen recent years.MR. ANGELL. The last question has to do with your statementin regard to substantial fiscal restraint. Substantial wasn't exactlythe word you used but you had some--MR. PRELL. I might have.MR. ANGELL. --adjective regarding fiscal restraint. Yetwhen one looks at the Congressional Budget Office forecast and I thinkeven our own, the budget deficit doesn't change very much over thisforecast period. I recognize that a deficit staying around $250billion would [constitute] a declining percentage of GDP, but I'd liketo have you explain why you call it "substantial" fiscal restraint.MR. PRELL. Well, the numbers in terms of the unified budgetare distorted by the year-to-year movements in deposit insurance, sothat the drop, for example, from fiscal '93 to fiscal '94 excludingdeposit insurance programs is on the order of $40 billion. If we lookat the NIPA budget deficit numbers, we're going to get something likean $80 to $90 billion reduction in that deficit over a two-year spanwith roughly constant levels of resource utilization. If we look atthe structural budget deficits, while the CBO numbers and the OMBnumbers show a flattening out as we go out several years, in the nearterm there are a couple of years of fairly substantial reductions in9/23/93the structural deficit. Our own measure of fiscal impetus, looking atdiscretionary components, indicates a significant movement in thedirection of restraint. I think the direction is pretty clear, butgauging the economic significance is always problematic. We interpretthings as suggesting that in this period going out through '94 andmaybe well into '95 the direction of fiscal policy is one ofsignificant restraint.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Could I ask you to refer back tothe interest rate model that you discussed in your presentation as towhether there is a policy implication regarding relatively smallchanges in the fed funds rate? If one were to say there would be somemerit in easing, it would appear that the model would say that thereis still considerable bang to the 3 percent fed funds rate buck andthat this will be transmitted over time, as the model suggests, tolower medium- and long-term interest rates. On the other hand, if wewere to increase the fed funds rate by, say, 25 basis points, does themodel suggest that the change in expectations could have a rathersignificant effect on the real economy by restraining investmentbecause of the effect on medium- and longer-term rates?MR. PRELL. No. As I said, this is a very simple model; anda small upward movement is just going to begin a process of alteringthe moving average, which in our model reaches back several years.So, it's not going to have a major effect. I think you have to askwhether this model is something you want to rely on in reaching ajudgment, though. The other questions are how low the rates have togo in order to get the outcome you want and how fast do you want toget there? Do you want to be patient? If you believe that ratesmight [move] as the model is suggesting, is that quick enough for you?Would you rather accelerate the process by cutting rates further,knowing that ultimately you probably are going to have to reversecourse more dramatically down the road in order to move real ratelevels to something that is more appropriate in terms of the longer-run equilibrium? But a small adjustment, in terms of this model, isgoing to be essentially meaningless.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. There is a rather slow decline in theunemployment rate in the Greenbook forecast and there's no declinefrom where we are now.MR. PRELL. Right.MR. PARRY. And you had included an upward revision of thegrowth in trend productivity and higher potential output as well. Ifone looks at the growth rates, the real growth rates appear to beroughly equal to or in some cases below the growth rate of potential.Why is there such small progress made in the inflation area? I thinkyou mentioned health care, gasoline taxes, etc., but it seems to me asthough it's surprisingly small progress.-8-9/23/93MR. PRELL. Okay, let me address a couple of things verybriefly. One is that, as we are gauging it now, we believe that areasonable estimate of potential output growth at this time is perhapsa shade below 2-1/2 percent. So, it's very close to the growth rateof output that we are projecting. If that is so, then all otherthings equal, one would expect the unemployment rate to be reasonablystable. There are short-run uncertainties about labor forceparticipation. If it remained on the weak side, then one mightanticipate a lower unemployment rate. If it rejuvenated suddenly, theunemployment rate could easily go higher. I'd say, looking at variousmodels, that there is a very slight upside risk on unemployment.As for the inflation forecast, basically we've had about3-1/4 percent over the past year for the core CPI. We see it edgingdown to just under 3 percent over the next year or so. This is notout of line with various models we look at. Some of them would givemore deceleration and some less. It is a bit less favorable than wehad been hoping a year ago, say, or at least at the beginning of thisyear. We remain concerned that there is a certain momentum here thatis supplied by expectations, which still have not adjusted downwardamong households, that appear to be in the 3 percent area. We thinkpart of the disinflation process will be a gradual adaptation ofexpectations to that kind of inflation; but in the near term it tendsto keep wage increases a little higher than they would otherwise be.We think we're in a reasonable middle ground, given the uncertaintiesthat we feel. Based on the experience of the past year or so, wethink it would be a little aggressive at this point to lower thatforecast further.MR. PARRY. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. We've probably talked enough about the model,but I thought I'd kick it a few times as well. What bothers me is notjust that it's sort of transparently nonsensical and violates enormousevidence which has been accumulated on the way markets work,[including] market efficiency. I don't think one needs too extremecircumstances to realize that the model may capture what is happeningover some period. But it can't be what is happening [now]. I take itthat if we continue to run this model, with the backward-lookingnature of the model, as you say, the long rate pierces 5 percent. AndI've noticed Michigan mean inflation expectations have often beenaround 5 percent, so basically it is a real possibility in this modelthat it will drive long real rates negative.MR. PRELL. I would anticipate that if the inflation outcomeis also similar to what we're forecasting, those inflationexpectations would come down. But you are correct--MR. MULLINS. But the expectations in the market are a littledifferent than ours.MR. PRELL. What I'm saying is that as inflation has remainedlow expectations have been adjusting and they will continue to do so.MR. MULLINS. What I was going ask is this: Short ratesroughly track inflation, so suppose you included with the model some9/23/93measure of inflation and the formation of inflation expectations.Would that take all the predictive power away from the model?Essentially what we've gone through is a period of gradually fallinginflation expectations, with a little turn up, but associated with anupward movement in short-term rates and then a reduction and again agradual [unintelligible]. If you had some model of inflationexpectations to see whether this interest rate model has anythingother than that driving it, what would you get?MR. PRELL. Well, I can't speak to all of theexperimentations done over the years on this. In the current model,there is only a minimal role for inflation expectations in the termstructure determination. And it's in [the model in] an arcanefashion. It is possible that such a model as you hypothesize might beserviceable, but I suspect that we have experimented enough that thisformulation has proven more robust. I think saying that this model isnonsensical and totally at odds with reality runs up against the pointthat it does contain some very basic notions that people have talkedabout theoretically for a long time, and it has worked. But I don'twant to push that too far.MR. MULLINS. The reason I say it's nonsensical is because itdoesn't make logical sense. You know you can take the short rate tozero and it's not going to work. You get ridiculous answers out ofthe model.MR. PRELL. Indeed.MR. MULLINS. Plus there appears to be a lack of evidence onthe way markets incorporate the data that are available, which makesone think that what it is picking up is some other process. When onehears what people talk about when they set long rates, they talk a lotabout inflation over long periods of time. So perhaps it is somehowcapturing that process. It may be a good model which implicitly iscapturing this inflation expectations process. It seems to me alittle questionable when we start to reach these levels; when youproject that going forward for a couple more years, you run the dangerof getting pretty interesting [results].MR. PRELL. Let me say a couple of things. One is that a 5percent long-term rate, with inflation moving below 3 percent and ashort-term rate around 3 percent, still looks like a high long-termrate if you go back to the early 1960s. Now, if that's what peoplewere thinking, perhaps about 3 to 4 percent inflation for the next Xyears--they were probably thinking 1 or 2 percent [in real terms]which is not inconceivable--MR. MULLINS. Of course, it's not inconceivable if we getinflation down to the level that we had in the early '60s, which was 1percent on the measured CPI.MR. PRELL. But in that case you'd be looking maybe for a 4percent long rate.MR. MULLINS. Yes, then you can move that rate on down. Iwould just say that it's not clear that is what is driving---10-9/23/93MR. PRELL. Well, to take minor issue with that, I think thatperhaps is embodied even in some of your recent comments about whathas been happening with the way investors have been moving into thestock and bond funds. I think it's very much compatible.MR. MULLINS. Well, why is it that all the survey data showthe opposite?MR. PRELL. Those people are not necessarily thinking in anyprecise way about what inflation will be doing over the next 10 years.They're saying "I just can't stay with these 3 percent rates forever."They are saying here that maybe [rates] aren't going to go back up,and they shift out [of CDs and the like]. The model doesn't preciselyspecify the psychology, but it's compatible.MR. MULLINS. But that's another theory that I don't know ifwe want to get into as well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We don't.MR. MULLINS. I knew you were going to say that! The onlyother thing I would say is that if you look at the '70s, a period inwhich perhaps short rates weren't appropriately set to trackinflation, you might separate what was going on to see whether it wasa formation of inflation expectations or this backward-looking model.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Short data question: Coming back to what BobParry asked about inflation, these mandated programs come and go andare going to affect inflation--or inflict inflation, however one wantsto say it. Do you have a meaningful number, if I can put it that way,in your forecast for that stuff now? Or is it just below the[unintelligible] in terms of being--MR. PRELL. Well, cumulatively, it's conceivable that it'snon-negligible. A number of things have happened over recent yearswhere we've had various mandates that have added to the cost ofproduction in one way or another or circumscribed supply. But whetherthose things have been increasing in size on a trajectory that meansfaster inflation in recent years is very hard to say.MR. SYRON. I meant prospectively.MR. PRELL. Prospectively the same thing would hold. The bigissue hanging out there clearly is health insurance. And we have notmade an assumption on that in this forecast, in part because we've notyet ventured beyond 1994. I grant that we need to before very longbecause of the necessities of monetary policy strategizing. But Idon't expect that a program will be in place before the end of 1994.And it is likely to be phased in over several years in terms of thevarious costs. So, whether it will show up as a sudden large boost tocosts isn't clear. I'm reminded of another thing we had in ourearlier forecast, based on some trial balloons or whatever, and we'vetaken it out, which is a minimum wage increase. The kind of minimumwage increase that is being discussed is only going to have a verysmall effect if implemented in 1994, maybe one-tenth of a percent.-11-9/23/93MR. SYRON. And the environmental stuff is all [measureable]?MR. PRELL. It's partly that [such costs] aren't readilymeasurable in terms of their aggregate price effects. A bunch oflittle things have come along, all of which may tend to increase costsand in some cases are perhaps affecting the willingness of employersto take on full-time workers and so on. So, there are broad effects.And one of the reasons we have this rather subdued view of aggregatedemand going forward is the thought that there will be a continuingburden of worry in the business community and among households aboutwhat government mandates may do to them over the years.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for eithergentleman? If not, who would like to start the Committee discussion?President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, for the lastseveral meetings I have been reporting that economic activity in theSixth District has been outperforming the rest of the country. Thatis no longer the case because we are now seeing some deceleration ineconomic activity, and there now is a convergence of the District andnational economies. As I've said earlier, our performance during thisexpansion has been based mainly on housing-related activity; and asthe housing cycle matures, the stimulus is tapering off. Retail saleshave also been quite disappointing in the District, and that's acrossthe board, even though we've had a continuation of rebuilding from thehurricane and that's still positive. But retailers now are reportingpoor sales at the end of the summer, and they're very cautious intheir orders for the holiday season. On the other hand, auto saleshave been quite good; the only constraint really to auto sales hasbeen the lack of supply. Inventories have been low due to the factthat the 1994 models have been late in arriving and most of thedealers are sold out of 1993 cars. So, auto sales would have beenbetter if the supply had been greater.Tourism and business travel in the District remain quitestrong, and Atlanta is doing especially well. Our hotel bookings andair travel are at their highest level in three or four years.Florida, obviously, is very concerned about the tourism industry dueto the tragic events that have occurred not only during the pastcouple of weeks with respect to foreign tourists but throughout theyear. And since this is a $60 billion industry in the state, I thinkthat concern is quite well placed. It goes beyond tourism actually,because there is concern in light of the adverse press reports thatthis will affect relocations both of businesses and retirees.Factory activity was mixed as the summer drew to a close.There has been some seasonal increase but nondurables and consumerpaper products are quite soft. And manufacturers indicate thatconsumer demand has been quite sluggish. Real estate activity also ismixed. The residential side has been quite healthy. In the single-family sector we're seeing more building of spec houses than we hadearlier. The multifamily sector remains in the doldrums andcommercial construction is still soft, although we do notice in manyof the cities of the Southeast, particularly Atlanta, that there issome absorption of space. But at the same time the lease rates arepretty low and that's not encouraging any speculative building. Theemployers that we talk to around the District report no upward-12-9/23/93pressure on wages, although there is concern about benefits and, ofcourse, about the health care program. Prices of raw materials andfinished products are steady, although lumber prices have started torise again. In the energy sector, we've had some increase in the rigcount, which is good for the economy of Louisiana. On theagricultural side, the drought has been quite severe in the Southeastalthough not quite as bad in our District, I think, as in the FifthDistrict. There has been an estimated loss of about $230 million;that's basically affecting the corn, tobacco, and peanut crops.We had a meeting of our Small Business and AgricultureAdvisory Council last week and the small business people continue tocomplain, rather bitterly I might say, about the lack of creditavailability. They now say they are not even talking to their banksanymore but are trying to use nonbank sources of funds, includingtheir own internal fund development. The farmers, on the other hand,say the banks are quite aggressive in trying to get agriculturalloans, so they're not having any trouble at all in finding credit.Finally, with respect to the District, I've been quiteinterested and surprised that NAFTA seems to be a greater source ofconversation among people that I've talked to than the health program.And, unfortunately, while there seems to be support in many quarters,the sentiment at the moment is that NAFTA is not going to pass, forwhat that's worth.Turning to the national economy, our forecast in the nearterm is very close to that of the Greenbook. We do see greater growthin the middle to the latter part of 1994 and our inflation forecast isa little higher. That increased growth in our forecast is predicatedalmost entirely on our assumption that hours worked and overtime can'tcontinue at this level and that at some point employers are going tohave to take on additional workers. While that's in the forecast, Ithink employers are still at this point very reluctant to take onadditional people; and where they are adding workers at all, they aretemporary workers for the most part. If we get the Greenbookforecast, which is a bit lower than ours in 1994, I think that wouldnot be a bad result. I think at this point we're in the fortunateposition of perhaps being able to sit back and wait to see what datacome in a little later. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, turning to the District, the levelof economic activity seems very much unchanged since the last meeting.Still, the underlying tone of the reports seems a bit stronger, atleast in terms of volumes. The automotive business continues at asurprisingly good pace. The fourth-quarter production schedules havebeen set some 11 percent over last year. In a comparative sense, thefourth quarter of last year was really quite a strong one so thisyear's fourth quarter bodes to be a pretty good one. And with retailinventories still at good levels, as long as the sales hold up theindustry thinks the downside risk on production is reasonably limited.The automotive industry, therefore, expects that their activity willbe a plus in terms of fourth-quarter GDP. The steel businesscontinues at a strong pace given the good first half that they had; itwas the best first half since 1981. As [for] the current level ofoperations, they're at running about 87 percent of capacity. They-13-9/23/93expect shipments this year to come in at 87 to 88 million tons. So,in terms of production it's a good year. They just aren't making anymoney. The October price increase that was announced earlier is notgoing to stick; but despite that they're really pumping out a lot ofmetal.Despite the floods and other adversities in the agriculturalsector--and as an aside I would say that the weather over the next fewweeks is certainly going to be critical to that sector--the farmequipment business continues to be very strong. The company I talkedto has a scheduled fourth-quarter production level some 30 percentover last year, but last year was really a very, very poor comparativequarter. In the truck business, the 1994 outlook for medium trucks isgood. They're expecting a 10 percent increase next year. Heavytrucks will be down a bit, 5 to 6 percent, but this is a result of aregulatory issue; there's a change taking place at the beginning ofnext year and, therefore, there was some advance buying this year toget the trucks in before that change. I continue to be impressed,really even surprised, by the intensive competitive conditions of themarketplace and the very restraining effect that is having on pricing.Many companies are achieving outright reductions in the cost of theiroutside purchases. And for those companies experiencing increases,the increases tend to be pretty small and in the production processthey are able to overcome those through productivity improvements.So, it really is a very, very intense pricing environment. But I dofind the employment aspects of the environment increasingly worrying.Companies are continuing to contract their work forces, and CEOs aretaking a very, very hard line on this and are exerting an awful lot ofemployment discipline on their organizations. As an example, in onecompany in Chicago, which 15 years ago had sales of about $1 billionand 53,000 employees, their sales level currently is up to $4 billionand their employment level is down to 25,000. And despite theincreased production levels, which in some cases really are quitesignificant, I think it's a fair statement to say that no one I havetalked to plans to add permanent employees to their payroll.One change in the outlook that I find a little interestingand almost surprising is in the commercial real estate business. Italk to a company from time to time that is in the upper end of thecommercial business, and over the last three years they have hadnothing to report other than just absolutely dismal conditions. Thistime, though, there was a slight change in the tone. They thinkconditions are beginning to improve. As yields on alternativeinvestments have come down, people are looking at real estate as apossible investment for a higher yield. This is probably animprovement for the wrong reason; nonetheless, it appears to bebeginning to result in something of a stronger tone in rentalconditions, terms, and other things like that. They expect, if thiscontinues and there is an improvement, that as we get into the secondhalf of the 1990s the underlying fundamentals can begin to show someimprovement.With regard to the national economy, I think the 2-1/2percent or so growth rate that we've been talking about continues tobe very realistic, very achievable, and that at this point the risksare about evenly balanced. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. President Parry.-14-9/23/93MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, economic activity in the TwelfthDistrict is still weak, and it's not a surprise to indicate that thatis due largely to poor conditions in California. We saw employmentdown in August; since the peak of employment in July of 1990 therehave been 588,000 jobs lost in the state. It's also interesting tonote that if one were to back the state out of the national figureswe'd probably have an unemployment rate of about 6.3 or 6.4 percent asopposed to the 6.7 percent. Residential construction activity showsno signs of picking up in the state and this, of course, is despitethe low interest rates and also reduced home prices. The number ofhousing permits is down 13 percent from a year ago and stands at abouta third of the level that was reached in 1989. On the commercialside, the only thing I could say that would be of a positive nature isthat property values have fallen so low that we seem to see someserious buyers in the markets. Actually, there are some transactionstaking place. If you looked at the situation a year ago there wasvirtually no activity. Reflecting California's economic troubles, netmigration to other states rose to 150,000 in fiscal 1993. Incontrast, the number of legal foreign immigrants to California rose 23percent in 1992 to a record 237,500. Now, the official estimate isthat illegal immigrants are 100,000; I think that's really low. So,in spite of the moves to other states, the state's population isgrowing very rapidly.Conditions are much better in other parts of the [District].In fact, we have two states that are among the top five in the nationin terms of growth rates, Utah and Nevada. Homebuilding activity isvery strong. The number of housing permits during the three-monthperiod that ended in July was up 22 percent in Idaho and 35 percent inUtah. Home prices are rising dramatically. From 1990 they're up 27percent in Boise, up 18 percent in Salt Lake City, up 16 percent inLas Vegas, and up 13 percent in Reno. Manufacturing growth is alsostrong and outpacing the national average in many of these states.We've seen 4.3 percent growth in manufacturing in Idaho, 3.4 percentin Nevada, and 1.7 percent in Utah.If I can turn for a moment to the national economy: While Iagree with the Greenbook pattern of modestly accelerating growth anddecelerating inflation, I'd have to say I'm a bit more optimisticabout the magnitudes in 1994. We're expecting that real growth willbe up a bit more--not quite half a percent--with somewhat lessinflation. On the price side, while some factors--certainly one-timefactors--are going to have the effect of tending to raise the CPI abit in 1994, our estimates are that we're going to see some greaterimprovement in the CPI than is indicated in the Greenbook.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, there hasn'tbeen much change in our District over the period since the lastmeeting. The information we're receiving from our business contacts,directors, and others indicates that the District's economy is growingat a moderate pace. But, as Bob Forrestal said, we've been hit hardin agriculture by the drought; we're coming out of that now butoutside of agriculture things are pretty much unchanged. Aselsewhere, people are frustrated by the slow pace of overall recovery;they are especially frustrated by the sluggishness in job growth. ButI don't think very many people in our region think the economy is-15-9/23/93about to turn back down. One sector where we do seem to be seeingpretty consistent signs of somewhat greater strength is housing. Homesales, construction, and both new and existing home prices seem to berising in most local areas in our region.As far as the national economy is concerned, the Greenbook'sprojection is certainly reasonable and plausible; and objectivelyspeaking the risk of error is probably pretty evenly balanced on boththe up side and the down side, given what we know now. I've been moreoptimistic about the outlook in recent months than most people and Iguess most people have been more optimistic than the actual outcome.But I think I have been more optimistic than most people coming intothis meeting, so I need to be a little humble in making any conjectureabout future growth at this point. Nevertheless, I would humblysubmit that we may get somewhat stronger growth going forward than thestaff expects. I would make three points in this regard. First, boththe Greenbook and the Beigebook seem to suggest that the greaterstrength in housing, which as I said a minute ago we see in ourDistrict, is pretty general across the country. As the Greenbookpoints out, the latest reports of builders, lenders, home buyers, andothers in the market all seem to indicate that the housing outlookgenerally is better than some of the latest data seem to suggest.That might to some extent be substantiated by the increase in housingin August that you announced a minute ago, Mike. In light of thesereports, and given the substantial further decline in mortgage rates,the pickup in housing that seems to be going on currently may turn outto be more robust and sharper than many people think. Second, I thinkconsumer spending is looking increasingly solid. We had a good rateof increase in real personal consumption expenditures in the secondquarter and, given a high level in July--if I calculated thiscorrectly--the third-quarter rate conceivably could be close to 4percent even if there are relatively small increases in the months ofAugust and September. And finally, as many people have pointed out,job market conditions are generally stronger than the weak Augustpayroll figure would seem to suggest. The lengthening workweek, thestrength in the household survey data, the continued fairly healthyrise in help wanted advertising, all suggest to me that the labormarket is at least holding steady and perhaps even improving a bit.So all in all, it seems to me that at least one can say thatprivate domestic final demand is firming up noticeably. Well,"noticeably" is too strong; I guess one has to exert a little effortto notice it, but I think it's there. Activity undoubtedly willcontinue to be restrained going forward by the forthcoming taxincreases, employer concern about the cost implications of health carereform, and the economic weakness in many of our major export markets.But I still think on balance that there's a better than even chancethat we will get a little more growth than the 2.3 percent rateprojected by the Greenbook for the second half of the year.One final point, if I may: In my view the most significantdevelopment by far since the last meeting is the further decline inlong-term rates. One of our major objectives in policy in recentyears, as you all know, has been to help bring long-term interestrates down further by raising the credibility of our efforts toachieve price stability over time. I think the much greater thanexpected declines in long rates recently are evidence that thatstrategy is working over time. That may be evidence of other things-16-9/23/93as well, but there's no doubt that our actions recently have aided thefurther decline in long rates. And I hope we will do whatever we needto do going forward to maintain and extend that progress. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our District continuesto grow modestly, as I've said time and time again. Constructionremains reasonably good in our area mostly due to housing, primarilyin the western portion of our region in Denver. Energy has postedgains and that's tied to the natural gas industry, which is stillfairly active in our area. Banks' earnings are doing extremely well;in the second quarter, as for the nation, they were very strong. Infact, in Oklahoma, which I think was once the worst in the nation,banks earned in the second quarter something on the order of 1-1/2percent on their assets. I was in Oklahoma last week and there were acouple of banks actually talking about making loans! That's the firsttime they've said that in almost a decade. They said they wanted towait two more quarters, though. [Laughter] I'm only half kidding!The service industry is generally solid, although not as good as thenation. Where tourism is very important, it's a little disappointing.Manufacturing is really weak; durable goods employment actually hasdeclined over the last year in our region, about 2-1/2 percent weestimate, and that has to do in part with the aircraft industry.Prospectively in our region, we expect more of the same in terms ofslow growth. Low mortgage rates should keep housing starts strong inour region, especially in the mountain area where there is a bit ofin-migration from California going on. Agriculture will report solidincome, we think, due importantly to livestock prices; and crop losseswill not be sufficient to offset that, including [those associatedwith] the effects of the flood and of the drought, and also somefreeze that we had in portions of our region. In manufacturing,though, we see nothing that would show any strong improvement in ourregion, so we think it will continue to be rather slow as we goforward.For the nation, we expect moderate growth, as everyone elsedoes, although we are somewhat stronger than the Greenbook. We alsoexpect modest inflation, about the same as the Greenbook. Some ofthat comes from a little stronger growth in business fixed investmentand a little more accumulation of inventories, but basically we seevery modest growth going forward. Because of our stronger growthprojections, we see employment being a little better than what theGreenbook shows but, again, not enough to change how we view theeconomy into 1994.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. The Philadelphia region has improved a littlebut it continues to grow modestly and still, I think, lags the nation.Employment growth is sluggish and attitudes remain cautious, neitheroptimistic nor pessimistic. Where there has been some improvement isin the manufacturing sector, which has been a major drag on theeconomy. It's not that it's going up so much; it's that it has tendedto stabilize after several months of decline. Also, New Jersey, whichhas been one of the hardest hit states in the country, appears to beimproving. The weakest sector there was construction, and bothresidential and nonresidential are showing some signs of growth-17-9/23/93although from very low levels. Also, New Jersey had a good tourismsummer and that has been a positive. More generally, I'm picking upthe same kinds of vibrations that Si is in the commercial real estatemarket: That investment in real estate is beginning to lookrelatively attractive because other alternatives aren't so good. Ithas been a long time since I've heard the term REIT in our board roombut I'm now hearing it again, which isn't all good news. We wentthrough the REIT problems of 20 years or so ago. But this noise wehear about some improvement in commercial real estate is not for thisyear or next year so much as later in the decade.District bankers report weak commercial loan demand.However, when we pursue that a little more, they are beginning towonder how they will finance a pickup in loan demand when it comes.And that's a new kind of attitude. They're worried about the runoffthey've seen in deposits and whether they can get enough deposits backto fund what they think someday will be an upturn in loan demand.On the national economy, I think the fundamentals are aboutthe same and will likely continue to be the same: moderate growth,subdued inflationary pressures, employment growth insufficient tocause a significant drop in unemployment, and cautious attitudes. Idon't believe there's very much that monetary policy can do to alterthat outlook even if we wanted to. But I think the respite fromcriticism that we've had in recent months is likely to come to an end.Impatience is going to be our greatest foe in the next few months.And I suspect that we will increasingly have to defend a no changepolicy as the restlessness over this rather disappointing employmentgrowth continues to build.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. Even though it has been a fairly short periodsince the last meeting of the Committee, I would not characterize thesituation in the District as better than the nation anymore. The moodcoming back after Labor Day for large and small businesses was lesspositive for the District than I thought it was before. Objectively,the numbers look still pretty good. Unemployment has been decliningin our District, even if it hasn't nationally. The auto sector isdoing quite well, mainly because of a larger domestic share, thetransplants and all of that. One of the things that I hadn'tconsidered before about the transplant companies raises an interestingproblem for them. This came up with the recent Honda actions. Theycannot effectively sell essentially the same car that's produced inOhio and produced in Japan at different prices. So, the exchange rateis forcing them to make choices between pricing that's appropriate foran import or pricing that's appropriate for a domestic car, withconsiderably different implications for volumes depending on which waythey go. It's quite different for a company like Honda that has avery substantial domestic production relative to their total versussome of the other foreign manufacturers.Retailing was disappointing. The major retail companiesheadquartered in the District that operate nationally said that theback-to-school selling season was less than they had hoped, but theyremain hopeful about the holiday selling season. In a joint boardmeeting last week, large and small businesses made reference to theidea of expecting leaner times--that '94 would be weaker than '93.-18-9/23/93And they talked about the general pattern of what they call "makingsmall downward adjustments" in spending habits and expectations inorder for it to get soft in the region. One director in doing aroundup for me of minority businesses in the major metropolitan areassaid that there's a general sense that minority owned businesses arebeing more negatively influenced by government actions than non-minority businesses because of the way the tax laws and the healthcare proposals affect them.Turning to the nation and the Greenbook, a number of commentsare being raised on some issues that concern me. First, thisdiscussion about long-term rates and the backward-looking model andthe forecast part of that seemed to me like a debate a long, long timeago, involving the views of Ptolemy and Copernicus. The Ptolemaicmodel did work well apparently, but that didn't make it valid. Whatwe do know is that in the very long run there is a relationshipbetween the quantity equation and the Fisher equation. [That's]because the real return on productive assets and the real return onfinancial assets are going to approximate over time the real growththe economy is able to produce, and one would expect that inflationaryexpectations in a sustained steady state world are going toapproximate inflation. In the 1953 to 1963 period nominal GDP growthaveraged about 5 percent, what the Greenbook projects out toward theend of '94. And, of course, in that period long-term rates weresubstantially lower than they are today. But at that time I think wehad a regime where people believed that increased inflation andinterest rates were temporary and bound to go back down, whereas todaywe still have the opposite. And what we're trying to do is changethat regime. It's not an inflation objective in terms of numbers, butrather a mind set about what the natural order of things is.And that brings me to some [points] about fiscal policy andthe way it was raised both in the projection and discussed in theGreenbook. Mike said in his response to me that it's not advocacy tosay "achievement of this middling expansion path...." But that to meimplies that real output is an objective of monetary policy, assumingwe know how to measure the thrust of monetary policy actions onnominal or real magnitudes. I'd say a couple of things. This monthis the 25th anniversary of a study completed on various ways ofmeasuring fiscal policy at the St. Louis Fed; that's a long time agoand I don't think we've learned a heck of lot since then about how togauge these things. The notion of characterizing current fiscalpolicy as restraint is about like the Lyndon Johnson surtax of 1968.I would worry about that being allowed to influence monetary actionsas it did at that time. If we maintain that the objective of monetarypolicy is price stability, somehow measured or viewed, and if weaccept the Greenbook projection that inflation is now higher than wepreviously thought it was going to be with the current stance ofpolicy and if that policy is [deemed] acceptable, then that says thatwe have either changed our objective or the time horizon for achievingthat objective or that we think the Greenbook is wrong on itsinflation forecast or our policies are wrong and they need to beadjusted.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Most indicators in the Eleventh Federal ReserveDistrict remain positive. Our District economy seems to be-19-9/23/93accelerating a bit from a level that was already above the nationalaverage. NAFTA dominates the conversation in Texas when we talk todirectors, Beigebook respondents, members of the Small BusinessAdvisory Council, which met last week, and banking groups, althoughthe small business people are very afraid of mandated health benefitscoming out of the health reform effort. Commercial real estate stillhasn't done much but home and apartment construction are beginning tobe very strong in a lot of our markets, particularly Austin and SanAntonio, and even in Dallas to some extent; within a five mile radiusof where I live there are, I believe, 8,000 to 10,000 apartments underconstruction. Austin has more under construction than Los Angeles,Chicago, or New York, and Dallas is third behind Chicago and Atlanta.New construction appears to be putting downward pressure on existinghome prices. I refinanced about three weeks ago. And while I gotsome rate relief, my appraisal came in considerably below what I paidfor the house, which is somewhat discouraging because I thought Imoved to Texas at the bottom of the real estate cycle and it turns outI didn't. We don't hear a lot about upward pressure on prices in theDistrict but we do hear about it in building materials. Retail salesin the District seem to be holding up rather well, butwho has interests in real estate, specialty real estatestores across the nation, and showed usa chart indicating that in the three weeksfollowing the passage of the new tax law, retail sales in those storesjust collapsed after having been growing rather nicely.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is this a high-price type operation?MR. MCTEER. Not necessarily, it involves things like high-volume office supplies, [unintelligible], that kind of thing. Some ofthem are specialty and higher priced. I guess that's all I want tosay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In New England theeconomy is mixed but there are signs of growth. To put this incontext, in a sense one really has to look at this period, given theenormous overheating we had in the '70s and '80s in New England, as along-term healing period. I think that's pretty important, and some[healing] is still going on. We see some wage rate adjustment [andother] things happening. And there are improvements in some areas.We've seen very substantial improvement in the banking sector. Now,the returns are still not numbers that are comparable to nationalfigures; return on assets is about 1 percent currently. There is animprovement in bank willingness to lend, and I think an appropriatedegree of caution with it, but there is more lending now even in smallcommercial real estate ventures. On the small business side, I thinkthere is a willingness to lend, and I think we actually have a newequilibrium being approached with small business loans being made onterms that may be [reasonable] over the very long run. Small businessjust hasn't adjusted to that, and those who can't just have to get adeal someplace else and change long-term relationships. But I don'tthink there's an awful lot more to be hoped for in that change inwillingness to lend.Like everyone else, we're seeing an improvement on theresidential side. And even in manufacturing all of this restructuring-20-9/23/93that has been going on--we had a lot of transitional problems--isstill going on, but we can see the end of the tunnel, hopefully.Going back to this issue of price pressures, it's interesting that inthe health care industry, among the producers of health careequipment--U.S. Surgical and these kinds of [companies]--we really dosee a change in the way people are approaching things. They thinkthis is a permanent shift in their business in a lot of ways withvery, very substantial price pressures, and they are adjusting pricesdownward in some areas. One fellow from a quite large health careequipment company said: "If the country does the right thing, mybusiness is going to be lousy for five years and there's just no wayto avoid that." We've mentioned that in the mutual fund business westill see very strong flows [and] increasingly nervous fund managers.The comfort I take out of this is in their nervousness; it's the non-nervous fund managers who worry me. But I think we are making someprogress there in terms of people being more and more aware of wherewe are in this situation. I'd just mention that tourism in NewEngland runs inversely to air fares. We had a great year, probablythe best year since the mid-1980s in tourism.As far as the United States goes, I'm very much in agreementwith the overall contour of the Greenbook forecast. I'm a little moreoptimistic on prices but I have to admit that's based on a usual kindof capacity and to some extent labor market view of things, and I'm alittle more concerned on the export side. I would think that therisks are probably center-weighted. One thing I can't quite figureout is these consumption numbers, [given] what we're seeing in theincome numbers. [The inconsistency] has been going on long enough nowthat I'm starting to wonder whether some of the other figures areright. Particularly in New England, of course, there has been arevision in some of the data captured in the national revisions. Asbad as things got, the mood never really got as bad as the data were.And I think that's consistent with what we're seeing now, so it makesme wonder about them.Over the long term, I think we just have no choice but toslide through this period; I have some sympathy for what Ed Boehnesaid about what monetary policy can and can't do. I do think, though,that we can't avoid, not immediately anyway, the fact that there aretradeoffs in all of these things. And I personally think that atleast in the intermediate term monetary policy affects realmagnitudes. Over the long term it may be a different matter. And Ialways thought the reason we want price stability--and I think it'sabsolutely important we get it--is to maximize real output. So Ithink that is what we're all about; and unfortunately in someintermediate periods that can involve some tradeoffs.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. In terms of economic conditions in the District,the trends and patterns remain generally positive as they have forquite some time. There are some concerns with regard to agriculturebecause of the weather, of course. There's the concern that all theshoes haven't dropped yet with regard to military bases and possibleclosures. And there are some strikes under way in some of thetaconite mines in northern Minnesota and the upper peninsula inMichigan. But with those caveats, conditions really are pretty good.Employment is up in all District states and we are getting renewed9/23/93reports of pretty tight labor market conditions in some of the majormarkets in the District. That does not seem yet to have translatedinto demonstrable wage pressures, but we are hearing reports ofdifficulty in hiring--and these are above-minimum-wage type positions--and retaining workers.With regard to the national economy, I don't see much that'sgoing to break us out of this pattern of moderate growth and moderateinflation that we've been in for quite some time. I've beensurprised--Ed Boehne raised this point--that there has been as muchpatience, or maybe less impatience than I would have expected, withregard to the performance of the economy over the past couple ofyears. Maybe that's about to change, but so far it seems to me thatthere certainly has been less impatience than I expected. And I guessthe Committee at least implicitly seems to be patient or satisfiedwith both the pattern of growth and inflation that we've been getting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. In our District the situation is pretty muchlike the one Al described. I don't detect any major changes inactivity. We're still seeing modest growth. I would say that retailsales are reasonably strong. That's not getting fully reflected inemployment, though, where we've been pretty sluggish. We'rerelatively stronger than the rest of the country in manufacturing andquite weak in services right now. Some of that may be flood-relatedbecause of the impact on construction in particular, which has been aweak sector employment-wise. We do hear reports from our directorsand others about modest expansion in manufacturing areas--firms addingseveral hundred jobs here and there. So, generally, I'd say that'spicking up. Housing has been quite strong over the last year. Whatwe heard earlier was that the wet weather in the spring was going topush activity later into the summer and I think we're seeing that nowin terms of a pickup in activity. With respect to the flood and itseffects in general, there wasn't that much disruption of employmentactivity and many of those who were disrupted are back to work now.Cleanup efforts are under way. There will probably be some positiveimpact on construction activity in due course, although I don't thinkit will be that noticeable on a national basis. Barge traffic ismoving on the river and so forth, so in many senses the crisis of theflood is behind us.In terms of banking, it was interesting to note an increasein loan activity across the board in the second quarter; actually loangrowth was relatively healthy in Eighth District banks, up not quite 6percent. Consumer, real estate, and business categories were allgrowing. My final point--maybe this is somewhat related to the flood,but [it's difficult] nationally to sort out the flood, drought, andother effects--is that the crop estimates aren't dramatically downthat much. But it's interesting that in Missouri the corn crop isestimated to be down about 40 percent, which is a fairly dramatic hit,but in Illinois [the effects are] very little, maybe about 15 percentin terms of the corn crop.Nationally, I keep asking myself why I don't feel betterabout the relatively sanguine outlook that we have. This ought to beideal from a central banker's point of view. I know we're paid toworry, but real growth around potential and reasonably well behaved-22-9/23/93prices is something I guess we ought to feel good about. But thereare two things that bother me somewhat. One has to do with the factthat I just don't think we can gauge the current thrust of monetarypolicy very well, and I'm very uneasy about the fact that we may wellbe in a very stimulative posture and those chickens will come home toroost. The other thing--and I think it has been appropriate to showsome flexibility on this front--ultimately would be the question in mymind of moving the inflation rate down closer to what would be somerepresentation of price stability. Others have commented on this atother meetings. I think to some extent we've taken comfort in thefact that prices haven't been moving up. But at some point we mayhave to think about trying to move inflation a little lower.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, given what I've done in the lastmonth, I think my contribution would be to talk about a district wedon't have represented here. It's what Congressman Clay calledAmerica's internal third world nation. Having been to hearings allaround the country, I thought I'd just report on economic conditionsthat I've heard about. There seems to be a growing gap betweenexpectations, which are rising, and realities, which are falling. Therising expectations stem largely from political changes and promisesof change and reform. I'd point out that there are extremely highexpectations about what potential changes in the CommunityReinvestment Act could do. I doubt very much that anything we docould fulfill those expectations. So I think it's going to lead todisappointment.With regard to realities, in the 1980s real black familyincome rose about 70 percent faster than real white family income.Black small business creation as well as Hispanic small businesscreation was quite quick. Both of those trends have stopped, whichseems rather puzzling until one thinks about the usual process that'sgoing on. The usual pattern for all ethnic groups moving up has firstof all been the civil service. And limits on civil service employmentat the state and local level and now in federal civil service areimpacting minority communities particularly. Even more dramatic,particularly for young people, are cutbacks in military hiring whichhas long been a way out. We've seen an historic and continuing trendof decline in pay in manual jobs; that's no surprise. But during the'80s there was robust growth in office jobs, which led to rapid gainsin female incomes relative to male incomes. In minority communitiesfemale incomes are a more important component than they are in thewhite community, so that was a net plus. That has stopped and it isone of the problems being faced. And finally on the horizon is thefact that the health care industry, which has also been a majoremployer of blacks and Hispanics, now appears to be facing cuts. As aresult there does not seem to be the job growth going on and,therefore, the realities are somewhat grimmer.There is good news. Minority test scores, SATs and what haveyou, continue to rise; they've been rising now for 12 years. It'sinteresting that white test scores are unchanged, but for all othergroups test scores have been continually rising. The reason they'restatic for the country as a whole is that the composition of thepopulation is changing. But, still, progress is being made.Graduation rates are up and, according to survey data, drug use is9/23/93down. In fact, it was lower in the last survey for the minoritycommunity than for the white community. The other big piece of goodnews is the [increased] affordability of housing--and that's largelydue to lower interest rates--which is a real plus.But I'll tell you, I heard quite a bit about the effects ofregulation. Jerry Jordan mentioned that with regard to small businessand minority small business in particular. There are three that Ithink we should take a close look at. The first is the appraisalmess, which is without any question devastating for the minoritycommunity. Appraisers, even licensed and certified ones, have no ideahow to do appraisals in the inner city and as a result are literallydestroying what equity might exist there. Second is the tightening ofdown payment restrictions; the monthly payments are more affordablebut it's a lot harder to come up with 20 percent down than with 10percent or 5 percent down. And tightening of bank regulation hasadversely affected the minority community in that way. Finally, and Iheard this everywhere I went, is something we don't think about; it'sa classic unintended consequence. For historically underservedcommunities, cash is not only a medium of exchange, it's a store ofwealth. If you don't have a bank account you keep your moneyliterally in cash. Well, in the name of anti money-laundering laws,we have made the use of that cash and its entry into the bankingsystem virtually impossible. I had a lady in Denver confront me. Shewas trying to buy a house and had $5,000 in cash; obviously she wasnot allowed to use it by the bank, as you might imagine, under ourlaws. And she said: "You're treating everyone in the community as ifthey were a drug dealer." And I had no answer for her. I thought itwas a very good observation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Very interesting.MR. LINDSEY. It's something we should definitely thinkabout. I don't think the Congressmen who are leading the fight on theHill are aware of exactly what that's doing. So, I saw a tremendousamount of bitterness. I had never seen anything like what I saw atthe hearings in Los Angeles. I think the country would see a greatcloud lift if we could somehow cut southern California off from therest of the country! The bitterness there was not only directedagainst the establishment but against other minority groups to anextent that I just found unbelievable in a public hearing setting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The Koreans and--MR. LINDSEY. Yes, and backwards in time. We had testimonyfrom the Chinese banking community, which was a good lesson inhistory. As late as 1946, it was illegal for Chinese to own land inCalifornia. 1946! So, needless to say, this community felt that ithas been historically disadvantaged and yet has solved its ownproblems. We had a witness testify who said, in effect: We solvedour own problems; don't expect us to solve anyone else's problems.And the witness said it that bluntly. Also, I think the amount oftension that exists in Los Angeles between the Mexican Americancommunity and the black community is something one never sees on thenews, but it came through loud and clear in the hearings. So, thatwas a matter of some concern.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is that going in both directions?-24-9/23/93MR. KELLEY. You bet.MR. LINDSEY. Yes.MR. BOEHNE. It certainly does in Philadelphia.MR. LINDSEY. Yes. It's competition for everything. It'scompetition for civil service jobs; it's competition for contracts;it's competition for housing. I don't know what implication it hasfor the Greenbook, but it is a matter of great concern that we have asituation of rising expectations and falling realities. And in thelong run we've got to reverse those two curves.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Right, I would agree with you. I thinkthe CRA issue has created a political [fallout] that has gotten out ofhand with respect to expectations, and it will be very tough tofulfill a lot of what people are hoping to see.MR. BOEHNE. Larry, I think those observations are especiallyinsightful. I wonder if you wouldn't mind just dictating some ofthose and passing them out.MR. LINDSEY. Thank you. I see the recorder is on.MR. BOEHNE. Well, maybe it could come from that. Also, someof that ought to be in your public remarks at the appropriate time. Ithink those are things that need to be said.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think it could be appropriatelyembodied in the minutes of this meeting.MR. SYRON. Good idea.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. The Second District economy remainsextraordinarily flat. The level of employment in the state of NewYork is almost exactly what it was 12 months ago. And the level ofemployment in our portion of the state of New Jersey is actually down.So, throughout the area--I've been travelling around upstate New Yorkand parts of New Jersey--the level of optimism is very low. It's notquite into pessimism but feelings are sort of flat [and people are]very concerned about what's going on.In the national economy, Dick Davis tells me that there hasnever been such identity of forecasts between that of the New YorkReserve Bank and the Greenbook, which probably means the chances ofthe forecast being wrong are geometrically increased! But we do feelthat [outlook] is by far the best bet. However, probably because ofour proximity to Wall Street I do have stomach rumblings that I thinkI should share with the Committee. There is growing concern in thefinancial markets about the level of the DOW and of the equity marketsin general--and some concern about the debt markets but considerablyless--as to the sustainability of these levels of equity prices. Thequestion is the effect that anything other than a very modestcorrection could have on the holders of mutual funds who signed theprospectus that said they understood that what goes up can go down andthat the [value of the] investment could turn out to be less than what-25-9/23/93they invested. But I don't think there are very many who actuallyunderstood what that prospectus said. And there is very serious causefor concern on our part and growing concern within the financialcommunity--I suspect in Boston as well, from what Dick Syron said--about what the effect of a sharp correction would be and what thereaction of the smaller investors will be who by and large were notthere in the '87 crash. Do they think they can get quick cash andthat the cash they will get is at least approximately what theyinvested? Some of the more astute mutual fund managers are keepinghigher levels of cash than they normally would, so that they would beable to handle a greater than usual level of redemption requests. Butit does not appear that those levels of cash are anywhere near highenough to handle a really sharp correction in the market if thereshould be a psychological reaction on the part of the small investorwho says: "I want to get out."With the tremendous interconnection of financial markets,perhaps that concern from our neighbors in Wall Street makes me evenmore concerned about certain things that one sees internationally. Weare absolutely in agreement with Ted Truman's forecast on what willhappen in the major economies in Japan, Europe, and Latin America.And yet I think one has to worryFor our economy I think it's not just the question of whateffect those developments in Europe and Japan could have on netexports, it's the effect that they could have on the financial marketsas well, which could exacerbate any of these concerns that we mighthave about what would happen in the case of a correction in the DOWand the effect on mutual fund holders. Domestically, we think,assuming that there is no contamination from abroad, that the economicforecast is quite sound. One would think, with the level of consumerconfidence not being very high and the level of business confidencenot being very high, that one would have to be more concerned about-26-9/23/93the forecast being accurate. But it seems to me that the projectionson consumer spending are quite defensible and likely to be accurate.In the business investment area, we've been doing someinteresting work in New York on where we are in the restructuring ofthe corporate sector. And it would appear that it is really a bitfurther along than we had thought, pretty close to the point wheremost businesses could say that the restructuring in the balance sheetis about where one would wish it to be. However, it would not appearthat they're very likely to increase production with consumer spendingnot being more robust. Then, I think one has to ask the question: Isthe forecast of rather strong business investment spending likely tobe right? We think it is because so much of it is in the investmentin increased power of the magic machine; however, that is not gearedtoward increased production but rather increased productivity andwould appear even within the bounds of the economic forecast to besomething that one could expect to be very likely to take place.Another rumbling that we get around Wall Street is that theattitude toward official Washington has improved considerably over thelast couple of months. It went, if you will recall, from euphoria inDecember/January--a kind of view that if Richard Nixon could go tothen-Peking, that a Democratic president could do certain things thatno Republican could do. Then, [attitudes] went into an enormous funkin the spring months and are now--I think largely because of thebudget reconciliation bill--somewhat more sensible, I'd say, in theview that it's going to be very tough to get NAFTA through and it'sgoing to be very tough to get a sound health bill through. But theredoes seem to be a view that Washington is working, if not perfectly,at least better. So, I don't think that weight on the financialmarkets, which I believe was quite serious a few months ago, is quitewhat it was then.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Looking back over the last 18 months, the dataseem almost unbelievable. In fact, no one talks about it because it'sreally hard to believe. The fact that we got to a 3.9 percentincrease in real GDP--which no one talks about and I would admitwasn't 4 percent--and then had that cut literally in half...! In someways it doesn't seem that way. That is, during 1992 no one reallyfelt that good about things and in some ways during 1993 no one feelsthat bad about things. [But] that's really quite a significant stepdown to be operating at that level and then to fall back. What makesit more disconcerting is the fact that in 1992 December over Decemberthe CPI was up 3.1 percent and we've still got the CPI running at 3.1percent. Now, we're forecasting 1994, Q4 over Q4, of 2-1/2 percent,and I don't think anyone knows how to change that number. No oneseems to have any real good suggestions or real good alternate numbersthat they've been advocating. To make it even worse, the revisionsseem to show productivity trends higher than we thought they were.We've got productivity trends very, very high; we've got the ECI verywell behaved and yet we're not getting the kind of combination ofoutput and price level response that certainly seems desirable. Iwish I could say just why it is that the economy has faltered sobadly, and yet I can only guess. I think corporate rationalizationcertainly has been a factor. Certainly, the FASB rules in regard topost-retirement health care benefits undoubtedly gave some impetus to-27-9/23/93downsizing employment. Certainly, the pension plan underfunding thatseems to be there probably already is impacting large corporateemployment plans. And I think all of us are very well aware of howdisconcerting that is. Apparently, many people who have jobs in thisenvironment are much more aware of the fact that jobs are notnecessarily permanent. So you'd think maybe we'd be getting a highersavings response or somewhat more conscious spending response and yetthe numbers don't show that at all. We don't see any budge upward inthe saving rate. So, all in all, from the domestic scene it seems avery strange combination.When we look abroad, certainly [we see] the impact of theeconomies in Europe and Japan; I guess the Federal Reserve staff andmembers of this Committee have all agreed that those economies aregoing to be weaker than they were generally thought to be by thegovernments and the central banks of those countries. When we look atthe stock market, I guess we would think that if all this downsizingand rationalization efficiencies are going on, the profit numbersought to sustain the kind of equity prices that we see. And yetironically we don't seem to be having any inflow from abroad to U.S.equity markets. Indeed, in terms of diversification, mutual fundinvestors in the United States seem to be the only ones that arebuying equities in Japan. So, all of this gets to be pretty confusingand maybe I better stop before I get in worse trouble.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. I'm pretty close to where Governor Angell was atthe end [of his comments]. It seems to me that on the economy we havea rather tight consensus with a couple of important exceptions today.There was consensus around the Greenbook type of view, and thatcertainly includes me. Very frankly that worries me a lot! Imistrust it; my contrarian antennae are twitching. I was interestedyesterday in the Wall Street Journal that Keynes reminded us that theinevitable never happens.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Except for death and taxes!MR. KELLEY. Good point. I don't mean to be facetious when Isay that the thing that concerns me the most right now is that I don'tknow what I should be most concerned about. Where's the balance ofrisks? If you look at the things that we're able to analyze and makesome responsible comments on, the risks seem to be quite balanced.And it seems to me that the things we can see are unlikely to take usvery far away from our consensus view. It seems to me that if theconsensus were to break, it could most likely be because of someunanticipated or unexpected event. And it seems to me that the worldmay have more than the usual potential for that right now; it alwayshas potential for it. But there are some things out there that Ithink could change things radically. It's easier to see the badthings than the good ones. The failure of NAFTA, which could impacton GATT, could cause a rather severe dislocation of internationaltrade at least for a while. Many friends of mine in the Southwest areterrified that oil may collapse below $10 a barrel, which could havesome pretty severe impacts. There are a couple of major economiesthat we all know are in a very shaky state. The former Soviet Unionhas various civil wars going on; optimism in the Near East runs veryhigh and it better be brought to pass or [the repercussions] could be-28-9/23/93more severe on the down side than ever, and so forth. I think thereare up side [possibilities] too. It would not be out of the bounds ofthe imagination to see job growth start to pick up; the potential forthat has been alluded to a couple of times this morning. If that wereto happen, it could have a dramatic impact in terms of a resurgence ofconfidence. I think Americans like to be confident, and we haven'tbeen for a long time. We could see a pretty strong bounceback inconfidence, which could cause a real surge in the economy. All inall, Mr. Chairman, in August I said that I thought we should all enjoyour vacations because we'd have work to do soon enough. But itdoesn't seem to me that the time is here yet. And I honestly don'tseem to be able to generate any very clear notion about what it may bewhen it comes, either as to timing or circumstances or extent or evendirection. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, all of the Cassandra-like insightsinto what is going on that I had in mind have already been stated byPresidents Melzer and McDonough and Governors Angell and Kelley. So,I'll just be marked present. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. Well, I should follow right along with that.First of all let me say that I, like a lot of people, have beendisappointed by the [slowdown] in 1993. I also was disappointed tosee the downward revision by the staff for the third quarter; but Ican't really argue with it. I do hope that the fourth-quarterbounceback that is projected in fact really happens. If that's thecase, then that would make 1993 all in all reasonably respectable. Iagain am struck by the stark differences in outlook in various regionsand also by Larry's comments about differences among groups.Sometimes when we focus on the Greenbook or the national economy, wetend to gloss over some of these drastic differences. One unifyingfactor in all of these comments, though, has been continued concernabout the employment situation. The employment gains we've seen sofar in '93 have been encouraging; we have seen jobs added. I think,though, that job quality is still a problem. Employees are stilltrying to learn to adjust to the restructuring via temporary part-timeemployment. This notion of downward mobility is still a concern. Ihope that Dick Syron is right and that there is light at the end ofthe tunnel. I wonder whether this is more a function of learning tolive with the adjustment as opposed to light at the end of the tunnel.All of this, I think, is continuing to weigh on consumerconfidence. That's likely to be exacerbated over the coming monthsbecause of the uncertainties regarding what is happening to healthcare reform and taxes and also the NAFTA rhetoric and the defensecuts. Some of the other risks to the economy have already beendiscussed. As for productivity, we've seen a marked improvement sofar in the '90s, but the question remains as to whether that's goingto continue or whether the downturn that we've seen for the first twoquarters of this year is going to be more the shape of the future.The fiscal drag that is likely to be setting in is a bit moreworrisome because there's less room for error in projections. Ifwe're at a 1.2 percent projected growth rate for the third quarter,that doesn't leave as much room for error in potential effects of the-29-9/23/93fiscal drag. And we have yet to see the health insurance and otherspending cuts that are supposed to be put into place play out yet.State and local government shortfalls also are going to have more of anegative effect; that's going to mean either more cuts in spending ormore state taxes, neither of which is very healthy for the overalleconomy. If the first announcement of the third-quarter GDP is reallyaround 1 percent, I wonder what kind of effect that's going to have.It may well be that we're going to start getting more sentiment for astimulus package. It may well be--and both Gary Stern and Ed Boehnetalked about this--that the light may be focused on monetary policy alittle more brightly. The other big down side that I'd mention, whichhas already been outlined by Bill McDonough and others, is theuncertainty in Europe, Japan, and the former Soviet Union. I agreethat the risks are not just on the export side but that other kinds ofeffects might be engendered if there are problems in those financialmarkets.Now, having said that--and a number of people have statedthat they believe the risks are balanced around the Greenbookprojection--I don't think we should forget some of the strengths thatwe do have in the economy. The broader monetary aggregates and evencredit are showing some signs of strength. The banking system isstronger; the financial markets are stronger. I must admit when Ilook at the stock market that I do see it as more problematic than thebond market, although I'm not one who has visions of tulips when Ilook at the stock market. But it is at a higher level. Perhaps thelast good news or better news story to mention is on the inflationfront: commodity prices have retreated; the PPI has been showing adisinflationary trend. And I agree that it's going to be possible tomake some continued progress on core inflation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Well, Larry Lindsey talked about neighborhoodsand Bill McDonough talked about the world; I guess that leavesrelatively little in between, although there are a lot of things incommon. Bill McDonough suggested that some of the problems have to dowith the and I have no doubtthat that's the case; butThat's probably not all of it. I think ithas a lot to do with the nature of this environment in which it's justa very difficult political job, and no one has been very successfulbecause of the adjustments we're going through and the economicsluggishness. And we've had it far better than most countries.Patience with political systems has already run out, and numerousincumbent governments have fallen. Just to extend Ed Boehne'sintuition, I would be a little concerned if the patience were to startto run out with central bankers around the world. Central bankershave done a pretty good job during this period. We have had a prettyimpressive turnover in leadership in the world's central banks, with alot of the seasoned, very credible personalities moving on.Turning to the domestic side, I see very little newinformation to alter the views that I've stated a number of times.The revisions in the GDP data reinforce my view that the forces ofmoderate expansion seem well entrenched. One can certainly see thisfor the last six quarters--the last year and a half--which have-30-9/23/93averaged 3 percent real growth. The last four quarters have averaged3 percent. It is true that 1993 is weaker; we'll wait nine months tosee what it really is, just as we had to do with 1992 as GovernorAngell pointed out. I think the patternthis year is in part due tothe unsustainably robust fourth-quarter 1992 growth of 5.7 percent.It was natural to have a pullback in the first quarter. If you takethose two quarters together, there was still 3.3 or 3.4 percentgrowth; they are still on this moderate path. But [the swing] createdan inventory adjustment problem, which affected the second quarter andmeant that was only about 2 percent; but still PCE in the secondquarter and final sales grew more than 3 percent. The forces seem tobe there.And I see no shocks to knock us off this--even the fiscalpackage--given the offset on interest rates and given the rathermodest structural reduction in deficits. The third-quarter Greenbookprojection is again for meager growth, 1.2 percent. I think that isabout what it was last year at this time--maybe precisely what it was--for the third quarter of 1992. In fact, in the September 1992Greenbook the projections for both the third and fourth quarters werebetween 1 and 2 percent as we headed into a 4-1/2 percent half. I'mnot suggesting that's going to happen. I would suggest that even inthe Greenbook's forecast the underlying forces of expansion seem to meto be well in place. Consumption is projected to grow more than 3percent; business fixed investment is continuing to grow at a reducedbut still healthy pace. Housing growth is expected to pick up and Ithink accelerate in the future. Even with slow exports and governmentspending, final sales are projected to continue to grow at roughly a 3percent pace. The low growth in the third quarter projected in theGreenbook is due solely to adjustments: inventory adjustments, croplosses, and the auto inventory adjustment. So, it's an odd picture.We could have the first three quarters of 1993 come in at 1.3 percent.Yet, when I look at it underneath--the bottom line numbers--theunderlying growth in demand seems consistent with moderate growth inthe future roughly of the same order of magnitude that we've had inthe past.It seems to me that sentiment as measured by the Michigansurvey has plateaued at a level well above that prevailing in Octoberof last year. In October we were just headed into a 5.7 percentquarter, you'll recall. And the current conditions are also abovethat entire fourth quarter of last year. It is a little troublingthat the longer-term outlook continues to sour in the Michigan survey.August payroll [employment] was weak; the overall employment datastill seem to reflect steady though gradual improvement. Initialclaims continue to ease; the strong hours suggest pent-up labordemand. I continue to hear that payroll jobs are weak; they've grownby 1.7 million in the last 12 months and 1.2 million in the last 8months. And the household survey, once you make the adjustment, seemsto give the same sort of picture even though it uses an entirelydifferent methodology.So, I think this is all consistent with steady momentum.Diminishing deleveraging head winds have been replaced in part byfiscal drag but countered by substantial easing in the capital marketenvironment, and the dollar has eased some as well. It's interestingthat the long bond yield has come down 50 basis points in the lastmonth. Real long-term rates when you use the Michigan long-term-31-9/23/93inflation expectations or the Philadelphia one are starting to get toquite low levels. On inflation, I think Governor Phillips is right;the PPI has performed remarkably well; it's up only .7 percent overthe entire 12 months. Of course, ex tobacco it's up 2 percent! So,smokers are approaching price stability! [Laughter] I think thehealth care plan may well take care of that. It is down a bit extobacco and maybe that's not quite fair. But I think it is clear thateven with that adjustment we have made some progress. The higher-than-expected CPI we had recently for August did remind us that thebond markets still notice these things; they backed up a bit. CoreCPI for the year to date is up at a rate of 3.3 percent, the same asfor the 12-month period and the same as it was at the end of lastyear. It's an interesting 12-month period, though, because itconsists of the most recent 6 months with core CPI at 2.5 percent andthe previous 6 months at 4 percent. I think this pattern of a run-upin inflation that we saw is easier to understand with the revised GDPnumbers when we realize just how explosive growth was in the latterpart of 1992 and why people might have tried to return to passingthrough 4 percent price increases. And once it was clear that growthwas going to moderate, the increases didn't stick. It's not at allclear to me where we go on inflation now. Commodity prices are againsubdued only if we include oil prices. They still show a bit of anupward pattern without oil prices. Now, the Administration hasinflation flattening and turning up gradually despite ample projectedslack. It stabilizes once the slack has disappeared, but whilethere's plenty of slack in the economy inflation continues up.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They need that for revenues!MR. MULLINS. Well, it's interesting that they appear tosuggest that our current interest rate environment is unsustainablebecause they do show interest rates increasing to levels above theinflation rate pretty quickly next year. Next year they show aTreasury bill rate above the inflation rate and then moving on up.Again, with the slack, I don't see why we shouldn't expect thedisinflation trend to be re-established. I think that should be ourobjective and I hope we will get there. Of course, rates are stillquite low now, both short and long rates. I think the financialsystem has eased and that monetary policy is doing what it can do tosupport growth. We're still pumping out the liquidity. M1 growth is12 percent and is projected at 11 percent for the year. M2 plus bondand stock funds has accelerated to 6 percent growth in the secondquarter and 7 percent in the third quarter. Governor Phillipsmentioned that nonfinancial, non-government debt has graduallyincreased; it's growing at a rather moderate level. So, I think we'restill sort of pushing it. I see no convincing evidence that we'vegone too far. By the time we see such evidence, we'll probably be abit late. So, I feel there's very little new to add. The economystill seems to be on track and I think we still will likely face somechallenges on monetary policy, and we should try to stay focused andconscious during this period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do we have some coffee and somedoughnuts?MR. BERNARD. Yes.-32-9/23/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We'll adjourn for coffee and come backwith Don Kohn.[Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Kohn.MR. KOHN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Questions for Mr. Kohn?MR. JORDAN. Don, on the chart package--I guess everybody gotthis yesterday--the last two pages have M1 velocity and opportunitycosts and M2 velocity and opportunity costs. The Committee has hadsome discussions in the past about what is going on with the relationbetween M2 and alternative variables. I don't recall any discussionabout M1, its velocity, and opportunity costs. Looking at this, itstruck me first how close the relationship still appears to bevisually. And I started thinking about some other things that I oncewas more familiar with than I am today, the empirical models of moneydemand on the monetary base and M1 that use intermediate- and longer-term interest rates. Over the last year we've had double-digit growthof M1 and the base, on the order of 10 to 12 percent, about twice therate of growth of nominal GDP. And the decline that we tended to getin long rates is consistent with the elasticities in those earlierstudies. I don't know what you have in your opportunity costs, butusing either version of that, I can think of four possibilities forthe future. It would be interesting to get you to assignprobabilities to the possible outcomes. One, of course, is that therelationship simply breaks down. One would be that nominal GDPaccelerates to double-digit rates. At least the Greenbook doesn'thave that! That would at least establish the relationship ofvelocity. A third would be that M1 and monetary base growth areessentially cut in half in the next year, down to about 5 percent orso, consistent with nominal GDP growth. And the fourth is that wecontinue to get a plunge in opportunity costs. Since I don't knowwhat yours are, I don't know what those implications are; but forlong-term government bonds that means a yield of approximately 4-1/2percent a year from now. Comments?MR. KOHN. It's true that our models also have been trackingM1 pretty well, as you can see from this chart. We use short-terminterest rates--the [3]-month Treasury bill rate--relative to rates onNOW accounts basically as the opportunity cost for [the NOW accountcomponent of] M1, and the short-term interest rate itself relative tothe zero on the currency and demand deposits [components]. We findthat our models underpredicted M1 a little over the last few years andwe think that's primarily because of the currency flows overseas andmaybe a little because of the mortgage repayments which are mostly indemand deposits. So, I guess we don't see a major disconnect thatneeds to be changed here. We have slightly slower M1 growth projectedfor next year based on our expectations that in fact interest rateswill be flat and that there will be some further decline in NOWaccount rates. It continues to be [unintelligible] at the end of thisyear and the beginning of next year by mortgage refinancing. So, I'mnot sure we see anything major that needs to be explained. M1 hasalways been very interest-sensitive, and I think that was the reasonthe Committee stopped targeting it in the early '80s. It's just that-33-9/23/93in order to make any sense of the connection between M1 and nominalincome one had to be very clear about the connection between interestrates and nominal income. When NOW accounts were invented, the swingbetween [small] time deposits and NOW accounts as interest rates movedbecame very dominant in the M1 demand [function], and it becameextremely interest-sensitive. So the initial response of theCommittee was a widening of the bands for M1, then they re-based itmidway through the year, and finally they just threw up their hands.If you couldn't get a fix on interest rates, you couldn't really get afix on the M1/GNP relationship. I agree with your originalobservation: that, unlike for M2, we don't see major unexplainedmisses in M1 relative to interest rates and income. It's just thatthe relationship [between M1 and nominal GDP] is not very tight. Thevelocity of M1 swings over very, very wide ranges. So, therefore, ithasn't been all that useful to the Committee in guiding policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Don? If not, letme get started. But first let me raise an issue which has beendisturbing me more than the economy in recent weeks, and that is theinitiatives up on the Hill with respect to the structure of theFederal Reserve System. As Don Winn will be discussing, there arehearings forthcoming in the next few weeks on the Gonzalez bill, andSenator Sarbanes will be there as well. Secondarily there is theissue of the consolidation of regulatory agencies under a centralindependent agency. When I looked at both of those initiatives, Iconcluded that they didn't necessarily have very much behind them.That probably is still a correct presumption, but I'm no longer surethat that is the case. We here at the Board, I hope in conjunctionwith those of you at Reserve Banks, will be increasingly sensitive tothe fact that this issue is surfacing and we're going to have torespond to it. We are going to have to appear as a sort of partialCommittee at the request of Mr. Gonzalez. I'm going to have to go upthere. [Given] the people who are being asked to testify before theHouse Banking Committee, it clearly suggests that we are leaning upagainst a stacked deck. It really is a wholly unbalanced operation.But instead of shrugging it off, I'm inclined to increase quitesignificantly our general positioning to make certain that we don'tallow something to sneak up from behind and result in some majorchanges in this institution purely because we were too complacent. Inany event, Don Winn will be discussing with us the current initiativesat lunch.MR. KEEHN. When you say "a stacked deck," do you mean interms of the people who will be testifying in front of them or isthere something else?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The witnesses are all there to say thatthe Gonzalez and the Sarbanes bills are perfect.MR. KEEHN. The non-Fed witnesses?MR. MULLINS. We hope so! [Laughter]MR. KEEHN. Who other than the voting members [of the FOMC]is likely to appear there?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, ask that of Don Winn; it's notclear what is going to happen. In that regard let me just say that we-34-9/23/93have been successful in keeping the issue of the minutes reasonablyunder cover. I think we have to be especially circumspect in the nextcouple of months and keep our heads down as best we can.Let mejust tell you that the last thing we need during this sensitive periodis any indication that there is a loose cannon in this organization.Maybe I'm being overly sensitive about what the risk to ourinstitution is, but I much prefer to be overly sensitive and toocautious and find out after the fact that it was all unnecessary thanto be on the other side of that issue. I just want to emphasize thatthis seems to be bulging in a way that makes me a little more nervousthan I'd like to be. We'll review that summons a little more withrespect to the legislative initiative at lunch, but I didn't want todiscuss a number of things at lunch other than just what thelegislative agenda is. So, I just want to put that on the table.I think the policy questions are less difficult, less amatter of concern. The more I look at the data the more I'm inclinedto believe, as some of you have hinted, that there is something wrongwith the numbers we are looking at. It's just not credible to me thatwe can have a significant rise in employment and in hours both fromthe payroll series and the household series--two measures that areabout as independent as one can get of an economic phenomenon--and saythat the GDP indicates productivity declined in the first half of thisyear. Now, I don't know what is going on in the statistical system,but I'm almost certain that out in the real world in an economy thatis growing, the thought that we are having declining productivity justdoesn't square with my understanding of the real world.Historically we have had alternate measures of output--forexample, gross domestic income. Granted, the income side of thenational income accounts is a little more flaky measure--with theproprietor incomes categories and even some of the profitabilitynumbers--than the output side, which is the reason obviously that theoutput side is used. But if you look at it, you get something thatfrankly looks a lot more credible. You get a much lower rate ofincrease in gross real incomes in the second half of last year, ormore exactly in the growth of gross domestic income in constantdollars; that grew a lot more slowly than the GDP and it wasmoderately faster in the first half of this year. I haven't looked tosee what happened to the productivity numbers but my suspicion is theywere still going down a little. I'm inclined to believe that when welook back at this period with the better annualized data, which may bea year or two years from now, it's going to look better because wecan't have the unemployment rate declining, the initial claims fallingand, as Governor Mullins said, a tight labor market with average hoursof work moving up, and have declining productivity. It just doesn'tmake sense. Something is wrong with the data system, and I suspect--or I hope--that eventually that will get resolved. If you look at the-35-9/23/93industrial production index and its counterparts in other elements ofGDP, it does look as though it was extraordinary even before therevisions; but with the revision we're still getting some evidencethat the real part--the goods part--of the GDP may be running somewhatunder what we're picking up in the industrial production index. It'sa close issue and, frankly, I haven't had a chance to have somebodylook at it in the detail that I would look at it. But the numbersjust don't square. If that is in fact the case, we may be not allthat far from potential here. I'd say the economy is moving [up at arate] that has to be over 2 percent at this point, maybe 2-1/2percent. I realize that this may seem to be making the figure lookthe way I think policy ought to run, but since I don't sense thatanybody out there is talking in terms of any radical changes, I won'tpress this issue.The one thing I heard around this table, which I did findrather encouraging, was some semblance of a pickup in transactions incommercial real estate--not in prices. But the first stage of abottoming out of the commercial real estate operation has to be thatthe number of transactions has picked up, because we [previously] hada terrific decline in the bids for the properties. The offering ratescame down somewhat, but there was no meeting [of supply and demand]and nobody was doing anything. And it's only when the offering ratescome down to the bid prices that the thing changes. And it's abouttime because if you look back at when the whole thing began to change,we have experienced a very significant number of periods where leaseshave been renewed. In other words, we've actually had most of theleasing adjustment and the [market clearing] valuations are beginningto emerge and apparently the ice is cracking. If we have been dealingwith a significant balance sheet stringency problem in both thehousehold and especially in the business area where commercialproperty collateral has been a critical factor in the whole system ofrestraint and if this [restraint] is beginning to ease, it may be thatwe're seeing the first stage [of a turnaround] in commercial bankingitself; it may be starting to nudge back. And this little modestquickening of M2 may be something; then again it may not be. But Idon't think the outlook has deteriorated at all; I don't think it hasbeen great on the other side. I suspect that eventually we'll comeout of this, but I don't think it's going to be soon. We still have away to go. [It's clear] looking at the various relationships in thebalance sheets that those relationships are not anywhere near back towhere they were in 1987. And it should be fairly obvious, having gonethrough what we've gone through, that if anything the desiredequity/debt ratios have probably gone up, not down, since 1987. So,we probably are still working our way through that; but as we'vediscussed many times in the past, the economy can accelerate itsgrowth before the so-called head winds go to zero.As far as I can see, leaving aside the quality of thefigures, the process that we're going through seems to me exactly whatwe perceived it to be over the last year. As I recall, we got to a 3percent funds rate a year ago. I like to interpret that as: Wefinally got it right and decided to sit with it. In retrospect it maynot be the wrong interpretation that we happened to hit the rightlevel of policy. Despite the issues that Jerry Jordan is raisingabout a lot of things going on underneath, which is unquestionablytrue, we probably have not been badly fixed for the last year. Andunless the data that come out a year or two years from now suggest-36-9/23/93that the economy actually is growing far faster than we think and weshould have been tightening, my expectation is that we'll look back atthis period and say that for once we got it right for a longer periodof time than has ever been the case in the history of thisinstitution. In any event, listening to what I have heard around thetable I don't see any inclination, at least on the part of anyone whohas spoken up, to move off where we are, which at the moment is asymmetric and no change directive. And I personally don't see anyparticular reason why we should veer from that prior to the nextmeeting, which is in mid-November.MR. LINDSEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, when we used to be asked"Are interest rates going up or down?" we always dodged the questionby saying "Yes." We can't say that anymore; we have to say "Maybe."[Laughter] But I think your analysis is quite right.MR. KEEHN. "B" symmetric, I completely agree.MR. SYRON. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. "B" symmetric.MR. BROADDUS. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. "B" symmetric.MR. BOEHNE. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Far be it for me to break the pattern: "B"symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. I agree, "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry,9/23/93MR. PARRY. Agree.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Count me in!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I can go along with "B" symmetric. I wouldsimply note that if you're looking at real output, the recognition lagmay be longer than we would wish it to be. So I agree with you thatwe need to remain alert.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody else? If not, we'll put thatout for an official vote. Would you read--MR. BERNARD. This language is on page 13 of the Bluebook:"In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, theCommittee seeks to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reservepositions. In the context of the Committee's long-run objectives forprice stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving carefulconsideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments,slightly greater reserve restraint or slightly lesser reserverestraint might be acceptable in the intermeeting period. Thecontemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent withmodest growth in M2 and M3 over the balance of the year."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Call the roll].MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman McDonough YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Lindsey YesPresident McTeer YesGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Phillips YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We will adjourn, and our next meeting ison November 16, 1993.END OF MEETING-38-