Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeAugust 17, 1993A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Systemin Washington, D.C.. on Tuesday. August 17, 1993, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanMcDonough, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneKeehnKelleyLaWareLindseyMcTeerMullinsPhillipsSternMessrs. Broaddus, Jordan, Forrestal, and Parry,Alternate Members of the Federal Open MarketCommitteeMessrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents ofthe Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,St. Louis, and Boston, respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Kohn, Secretary and EconomistBernard. Deputy SecretaryCoyne, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPatrikis. Deputy General CounselPrell. EconomistMessrs. R. Davis, Promisel, Rosenblum, Scheld,Siegman, Simpson, and Slifman. AssociateEconomistsMs. Greene, Deputy Manager for ForeignOperationsMs. Lovett, Deputy Manager for DomesticOperationsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Researchand Statistics. Board of GovernorsMr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division ofMonetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMr. Stockton. Associate Director, Division ofResearch and Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Johnson, Assistant Director, Division ofInternational Finance, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant.Division of Monetary Affairs, Board ofGovernorsMessrs. Beebe. J. Davis. T. Davis, Dewald,Goodfriend, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior VicePresidents, Federal Reserve Banks of SanFrancisco, Cleveland, Kansas City, St. Louis,Richmond, and Atlanta, respectivelyMessrs. McNees, Meyer, and Miller, Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia,and Minneapolis, respectivelyMs. Meulendyke. Manager, Open Market Operations,Federal Reserve Bank of New York.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofAugust 17, 1993CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. The first item,which is not on the agenda, is to welcome our old/new colleague, thenew President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. I gather fromNorm Bernard--who is the world's greatest expert on all such issues--that Bill McDonough is not the first Manager to move up to thepresidency of the New York Bank; Allen Sproul who was Manager in 1938to 1941 did the same. But you can't be first in everything, Bill! Wewelcome you and are delighted to see you move up to this side of thetable where I can hear you better.MR. MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will continue totry to speak loudly and clearly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That would be novel! [Laughter] Thefirst item on the agenda is approval of the minutes. I would asksomebody to make such a motion.MR. KELLEY. I'll move it, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MR. MCDONOUGH. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. I'd like to call onGovernor Mullins to move the election of the Vice Chairman, who willhold office through the end of this year and until the next electionat the first meeting after December 31.MR. MULLINS. Mr. Chairman, I would nominate for the positionof Vice Chairman a person amply qualified to fulfill the recent Irishtradition, even if he speaks clearly, Bill McDonough.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other nominations? If not, we haveone individual [nominated] and I will ask for yeas and nays. All infavor say "aye."SEVERAL. Aye.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. I assume that there wassomebody out there with a "no" vote, but you didn't want to know aboutit! Anyway welcome, Bill.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm looking forward to your working withthe rest of us in this new position; the work is not all that muchdifferent from your previous activity, but it clearly has a verydifferent spin to it and we wish you well.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you. It's an honor and aprivilege. Having sat at the other end of the table for a year and a8/17/93half, I can appreciate the very real importance of what we do here.It also gave me the opportunity to think about whether any sane personwould wish to move from that end of the table to this end. And I cameto the conclusion one should. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That was not an answer to your question!For the first item of general business I'd like to call on GretchenGreene to report on the operations of the Foreign Currency Desk.MS. GREENE. Well, Mr. McDonough has set a very high standardfor me. He says he'll talk loudly and clearly. If I don't talkloudly and clearly, please let me know; I'll try to speak eitherslower or louder.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The first thing is to make sure yourmicrophone isn't covered up by anything!MS. GREENE. I will try. [Statement--Ms. Greene's statementcannot be found in the Committee's files.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't recall any evidence that theFrench or any of the others actually have covered their borrowedpositions in any [significant] amounts against the deutschemark sincethe debacle. Is that correct?MS. GREENE. It is correct that we do not have that evidence.What we don't know is whether they are succeeding in picking up somereserves and waiting to tell us of their operations when they are moresuccessful. But you are right; we do not have any clear evidence thatthey have been successful. And until today the French franc hadlooked a little heavy. So, the opportunities really were not obviousfor them to acquire marks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, with the approximately $70billion--even with, say, a 3 or 4 percent decline in exchange rates orultimately more--if they're going to have to cover at some point, thiswill be a very large hit on the budgets of those countries. I noticedthat there wasIs that true of the othercountries as well?MS. GREENE. The accounting on reserves varies [greatly] fromcountry to country, and the sharing of the loss in a case like this--where the French, for example, borrowed marks in an EMS arrangement--is also unclear to us. In other words, whether or not there's somekind of loss-sharing arrangement within the EMS that has been agreedto is something we are not fully confident we understand. But if itwere true that the country that is doing the borrowing has to cover atmarket rates, you are right, the consequences in terms of the profitsof the central banks on their foreign exchange transactions and howthat is reflected in a fiscal deficit could be a significant number.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions?MS. PHILLIPS. Do you have any sense as to where the demandfor the yen is coming from?-2-8/17/93MS. GREENE. Certainly one important element is that thecapital outflow, which had been a counterweight to Japan's currentaccount surplus, has been far smaller than is typically the case.Now, obviously, there's a capital [outflow] to balance the surplus inan accounting sense. But the [ex ante] demand to send funds abroad byJapanese investors has pretty much dried up. They did invest a fairamount and they were very active investors in the second quarter inthe European markets, taking advantage of the sharp drop in interestrates, particularly in countries of the EMS other than Germany. And,of course, they got burned by what has happened with the Europeanmonetary system. And we believe that one of the reasons why the yenadvanced so much more rapidly than the dollar in July was that theseinvestors were hedging their exposures in French francs and other[currencies]. We do not think they liquidated their investmentsbecause they thought that the breakup of the EMS would prompt a largercut in interest rates than has taken place and they wanted to be thereto get the capital gains. But apart from that burst of [what might becalled] an outward investment into Europe immediately after the Frenchelections, the outflow has been small by comparison to previous years.So that is probably the single biggest fact: The reluctance of theJapanese investment companies and insurance companies and investmenttrusts to make meaningful outward investment in other countries.MS. PHILLIPS. So they're demanding more yen?MS. GREENE. They are demanding fewer dollars.MS. PHILLIPS. So it's just sort of a relative thing.MS. GREENE. Yes. As this has built up, of course, we haveseen the Japanese companies responding differently, as I mentioned.Previously they had believed that the dollar would recover andtherefore they would be able to sell dollars at a higher rate, so theywere willing to hold their dollar exposures. As that belief hasfaded, people are saying: "I have to cut my losses; I just have toget out of these currencies regardless of what the exchange rate is."And that's when we observed the Japanese exporters constantly reducingthe dollar price at which they were willing to sell; in the pastcouple of weeks that has been an important additional factor.MR. FORRESTAL. Gretchen, do you think the French are reallyserious about this imposition of exchange controls or is it just apublic relations ploy to try to frighten the speculators? If theywere to do this, it would seem to me to be another blow toward--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible] just a few minutes agoindicated that that was not his plan. That's not an answer to yourquestion, I understand; but that's at least what he said in Tokyo.MS. GREENE. I think there is growing concern about the typeof market participants; these participants are difficult for theauthorities to have contact with. In the past the large players havebeen banks which the central banks know and understand; now we have aclass of market participants--call them hedge funds or investmenttrusts or whatever you want to call them--who exert enormous marketpower and for whom there is not the same kind of relationship with themonetary authorities. The authorities don't know who they are; theydon't know why they do these things. And, of course, these funds have8/17/93built up huge investment positions in all countries. And when theyget scared, the hedging of those portfolios--just because of the waythe hedging is done--is enough to have a very sudden and substantialimpact on the exchange rate, which comes at the most awkward time fromthe point of view of the central banks. So, I think there is agrowing level of frustration, and I guess the question is: Where doesthat frustration ultimately lead?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions? If not, let's moveto the Domestic Desk and Joan Lovett.MS. LOVETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I hope you can hear medown at that end also. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Ms. Lovett? I guess youcovered [everything]. Would somebody like to move to ratify theactions of the Desk since the last meeting?SPEAKER(?). So move.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?MR. KELLEY. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Let's now move on toour economic discussions with Messrs. Prell and Siegman.MR. PRELL. I always thought being audible got me into moretrouble! I thought the example set by Mr. Volcker and Mr. Corriganmight be the one I should follow, but I'll try to follow mycolleagues' example this morning. Having asked the Committee toendure a very long presentation last month I shall be quite brief thismorning. [Statement--see Appendix.]MR. SIEGMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for either gentleman?MR. SYRON. Mike, in looking at autos and at the pattern thatwe see before us, I was wondering if we had any feel on the leasingside on whether there is--and how much--an incentive factor that mightcome along like earlier incentives that we saw on prices.Specifically, I'm thinking about the leasing terms which seem to be insome ways similar to the direct price sales promotional devices we sawearlier. How much do they really shade the residuals very, veryclosely? Are they even going negative on the residuals as anincentive kind of thing? In terms of having some view of what isgoing to happen to sales going forward, I wonder whether this islikely to reverse at some point.MR. PRELL. Well, I think we had some discussion of this inthe Greenbook. Pinning down the amount of the leasing transactionswith consumers is a little difficult. There is some survey evidencethat we're aware of that suggests that perhaps a quarter of theconsumer car sales have leases. And that does seem to have been theway that the major manufacturers have gone as a substitute to somedegree for the kind of price shaving they previously had done--rebatesand other techniques. Clearly, they've been trying to firm up their8/17/93margins. One step was to diminish the flow of cars going through therental companies that come back as nearly new and are perceived asfairly close substitutes for the new cars. That was partly a responseto a general rise in retail demand, which meant they didn't have tosell the cars on concessionary terms [nor did] the rental carcompanies. If demand remains on the uptrend we think we're seeing,and with the Japanese car prices likely to be under even more pressurethan we might have anticipated in light of the further appreciation ofthe yen, there may be some further tightening up of that market, withsome firming of prices either through less aggressive residualvaluations on the leases or through other devices. But I don't thinkwe have that good an insight into what trick they're going to use.MR. SYRON. We have a feeling that this is the same sort oftiming that happened before. We think that these [kinds ofincentives] are going to be offered for a discrete number of weeks insome cases, never mind months, and that they will be removed at somepoint.MR. PRELL. Well, they seem to have maintained incentives.They've broadened them recently. We don't think they are as deep orquite so broad as we've seen at the end of some other model yearclearance periods because the stocks are pretty [low]. So, we mightenter the new year with less overhang of prior year models. The "endof year" has gotten a bit vaguer. We see new models coming out atdifferent times of the year; and in the case of Chrysler, one of thereasons they're pushing so hard now is that they're going to bebringing out new models at the end of this year, sort of a '94-1/2[model]. So, there's a lot going on here. Our sense is that there isa more moderate level of promotional activity going on than there was[at the same time] a year or two ago. And that trend will probablypersist for some period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Thank you. Mike, there was an appendix in PartII of the Greenbook on the Budget Reconciliation Act that I think wasvery informative and interesting. It would seem as though the one-for-one in terms of tax increases and spending cuts looks fairlylegitimate there. I also got the impression that perhaps it was notquite as backloaded in terms of expenditure cuts as originally hadbeen the case. Are there any defining issues in terms of spendingcuts that are making it less than the pure number? Are they of anysignificance, because I know that was a major criticism earlier in theprocess? And I wonder if you could just comment on how this has allchanged because I know the last Greenbook had a ratio of 8 to 1 for1994 in terms of tax increases versus expenditure cuts. And, ofcourse, Boskin had that article in the Wall Street Journal that had a9 to 1 ratio for the entire period. It seems as though there havebeen some very dramatic changes.MR. PRELL. Well, to be honest I can't give you a neataccounting on this. We didn't perceive that the outcome wasdrastically different from what we've been assuming previously. Themajor change was the smaller energy tax than we'd been anticipating.We thought they'd come out somewhere between the House and the Senate[bills] and [in fact] there wasn't any concession [to the lower Senateversion]. [Unintelligible] reduction number they moved them to full8/17/93retro-activity for 1993. Other changes were quite minor. And as wenoted last time, the baseline from which we were measuring that taxdeficit reduction last time isn't the same as the accounting that wasgoing on here. We perceived [the reduction] to be rather heavily onthe revenue side. A good bit of the indicated expenditure cut isattributable to the cumulative effects of the lower deficit oninterest costs. I suppose it's legitimate--it's an expenditure--butwhether it's a high powered expenditure or not is another matter. Butwe perceived that it's enough on the tax side and there's enough of acase to be made that the GDP aggregate demand effects of tax increasesmay be somewhat less than expenditure cuts to suggest that the dampingeffect on economic activity would be less than if they had gone as faras some had advocated on the expenditure side. But we still see it asa substantial fiscal contraction, depending on how one looks at this--liabilities or cash basis and so on. It's either a tremendousrestraint in 1994 or a substantial restraint in '93 and again in '94.So, we're looking at the consumption behavior and so on, and we wouldallocate some of that restraint to 1993.MR. PARRY. In some past times there have been fee increasesthat were counted as expenditure cuts; is there much of that?MR. PRELL. I don't think there is a lot of that in this.There is obviously still talk of doing some things in terms of grazingfees and mining and so on; those aren't big dollars. But, no, I don'tthink there is much of that in here.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions? If not, who wouldlike to start our tour de table?MR. KEEHN. Let me start off, Mr. Chairman. Other than theflood, which certainly has been a serious event for those who aredirectly involved, I would not have to comment on any significantchanges in the District economy since the last meeting. Broadly,things seem very much the same. The auto business continues to bestrong. As we get closer to the end of 1993, the industry is raisingits sales forecasts for the year. Third-quarter production schedulesare running about 20 percent over last year and the expectation isthat the fourth-quarter schedules will be higher than last year butthat the margin will be much smaller. I will say, though, that thereis something of a growing concern in Detroit that the auto businesshas run ahead of the national economy. And unless the employment anddisposable income gains catch up, the sales levels could be at somejeopardy. Order flows for heavy trucks have slowed a bit but theindustry doesn't, at least so far, view this as significant. They arecoming off a very strong period and I think the current softness maywell be a reflection of the summer doldrums.In the steel business, the outcome of the trade cases, whilecertainly disappointing from their perspective, is anticipated toreduce annual domestic shipments by about 2 million tons. Also, thisis going to have a limiting effect on price increases. They hadannounced an increase of 2-1/2 percent for October that is clearly notgoing to stick. And they now think that the next increase will not beearlier than next January. Despite this, though, the underlyingbusiness continues to be good and they are forecasting shipments thisyear at about 86 to 87 million tons. Contrary to the nationalnumbers, retail sales in the District in July were comparatively good.-6-8/17/93Some of the larger chains that had been having a difficult timeexperienced some pretty strong gains.In the ag sector it is still, of course, premature to judgethe full economic impact of the flood. But in a broader perspective,I don't think the effect will be nearly as large as one might guess bywatching the television coverage on it. Growing conditions in manyareas that are not directly affected have really been very good. Andwith higher crop prices, farm income this year is expected to bepretty good. But I will say that because the growing cycle is behindby several weeks this year--we got a late start you may remember andall the wetness has delayed the growing cycle--an early frost thisyear would be a much more significant problem than would normally bethe case. In the ag equipment business, the level of activitycontinues to be pretty high. Retail sales from one manufacturer thatI talked to are running some 20 percent ahead of last year and becausetheir inventories are reasonably low their production in the currentquarter is running some 25 percent over last year. One manufacturerof construction equipment notes that business is up because equipmentis being used in the cleanup after the flood.With regard to inflation, I continue to be impressed by howrestrained the price pressures seem to be. Many manufacturers say thecost of their outside purchases this year will increase by only 1percent or even a little less. One large manufacturer that I talked'to says that in fact they are going to have a reduction in theiroutside purchase prices and costs this year of about 1 percent.Virtually everybody we talk to--it's true for retailers andmanufacturers--says that marketplace pressures are very, very toughand that there just aren't any signs of widespread price increases.On a somewhat continuing somber note, I think the line on thisrestraint on hiring that we keep hearing about is getting harder andharder with the passage of time. [Firms] just will not take onadditional full-time employees, and they are continuing to rely onovertime and out-sourcing to deal with their increased productionrequirements. While out-sourcing does increase employment, at leastin an indirect sense, it's not the same kind of employment increasethat we've had in past cycles. And I must say this employmentrestraint has become something of an absolute mindset among a growingnumber of CEOs.Turning to the national economy, the outlook is almostsurprisingly unchanged, very much in line with the forecast that wedeveloped at the time of the last meeting of the FOMC. I think thatat this point the risks are about evenly balanced. But I must say itdoes seem like a pretty unexciting outlook. Thank you.MR. ANGELL. Si, the late start on planting: Is that prettyuniversal throughout your District all the way from Iowa to Michigan?MR. KEEHN. It's certainly true in Iowa, Wisconsin, andMichigan, not quite so much in Indiana. Indiana is going to have agood year, much better than they've had in the past.MR. ANGELL. And Indiana had ample moisture?MR. KEEHN. Yes. Production in Indiana looks good and theyare delighted with the high prices.8/17/93MR. ANGELL. And Illinois, I presume, is like [the others]?MR. KEEHN. Not as good as Indiana. It's between Iowa and[Laughter]--it should be obvious it's between Iowa and Indiana!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm delighted to hear Illinois hasn'tmoved! President Parry.MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Economic activity inmuch of the Twelfth District clearly remains weaker than that for thenation as a whole. District employment fell at a 2 percent annualrate in June, marking the fourth consecutive monthly decline. Thefall in employment was due largely to job losses in California andWashington. California has now completed three years of recession;between July 1990 and July 1993 the state lost 560,000 jobs, with180,000 of those jobs lost during the last year. However, the Julyemployment report was somewhat more encouraging. We did see anincrease in California of 34,000 as far as payroll employment isconcerned. But half of this increase was due to a rise in state andlocal government employment that is linked to unusual seasonalfactors. Civilian employment also increased during July. However,there was a very large surge in the labor force and it caused theunemployment rate to rise from 9.1 to 9.8 percent. Despite the Julyreport, already announced layoffs and reports from contacts suggestcontinued weakness in several sectors of the California economy. Webelieve that the state will bump along the bottom and remain a drag onDistrict growth for the foreseeable future.Conditions in the state of Washington are also of concern,particularly in the Puget Sound area. Recent employment reports forthe state have been disappointing; for June employment in the stateactually fell at an annualized rate of 5.7 percent. Significantlosses were seen in manufacturing, construction, and trade. Inaerospace, employment has fallen 7.4 percent over the past year,largely as a result of cutbacks by Boeing. In addition, recentreports suggest that Boeing may cut its production more than calledfor by currently published plans.Conditions in the rest of the District are mixed, with robustconditions in the inter-mountain states and flat or sluggishconditions elsewhere. A depressed visitor industry has stalled theHawaiian economy. In contrast, the Nevada boom continues. Threemajor hotel projects will add 10,000 rooms in Las Vegas this comingwinter to the existing stock of 76,000 rooms. Construction jobs inNevada are up 20 percent over the past year.Turning to the national economy, although one could certainlyquibble with specific numbers in the Greenbook forecast, I think thebasic message of moderate growth is certainly the most likely outcomeover the next year and a half. I'd have to admit, though, that I'm abit more optimistic about inflation than is the Greenbook. We havehad three consecutive months of very low inflation, which isconsistent with the view that a good part of the inflation scare thatwe had earlier this year was an aberration. And given the currentslack in labor markets and also the prospects for continued moderateeconomic growth, it seems to me that inflation could come in a bitlower than is shown in the Greenbook. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.8/17/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, I think my report will be a littlehappier than Bob Parry's, Mr. Chairman.MR. PARRY. That shouldn't be hard!MR. FORRESTAL. Except for Nevada! Having said that, though,growth in the Sixth District is continuing to decelerate. Ourexpansion is still leading the nation but we anticipate that themargin will narrow, with the possible exception of Georgia. We'reestimating that at the end of July the unemployment rate for theDistrict was just under 6 percent; but at the same time our survey ofmanufacturing plants in the District suggests that little or no growthin employment is likely to occur over the next six months. In fact,the survey actually shows a decline, but we think there are someseasonal factors in there. But the clear message is thatmanufacturers just are not looking to add employees at all. Thesurvey also suggests that production was weak in July even aftertaking account of what likely were seasonal declines in activity.The areas of strength that we're continuing to see in theSixth District have been in retail sales, particularly in durables,and in new orders for exports, although exports are not a major partof our District output mix. The strength in durables comes basicallyfrom good activity in single-family housing. While the pace of salesflattened in some areas in July, it was well ahead of healthy year-agolevels. The inventories of unsold new homes have been shrinking sonew building has been quite brisk. The inventory situation has causedresales to do better and contract prices have started to rise inseveral places around the District. The multifamily sector is stillstalled, but there has been some improvement in absorption.Just to tick off a couple of particular areas of activity inthe District, the Atlanta metro area is now beginning to see the firsteffects of the upcoming Olympics. The contracts for a couple ofvenues have now been let and some of the construction will begin soon.Also, office space absorption in the first half of this year was twiceas high as [observers] had expected. Facilities and infra-structurebuilding are continuing to add to employment.On the negative side, base closings in Florida, which is ourmost populous state, continue to exert a negative pull on that state'seconomy. The pressures on state budgets are moderating, but this islargely due to special factors, particularly gambling [activity].Gambling is adding significantly to the coffers in Mississippi. Andas you may have read, Georgia has just started a lottery and thelottery ticket sales have been running well ahead of expectations.I'm not sure that's the most desirable kind of economic activity tohave, but there it is. Higher natural gas prices have increased therig count in Louisiana and they're helping that state considerably.Unlike the Midwest we've been experiencing drought; and in many areasin the Southeast that's hurting agriculture, although again that's arelatively small factor in our output mix.So, on balance, conditions are reasonably good as they havebeen for some time. Concerns that I hear basically relate more to thenational and international areas than to the District. Some of the8/17/93uncertainty surrounding the budget process has been removed with thepassage of the legislation. But there still is a good deal of concernabout the health [care] program and the costs that may be coming alongin conjunction with that. There's also, interestingly, a great dealof concern about the NAFTA legislation--there's a good deal of supportfor NAFTA in the District--and that there may be some difficulty withpassage in the Congress.Looking at the national picture, our outlook for 1993 is thesame as the Greenbook's. But we do see stronger real GDP andemployment growth in 1994. We're estimating that business will startto add labor in the months ahead as some of these public policyuncertainties unwind and current staffing levels become too tight. Ithink that's got to be a gambling type of forecast because wecertainly don't hear very much about employment gains. But the viewof our staff is that there's going to come a point when business willsimply not be able to continue with present levels of temporaryemployees and overtime. We have pretty much the same outlook forinflation on average, though upward pressures begin to emerge near theend of the forecast horizon. It seems clear to me that many of thefundamentals are in place for a continuation of the expansion. Andthat will take up some of the slack in the economy and perhaps movethe expansion above potential at least for a while.I think, though, that there are uncertainties surrounding theoutlook. On the positive side, I certainly feel a little morecomfortable about the European situation. I think their recovery willoccur a little sooner than we had expected. Also, the recent declinesin long-term interest rates will certainly be beneficial. On thenegative side, we have the continuing uncertainties surroundingconsumer and business attitudes growing out of the health care programand perhaps continuing contentious debate about the budget. But themajor concern that I hear relating to uncertainty is that federalspending may not be cut as much as had been hoped and that theinitiatives will end up being funded by indirect taxes on businesspayrolls. It's difficult to assess the net impact of all thesefactors, but I am a little concerned--or maybe more than a littleconcerned--that the forecast for real GDP this year has fallen byalmost a full percentage point since our March meeting. And the Boardstaff estimate for 1994 has now been reduced by an additional 1/2percentage point since then. So, in conclusion, I'm concerned thatthe risks to the forecast are that growth will remain sluggish forlonger than we anticipate and that unemployment will continue to be atunacceptably high levels. Thank you.MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, might I just add something? Anearlier comment--the comment about the medical expenses--raises aninteresting point. One of the major savings on the mandatory spendingside is the cuts in Medicare and Medicaid costs. Economically onewould anticipate a lot of cost shifting here, which might call intoquestion exactly how one wants to view the quality of this expenditurereduction. There are also some user fees, things like the FCC auctionexpectations and so on; but I think that medical cost issue is a verybig one, looking back.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.-10-8/17/93MR. BOEHNE. The District economy continues to muddle along.I could almost ditto my comments of a month or so ago. The pattern isessentially the same: sluggish manufacturing, soft retail sales, someimprovement in residential construction, nonresidential in a deephole, and slow employment growth. This attitude of not adding workersif we don't have to is very strong. Wage increases are probably inthe 4 to 4-1/2 percent range; that is what one hears from mostcompanies in the area.On the national level, I think the moderate growth theme isthe right one; 2-1/2 percent is the number if one wants to pinpointit. It's hard to see major risks that would cause a significantbreak-out on the up side. Likewise, it's hard to see a break-out onthe down side that would cause a cumulative downturn. Nonetheless, wehave had this pattern, as Bob Forrestal just pointed out, of startingout the year more optimistically and then scaling down our growthforecasts. I think there is a business attitude that if you have agood quarter, you take it but you don't think it's going to continueat that pace; and if you have a bad quarter, you say well, maybe weought to scale down the forecast. While we're not talking about majorrisks on either side, I suspect that if we're wrong we may havesomewhat more sluggish economic growth. On inflation I think thenumbers that we are seeing now do understate the underlying rate ofinflation just as the numbers earlier in the year overstated it. Mysense is that we're not likely to see an acceleration of inflationfrom the underlying fundamentals just as I doubt that we'll see muchof a deceleration. I think we just are kind of stuck where we arewith inflation. So, it's pretty much a no change, unexciting, and notparticularly satisfying outlook.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Regarding ourDistrict, there really hasn't been much change in our region either,like many other regions in the reports so far. Growth seems to becontinuing at a relatively moderate pace overall. We are experiencingthe same strengthening in housing activity that, at least from theBeigebook reports, I take it may be occurring in some other parts ofthe country, although I guess it doesn't conform very well with thefigure you reported earlier, Mike. Also, tourist activity in ourregion has been very, very strong especially along the coast in recentweeks. Despite this auto episode, Mr. Chairman, the mood of most ofour business contacts is less optimistic now than it was even asrecently as the July meeting. I think people are worried about thetax increase that now definitely will be coming. If anything, theymay even be more worried about what the health care reform package,when we get it, will do to them. And I think these concerns areclearly having a negative impact on economic activity, especially onemployment in our region; that has been happening for some time. Butit strikes me that, if anything, that negative may have intensifiedmost recently.As far as the national economy is concerned, I wouldn't arguewith the Greenbook's real GDP projections at this point. Initiallywhen I saw the 2.3 percent annual rate of growth in real GDP thatyou're projecting for the second half of the year, Mike, it struck meas a little on the low side in light of the strong final demand in thesecond quarter, the evidence of at least some strength in housing, and8/17/93the nice sharp decline in long-term interest rates. But the negativeattitudes that the budget package has fostered, as I said a minuteago, are very real; and I don't think there's any doubt that it couldput a significant drag on the economy in the months ahead. So, 2.3percent growth strikes me as reasonable at this point. If I had toguess, I would say the risks may be just slightly on the up side butnot very much.Now, having said all of this about real economic activity,let me just say that I think the most important development since ourlast meeting has been on the inflation and interest rate fronts. Itmay well be that the recent price data are overstating the progresswe're making, but I'm at least somewhat encouraged by what I've seen.Core CPI has risen at an annual rate of about 2-1/2 percent over thelast five months, which is a pretty good hunk of time. And with theJuly figure, the annualized rate of increase in the core CPI so far in1993 for the first time has dropped a little below the 1992 rate.Again, it may overstate the progress we're making but, as I think BobParry suggested, it strikes me that while we can't be sure yet we mayfinally be making some progress toward bringing the longer-term trendinflation rate down.The other positive, and I think clearly related, developmentis the nice decline we've had recently in long-term interest rates.As I recall the projections that were made back at the beginning ofthe year, the consensus forecast for the 30-year bond rate was about7-1/2 percent; and I don't believe anybody was looking for anything aslow as 6-1/2 percent, where we are now. Clearly, the budget packagehas played a role in this either because of its prospective deficitreduction or maybe because people think it's going to knock the heckout of the economy. But whatever contribution the fiscal side hasmade in bringing long-term rates down, I think there's a good chancethat our recent monetary policy actions and statements have alsoplayed at least an equal role, or perhaps even a greater role. Thenews of a tilt toward tightness at the May meeting, and the overalltone or emphasis of your comments at the Humphrey-Hawkins meeting, Mr.Chairman, I think have sent strong signals to the markets and to thepublic that, whatever may have happened in the past, this time aroundwe are quite serious about keeping inflation under control as therecovery proceeds. So, in short, I think we've bought some additionalcredibility recently, and I think that has contributed significantlyto the rally in the bond market. I would hope that with policy wewon't do anything to reverse that progress because it strikes me thatthe improved financial conditions are probably the main thing theeconomy has going for it right now. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, similar to manyother places, I'd say that the region's economy continues to muddlealong; it's not accelerating but it's not slowing either. The onlything that is really strong--and this is a comment some other peoplehave made--is the lottery industry and the gambling industry. Infact, you have to be an Indian tribe to have an operating permit.This has started a new cottage industry among bankruptcy lawyers who,fortunately, now are finding lots of work in trying to determine howmany people are required to declare a separate tribe so you can get a-12-8/17/93franchise to build a casino--I'm not kidding--because it really is anextraordinary license.Our pattern is very similar to the country as a whole in thesense that the retail sector is mixed. It's not collapsing;inventories seem pretty good and there's very little price pressure.We talk to retailers and they're poised to try to increase margins butthen complain that they can't. They say they have to increase marginsat some point, but they haven't been able to do so. The manufacturingsector depends very much on the product line. I had a little concernfrom a regional perspective regarding the sectors that have beenstrong for us because we have a fair number of companies that supplythe auto industry. They've done quite well, but obviously the outlookfor auto sales influences that. Also, our computer companies, whilenot doing as well as those in some other parts of the country, arestarting to see improvement. With regard to this funny situationbetween measuring output and [unintelligible] inputs, I was justlooking at the data that we produce for regional production measures.And we see the computer [measure] is coming up; their employment isgoing down sharply and their revenues do not look terribly good, butthere are more and more "mips" being produced out there. At somepoint one starts to wonder about how homogenous mips are, whether theyare a good deflator for this whole [industry], and how much moreoutput there is in fact. I just wonder how much of the dramaticincrease we saw in producers' durable equipment, in computersparticularly, is very heavily influenced by this measurement questionon what is being produced. People in high-tech industries--instruments, medical equipment and the like--are expressing continuedconcerns about foreign sales, including some new signs of softness inthe U.K., which a couple of companies talked about. Housing, as otherpeople have commented, has improved; actually, it has improved a fairbit in New England. We see at least some firming of prices even inthe second home industry.In the financial sector, banks are starting to see someslight improvement--an upward trend in business lending and someimprovement on the consumer side. The mutual fund industry continuesto see very, very strong inflows and there is continued nervousnessabout where they're going to put the money. Harkening back to acomment Gretchen made about hedges in the foreign exchange market, inthe institutional funds a lot of people are talking about having foundinefficiencies in spreads in the overseas markets compared to the U.S.market--for example, looking at dollar-denominated versus pound-denominated GMAC paper--and are going heavily into those investments.They are doing the same thing in some of the other markets and thenhedging heavily. Now, of course, we'll see how effective these hedgesare, but people are talking about just enormous flows in that area.Consistent with what other people also have said, we've had a very,very good year for tourism, the best probably in four or five years.Some of this is weather-related. An explanation is that touristsprefer to drive when there is uncertainty.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You even got the President of the UnitedStates in your District!MR. SYRON. That's right. He has not been welcomed with openarms by many of the people in Martha's Vineyard, but it's a uniqueplace! But the way that most people are looking at it is that at-13-8/17/93least it's an island, so they spin off from the rest of the region.The interesting thing is that President Bush's area of Kennebunkport,Maine draws more heavily now than when he was President in terms of aPresident-related tourism aspect. People--this is very, very micro--are less frightened about going there because they think it won't beas big a hassle. That area is actually busier now, selling T-shirtsand all that stuff, than before.As far as the U.S. economy goes, I think the Greenbook has itpretty much right. I would think that the risks are pretty balancedthe way the Greenbook has it. I'm not sure that I'd put exactly thesame weight on the consequences if we are right on one side or theother. But in terms of the likelihood of what is going to happen, Ithink it's about right. In terms of going forward now, no matterwhich side, an awful lot comes down to this question of what happensto employment and to incomes. That's because there is a question ofhow much longer we can continue seeing good consumption without thegrowth rate in incomes. This is the sort of tension that goes along,and history will see how it resolves itself.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the Tenth Districtthe economy, as I say every time, continues to grow modestly. Retailsales seem to be holding up. Construction activity has so far beenstrong; this strength is primarily focused, though, on the residentialarea. Oil and gas drilling has picked up in the past and that'sprimarily due to the gas portion of that industry. Coal output inWyoming has slowed, though, primarily because of the transportationproblems in getting that coal to the Midwest and South. There hasbeen some interruption there but it should be very temporary sinceinventories are down. Manufacturing activity remains quite sluggish.We've seen some continuing drop-off in jobs in that sector just aswe've seen nationally. The effect of the flooding is likely to reducecrop output in our area in Nebraska, Missouri, and a little in Kansasparticularly in corn and soybeans; but there's not much effect on thewheat crop as we see it right now. On the whole, prospects inagriculture should remain healthy despite this reduction in cropsbecause of price effects. Construction activity should remain good,focused on housing. We have one matter [of concern] in the Denverarea. That airport has about 13,000 infrastructure jobs; the work isto be finished [soon] and they have to out-place that. And of coursethe vacancy rate in Denver, while improved, is still rathersubstantial, so I think they'll have a bit of a transition issue inthat area. We also think that our natural gas drilling activityshould remain fairly good. But as far as manufacturing goes, we seeno real signs of strength except perhaps with the auto plants thatshould be at full capacity. Generally, manufacturing is very weak inour area.At the national level, as I've heard many others say here, weare revising our estimates down; we are a little more optimistic thanthe Greenbook but not enough to matter. And we see inflation incheck, but we are not of the mind that it's improving verysignificantly; we're still looking at around the 3 percent range.Slack in the economy, though, should keep inflation at least notworsening. And the outlook for growth in 1994 continues to look verymodest to us. In one sense the uncertainty has changed from what the-14-8/17/93fiscal package will be to what the effects of the fiscal package willbe and then we add on health care [uncertainty] to that. So we see avery uncertain future and pretty modest growth going on into 1994.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As far as the regionaleconomy is concerned, it remains reasonably healthy, which is thereport I have been providing for quite some time now. In general,construction is quite strong; retail sales are pretty good;manufacturing is mixed; tourism, at least in the western part of theDistrict, has been strong. We did run a special survey of about 100bankers in the areas of the District affected by the floods. I guessit's reassuring to report that they didn't have anything verystartling to say in the sense that while crop losses in some cases aresubstantial, they are not expecting major spillover effects oneconomic activity.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Spillover!MR. STERN. Yes, spillover. I'm glad you picked up on that;I was waiting for somebody to do that. They were not expecting majorspillover effects in many other areas of economic activity. And, ofcourse, we may get a little subsequent stimulus down the road fromrebuilding and so forth.With regard to the national economy, we have been debatingwhether this sort of "slow motion" recovery was going to accelerateand turn into more rapid growth; that debate is continuing at leastinternally. But for the moment I have concluded, as I have in thepast, that the Greenbook has it about right. That is, I don't see theseeds of an acceleration in place. So I think this very modestexpansion at the national level is likely to continue and, therefore,I find myself in agreement with what I guess is the consensus. As faras inflation is concerned, maybe in part because of the publicitysurrounding the asymmetric directive and your testimony or whatever, alot of people have gone out of their way recently to tell me that theyaren't seeing any inflationary pressures in their businesses at all.And some people have gone beyond that to report that they've tried toraise prices and haven't been able to make those increases stick.That suggests to me that people are still learning. They are willingto go out there and send letters to their customers that as of acertain date prices on certain lines are going up, and I guess whatthey tend to hear in response is that their customers will not acceptthese price increases and that they don't care what the underlyingrationale may be. So, I conclude that people are still learning aboutthe state of the markets and their inability to make price increaseslast, and that probably [augurs] well for the longer run.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Last month I said that the Eleventh Districteconomy had weakened a little relative to the national economy, butthat appears to have been temporary. Recent statistics in theDistrict appear to be somewhat stronger, particularly employmentgrowth, and the anecdotal information is somewhat more positive. Weseem to be benefiting in some cases from weaknesses elsewhere in thecountry. For example, the Austin area seems to be gaining a good bit-15-8/17/93of employment from firms either expanding out of or moving out ofCalifornia. We hear a lot about mortgage refinancing; just abouteverybody in Texas who didn't buy a house in the mid '80s and istherefore still under water seems to be refinancing their mortgages,including myself. I was doing that several weeks ago but I had todrop out of the market following your Humphrey-Hawkins testimony; itbrought my rate up a little bit.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sorry about that!MR. MCTEER. So if you'll hold off until next Monday I'll begrateful! [Laughter] Since I haven't taken much time, I thought youmight like to hear about a couple of comments from our Beigebookrespondents. California seems to be on the mind of a number of them.One told our research people that a company wanting to plant a tree inLos Angeles County has to get permission from 8 different agencies; tochop it down requires 47 permits. And in Dallas County you can doeither one of those things without a permit. A local banker told oneof our people that a client of his in north Los Angeles was sofrustrated with water quality standards at his plant that he submittedplain tap water to be tested, and the water quality agency judged thatthe water was not fit to be dumped into the sewer system. Finally, wewould appreciate your support of NAFTA--all of you; it's going to beclose.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. As far as the District goes, we generally havebeen outperforming the nation during this expansion although in thelatest three-month period employment growth has been a little worsethan sluggish; we've had slight declines. I don't think there's muchflood effect in that, however. What I might do is just make a fewcomments on the flood; St. Louis has really been the center of that.And as Si said, for those who are directly affected it's verydevastating. But what is striking is the small percentage of thepopulation that is actually affected; it's about 1 to 2 percent. Inthe Bank we have 800 employees and 6 or 8 families that are affectedin some way, and I'd say that's quite representative. I think theassessment that the broad economic impact is going to be relativelynarrow is on target. Clearly, there have been some crop losses andsome disruption of jobs, but really very little. One of the mainongoing effects is going to be the impact on transportation. We'vehad roads washed out and it will be a long time before the bargetraffic can move on the river. Basically what I hear from ourdirectors and others is that [transportation problems] are adding tocosts somewhat and it's a bit of a nuisance, but goods are basicallygetting moved. I think that will be with us for a while.Like Gary Stern, we did a survey of banks. We basicallypicked the counties on either side of the river--the Mississippi,Missouri, and Illinois rivers--and talked to about 200 banks. Theyconstitute about 10 percent of District banking assets; and 80 percentof those banks are less than $100 million, so they are principallysmall banking operations. What struck me through the whole thing--andGary touched on this--was how little disruption to operationsoccurred. We picked this up on the survey although it would not havebeen obvious from our own activities. Thirty-one banks had somedisruption in operations--either carriers having difficulty getting in-16-8/17/93or out or actually having to make other arrangements, such as havingtheir deliveries made to other processing centers or otherwise movingtheir processing. And 19 facilities, either head offices or branches,were evacuated because of flooding. We hear concerns about liquidity--no pun intended--but there has been only one discount window loan,an adjustment credit loan, that was at all associated with flood-related problems that I'm aware of up to this point in time. The biguncertainty looking down the road really is on credit quality. But,again, I don't think that's going to be a significant factor even froma District perspective. I would say most of the banks are looking forless than a 10 percent impact in terms of their loan portfolios. Andof the 200 we talked to there are roughly 25 that think the impactwill be greater than 10 percent. There will be a few banks--and thesewould be basically ag banks in small towns where both the agriculturalloans and the business loans in the community would be affected--thatcould have problems. But they are relatively small. In fact, all ofthose 25 banking organizations have $50 million in total assets orless. We will stay in touch with this. In a sense, while the crisishas passed, I think we're dealing with the worst part of it right nowin terms of the cleanup and rebuilding. And that will take some time.On the national front, just a couple of comments: Similar towhat Al said, I've been very pleased with how expectations withrespect to policy have shifted without really trashing the markets.It wasn't too long ago when the expectation was that we were on a one-way street for lower rates [and we've moved] to a period now, I guess,where expectations are fairly balanced. But the Chairman made itpretty clear in his testimony that there is the possibility that theywill be moving up, and that has been very well received, I would say.Done differently, one could imagine a good deal of short-term turmoilin the markets, which we really haven't had with that shift inexpectations. Who knows how to sort it out, but there may be somebeneficial impact, as Al observed, in the longer end of the market.The other thing that is extraordinary, particularly given theperception the last time around, is that the pressures on monetarypolicy emanating from a deficit reduction package have really beenmuted and well contained. And I think that's quite an accomplishmentfrom the politicians and the press.One of the things I have a little concern about is the factthat to some extent we are a bit at sea internally in terms of what weought to be looking at. We've had problems with M2; we went throughthe Feinman/Porter [study]; we talked about an M2+; the Chairmanmentioned real interest rates. And I think one of the things that weneed to be careful not to do is to convey a lot of confusion in thecentral bank about what we ought to be doing. This is, and always hasbeen, basically a judgmental matter; and I think the judgments havebeen very good during this period. To the extent that we roll out toomany different possibilities in rapid succession, in terms of what weought to be looking at, it's possible we could convey a sense ofconfusion about what we ought to be doing when in fact I think there'sa lot of credibility associated with the Fed's actions. Inparticular--and I suspect to some extent, Alan, what you said wasmisinterpreted in this regard--the real interest rate [issue] caught alot of attention. There was a sense that people would question if wecan't really control it in the long run and all we can really observeis a proxy and we can't really observe real interest rates and we-17-8/17/93don't know what at any point in time the right natural rate is, it'svery hard to view that as a target. I don't think that is what youwere suggesting. I think you were suggesting that there isinformation there and that we ought to use it, and I agree with that.But as we go through this period of thinking about what we ought to belooking at, we ought not get too far from the basics. We ought tofocus on the tools of policy and what it is we affect--reserves, thebase, and all the aggregates related to that. I won't say any moreabout it today, but I'm struck by that chart in the weekly Boardbriefings that relates the opportunity costs of M1 to its velocity andhow that has tracked--how certain periods stand out, at least to theeye, where there have been inflection points in policy. There may bemore information in M1 than we're willing to give it credit for.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. Reports from businesses, large and small, andfrom banks in the Cleveland District continue to be good--better thanthey previously expected--[but they are] associated with a pessimisticoutlook. There is this continuing tendency to feel that whatever goodsales volumes, good backlogs, or earnings are being experienced arenot going to be sustained. Maybe it's that people are unaccustomed inthe Fourth District to performing what they perceive as better thanother places in the country. Certainly what they read about otherparts of the country is more negative than what they're feeling in ourDistrict. Agriculture is good; both corn and bean crops are good;what's important is better prices and good farm incomes for the thirdyear in a row. So the banks in the ag regions are feeling that farmcredit is in very good shape. Land prices are firm to rising;agricultural equipment sales are very strong both within the Districtand nationally; Si Keehn commented about that. The auto supplycompanies are doing quite well, though they are nervous about theoutlook. They've had a much better year than they thought they weregoing to have but continue to worry about the future. Our smallcommunities are quite strong. A lot of the smaller cities around theDistrict would describe their conditions as bordering on a temporaryboom for them; there's construction of single-family housing, shoppingcenters, and some government buildings. But also there is a beliefthat this is temporary [and they should] enjoy it while it lastsbecause [business conditions] are going to weaken in the future.I formed a new Small Bank Advisory Council that had its firstmeeting last Friday. After they had a very extensive briefing oneconomic developments, including a variety of measures of inflation,various measures of money, narrow and broad, nominal and real interestrates, credit flows and so on, I asked them to characterize monetarypolicy as they currently see it in view of the fiscal package andlocal conditions and what they're seeing in their banks. [Views] wereabout evenly split between those who said that they consider policyabout right or too easy. Not a single banker was willing tocharacterize it as too tight. They consistently think inflation hasalready hit its low and is going to move up. We do feel we've hadsome success with both small banks and small businesses around theDistrict in talking them into lowering their expectations about howmuch inflation is going to rise, especially as that feeds into theirplans with regard to labor--their own salary budgets and theirprojections of what kind of increases they will be granting into 1994.-18-8/17/93But they still [see inflation] in an upward direction from where ithas been.As far as the national outlook, I don't know whether theGreenbook forecast for inflation is a good forecast or not, but I dothink it's unacceptable.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I've either been an academic allmy life or else a government employee, so I've never had theopportunity to pay the kind of taxes that some people are going topay. But--I have an example that's going around the table--I get mykicks either by buying lottery tickets when the pot gets really,really big or else figuring taxes for people who are very wellendowed. What I'd like to do is to talk through briefly what thefirst quarter is going to look like for a self-employed businessperson who makes $1 million. There are roughly 50,000 of theseindividuals in the country. If we reduce that to a half milliondollars, we are talking about perhaps another 180,000 people, all ofwhom are in roughly this type of situation. The earnings for thefirst quarter for one making $1 million a year are $250,000. What isgoing to be due next April 15th are their first-quarter estimatedtaxes, which under the new bill will be $92,000, and only one-third ofthe retroactive tax increase. The latter is a bit less than $25,000;the total retroactive tax increase is on the order of $74,000. Andfirst-quarter FICA is about $14,000. So, the total due on April 15thunder the new tax bill will be $131,000 out of the $250,000 they willhave earned in the first quarter. Now the thing I would point out--MR. MULLINS. What about Medicare?MR. LINDSEY. That's a part of the FICA.MR. MULLINS. I wanted to make sure you had included that.MR. LINDSEY. In the process of the tax bill, they got thisinterest-free loan provision in it so that on April 15, 1994 theywould only owe one-third of their tax increase. Had that not been thecase, these individuals would have owed roughly another $50,000 onApril 15th or another 20 percent of their first-quarter's income,meaning that they would have been working three-fourths of the firstquarter of the year to pay their April 15th federal tax bill. Thereare no state income taxes in these calculations. Maybe the richreally are different, but anyone who has any kind of cash flowconstraints at all and has to send 75 percent of his income to UncleSam I think would probably have been in an interesting situation April15th. I think a lot of the pressure has backed off because of thatone-third provision; it's a tiny little provision in the tax law, butit probably is going to help the economy quite a bit in the first andsecond quarters next year.I did another calculation. Most people who go toaccountants, of course, want to keep money in their own checkingaccounts and not give Uncle Sam an interest-free loan. You just haveto pay 90 percent of your tax on an estimated basis. If that's trueand you are rigorous about it, you will owe on April 15th $151,000instead of $131,000 and that's 60 percent of your first-quarter-19-8/17/93earnings. I think these are somewhat interesting numbers; I don'tknow how they're going to affect the small business sector. There isa lot of debate about it. Again, there's no behavior here or anythingelse; it's simply a cash flow issue.My own personal anecdotal survey is that most people who areaffected by the tax bill have underestimated how much they're going topay. This millionaire, for example, will see federal taxes go up by33 percent next year. Most people I've talked to figure their taxesare going to go up by 10 to 15 percent. I think a surprise of thatmagnitude next April 15th is something that may affect the economy.Other than that, Mr. Chairman, I think the Greenbook has itabout right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that taxinstruction from Governor Lindsey, since I guess the date just passedfor extensions!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I have a blind trust and I'm delighted!MR. MULLINS. The thing I've noticed on the tax return isthat box at the top where it says if you check this box $1 will go tothe presidential election campaign fund and it will not increase yourtaxes. I'd like them to take the rest of my taxes from wherever theyget that! And the other provision I think we should have is thatevery Congressman should be required to fill out his or her own returnto get the flavor for it.I think the economy has been pretty well discussed, no punintended. The '93 GDP has been revised down because the first halfwas weak. We had a weak second quarter, a weak first half. Withgrowth in the first half at a rate of only a little over 1 percent,it's difficult to be too enthusiastic about this kind of performance.It looks a little better, maybe, if we average the fourth quarter withthe first quarter and think of that as one. And it might look evenbetter, although not so much on the Greenbook forecast, if we take thesecond quarter and the third quarter together, but I will withholdjudgment on that. Certainly, when we look at the second quarter moreclosely, it is a more positive picture. Spending did hold up quitewell. Despite all the talk about consumer pessimism, consumerspending advanced at almost a 4 percent annual pace; the personalsaving rate dropped again. And we continue to hear the talk aboutbusiness pessimism concerning spending and hiring. Business fixedinvestment advanced at a 13 percent annual rate in the second quarteramid this pessimism. And payroll employment, which I continue to hearis very weak, is running at a 2 million job pace for the year, doublethe number of jobs added last year, which in my view has to providesome measure of downside protection. Even if the jobs aren't great,the unemployment rate is almost a percentage point lower than it waslast year at this time. It's 6.8 percent or 6.85 percent; and ex-California it's 6.4 percent but I guess that's unfair. The recentevidence on housing is a bit mixed, but on balance it suggests someacceleration in the housing expansion. The Mortgage BankersAssociation survey of purchase mortgage applications is very positiveas are homebuilders' assessments of current sales. Even though starts-20-8/17/93were down a bit this morning, permits were up a bit; and it seems tome that for the first half of the year starts were up about 10 percentover last year.So, I think the hard evidence is still consistent withmoderate growth, and we've had six quarters [averaging] 2-1/2 percent.Nonetheless, there are perhaps a few clouds on the horizon or at leasthints of haze that have appeared on the scene. The first is this autostory. We have had a little easing in the auto sales. And I thinkthis is the first sign in hard spending data of perhaps somethinggoing on. Now, there is a special story--the inventory shortage.It's also true, as I think the staff has pointed out, that non-autosales seem to have picked up if we look at the control category. Imust admit that this is an extreme form of product substitution: Ifyou can't find the car you're looking for, you buy a sofa.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As long as it's a convertible couch![Laughter]MR. MULLINS. I don't have to answer that! Still, I thinkthe auto easing may be the first sign of something going on. Theother warning sign continues--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is a question about theseasonalities in all these. If you look at patterns, it's clear.MR. MULLINS. Yes. We've now had four or five consecutivereporting periods where auto sales have backed down a bit. I thinkthere's enough noise going on and enough parts of the country underwater and the like to take that too seriously. But before auto saleswere a positive [factor]. People were buying cars and it wassomething that refuted concern. And this, it seems to me, is the onething that has backed off a bit.The other thing is that both consumer and business confidencecontinue to recede on surveys. What is new in the Michigan survey isthat the decline is concentrated in consumers' assessments of currentconditions, not vague fears about expected conditions which hadpropelled the earlier declines. Now, the current conditions index isstill about 10 points above October of last year, but it had held uppretty firmly until very recently. When I total it up I still seeself-sustaining momentum of moderate growth. And if the last sixquarters were 2-1/2 percent, it seems to me it ought to average a bitstronger than that.The fall in long rates should reinforce this momentum andshould cushion, if not entirely offset, the fiscal drag. Anotherthing we haven't talked much about is that the deleveraging head windscontinue to diminish even to the extent that some have started tonote--and we picked this up in a number of different settings--signsof the beginning of speculative excess in stock prices, especially theweak stocks. [We've seen] very low IPO volumes, the lowest in 15years, low quality spreads on bonds, and very low spreads on junkbonds. And all of this has occurred without the realistic prospect ofrobust growth, which usually accompanies these sorts of developments.Some people also suggest, and it may be less likely in my view, thatfinancial institutions' attitudes toward lending may have been easingup a bit. We can see things like land prices starting to get a little-21-8/17/93better. We talked about this yesterday at the briefing. The Chairmanpointed out that so far at least there is not a lot of evidence of netcredit flows to fuel these speculative concerns. But I would pointout that these factors do provide coincident indicators of easierconditions in the financial system.With respect to inflation, I think there are two usefulperspectives: the path of contemporaneous inflation and the medium-to longer-term outlook. With respect to contemporaneous inflation,what a difference a meeting makes! The last time I said the good newswas that inflation had been low two out of the past three months; nowit's four out of the past five months. As Al mentioned, the core CPIwas 2.4 percent over the past five months compared with 4.6 percentover the previous five months. Inflation in that 10-month periodsince the end of the third quarter of last year is now 3-1/2 percent.This pattern of acceleration and deceleration over that period of acouple of quarters is also generally reflected in most of the broad-based inflation measures and even reflected in commodity prices,albeit over a different timeframe as you'd expect. And I think thisis consistent with speed effects interacting with expectation effects.Indeed, I wonder whether speed effects are inherently "expectative;"it may not be two separate things going on there. If this is the goodnews, I think the bad news is that inflation apparently has settleddown in the 3 to 3-1/2 percent range. That is somewhat higher,perhaps 1/2 percent or so higher, than we would have expected earlierthis year; and that keeps alive this medium-term issue of thealignment of rates.The Chairman said nothing about targeting real interestrates, and I would agree that they're not simply amenable totargeting. I think looking at real rates provides a rough conceptualframework which provides insight on some things, one could say, at theedges of it. When you look at that issue today you still see thatrates look pretty low. The Board's staff has these simple modelssuggesting that short-term real rates are 2 to 3-1/2 percent below aneutral stance, where a neutral stance is defined as their estimate ofthe equilibrium real rate. One shouldn't ask about the standarderrors!MR. SYRON. Could you repeat that?MR. MULLINS. Yes, they estimate real rates currently 2 to3-1/2 percent--MR. SYRON. Percent?MR. MULLINS. Percentage points.MR. SYRON. Yes, percentage points.MR. MULLINS. --below their estimate of the equilibrium realshort-term rate, which is currently zero.MR. SYRON. Right.MR. MULLINS. And they estimate the real short rateequilibrium may be 2 to 3-1/2 percent--with a standard error of 5percentage points! [Laughter]-22-8/17/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's a concept which is credible forlong-term real rates, which are stable. There is not one for short-term rates. In other words there's a cyclical characteristic--MR. MULLINS. Which has shifted it around. I would notsuggest that there's any precision here. I think it does suggest thatby historical standards rates continue to look pretty low. With thepossibility of some net fiscal drag from the budget deal, even net ofthe lower long rates, a stance on the accommodative side of neutralseems not inappropriate. The question is how accommodative and towhat extent we might be asking for trouble down the road. Certainly,since inflation has receded there's no evidence of harm currently--nocompelling evidence of damage yet, of building pressures of creditflows gathering momentum even though we might have some of thesespeculative excesses in financial asset pricing. Still, the absenceof currently observable pressures doesn't give me too much comfort[given] the policy lags. We saw how quickly slack can disappear inthe second half of last year. And once the pressures are trulyobservable and supported by fundamentals, it's pretty late in thegame, requiring more precipitous adjustments and risks and economicadjustments as well.So, looking to the medium term, I still think it's ineveryone's interest to achieve a sustainable stance, one whichsupports economic growth but does not seem destined to requiresubstantial adjustment timed with flawless precision to avoidinstability. I think we're good, but I wonder how good we are intiming that. We may be very, very fortunate and back into such adecision if inflation continues to collapse. I think more likely thannot we have a bit of work ahead of us. Now, overall, I do think thisepisode has been useful and quite successful. I don't know that Iwould go so far as to suggest that the upturn in inflation has yieldedto the stinging lash of an asymmetric directive. That may be a littleextreme. However, I do think we've educated the markets here; oneneed only read the assessments of economists and market participantsand perhaps look at the record low 30-year implied forward rates todemonstrate that we've educated the market. It may strain credibilityto suggest we've educated the political system; I wouldn't suggestthat. We may have made some inroads there as well, though; at leastthe message has been delivered. All involved seem to have a betterunderstanding of the Fed's attitude toward inflation, our commitmentto price stability; they understand that we do not find 3-1/2 to 4percent inflation acceptable. Even though no shots were actuallyfired, I think we laid down some useful groundwork in this episode.I'd just close by saying that it may be a bit more tricky inthe months ahead. The upturn in inflation and our response, as Tommentioned, likely preempted talk and expectations of Fed ease tooffset the budget deal. With inflation now "under control" at 3-1/2percent, a very weak first half, and a budget deal enacted in law, Ifeel that sort of talk is likely to emerge. I've already heard sometalk about monetary gridlock: The Fed on hold for a year while theeconomy inches along. While Congress and the Administration have donetheir part, some may look to us now. So with the backdrop of analready very accommodative stance in my view, looking medium term therisk is that that may entail [difficulties] down the road. And with anew cloud or two drifting onto the economic horizon, I safely predictan interesting period ahead.-23-8/17/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I don't often find myself counterpoised againstGovernor Mullins and I run the risk, I think, of sounding like abroken record here, but I continue to hear the term fiscal drag aroundthe table. My inclination would be to change that a bit to eitherfiscal anchor or maybe fiscal torpedo. It seems to me that taxincreases of the magnitude we're talking about, which are not confinedto the wealthy--and Larry has indicated here what the effects can beon, let's say, a subchapter S individual who has a healthy income--andspending cuts of the magnitude we're talking about, if realized, willdisplace a lot of workers for long periods of time and some perhapspermanently. Corporate restructuring continues and I think it may beeven at an accelerated pace now and in the near future. The consumerconfidence indexes, as we've all noted, continue their downward trend.And logic says that that set of conditions may inhibit consumerspending, although we have not seen startling evidence of that yet.But after all, the budget compromise is only a couple of weeks old.And certainly there are indications that it is at least causing thepostponement of some business investment; and certainly businesshiring is being diverted into temporary types of help instead ofpermanent employment. I continue to believe that those conditionswill develop further as the full implications of the budget agreementare realized on a broader scale. At the same time, the health carediscussions thus far seem to telegraph further costs both tobusinesses and to employees. And there seems to be a growing concernover the full implications for employment and investment inherent inthe North American Free Trade Agreement.In that [environment], I still think the risks to the economyare shifting toward the down side as uncertainties [abound]. We allaccept, I think, that uncertainty inevitably inhibits growth. In thatcontext a more symmetrical approach to monetary policy would seem tobe logical but I'm not suggesting or recommending that simply becauseI think a shift in our policy at this time could create a verynegative signal and one that might send things going in the wrongdirection. But I am convinced that we are at a juncture here wherethe full implications of all of these major programs could beinhibiting [economic growth] to a much greater extent than iscurrently indicated by the data that we're looking at.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that I'm inthe consensus that I'm hearing around the table this morning. We'vebeen for a long time taking two steps forward and one step back andthat seems to continue. Some of the head winds we've been sailinginto are diminishing: Real estate is beginning to stabilize; banksare strong again and seem to want to lend; deleveraging is slowingdown. Some of the head winds continue: The foreign economiescontinue weak; defense spending continues to go down. There arefavorable and unfavorable new factors. We've had a lowering of long-term interest rates for some time, but one could call it a new factorthat it has gone into this very dynamic phase in the last severalmonths. I think an important favorable factor is that the budgetfight is simply over. Never mind how it came out; it's settled. Ithink that's going to help a lot. On the negative side, of course, isthe fact that that budget deal contains some very serious taxes, as-24-8/17/93we've heard here in the last few minutes. We've had some very goodnews and some disappointing news. The very good news is that more andmore it seems that last winter's inflation surge was temporary. I'venow learned that the new danger I didn't know about before is called"speed" effect. And there has been some disappointing news in thesense that, at least in my case, I expected real economic activity toimprove more quickly and strongly than it has. So, the realitiesdon't seem to me to have changed much. However slowly andtorturously, the economy does continue to improve. Inflation nowseems to be trendless, albeit at much too high a level. So, for themoment at least, I guess I would summarize by saying: Have a nicevacation. We're going to have work to do very soon, I'm sure.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, the economy of theSecond District has weakened slightly in recent weeks and probably canbest be described as bumping along a trough. The passage of thebudget deficit bill following the military base closings in June islikely to add further downward pressure in coming months. The labormarkets have been weak. Employment in the state of New York declinedby 14,000 jobs in June, and 51,000 jobs were shed in New Jersey. InNew York there were declines in manufacturing employment but in NewJersey they were spread throughout the whole economy. Retail saleshave been very mixed. Some firms at the lower end of the market inprices have been doing rather well and the firms selling higher ticketitems have been doing rather poorly. The budget bill is going toaffect the Second District fairly negatively. A lot of our neighbors,especially those in lower Manhattan, make a great deal of money andwould fit into Governor Lindsey's explanation. In addition, the cutson top of the base closings in the bill especially affect New York,New Jersey, and Connecticut. So, the rather negative tone in the areais made somewhat worse by recent developments.At the national level, we believe that the Greenbook forecastis essentially right on. The only area in which we in fact agree withthe analysis but [where] I am somewhat concerned is that the strengthfor the export markets seen in Japan and in Europe may be slightlyoverstated. I think the political leadership in Japan is going toconcentrate almost exclusively on electoral reform and do very littleabout the economy. And it's very difficult to exaggerate the degreeof political dismayin Europe. Although I think the forecast for those economies in theGreenbook is the best bet, if there's any risk to it, I think the riskis that [the forecast] is overstated; and that could mean that our netexports would be even a bit weaker. The offset is that there would besome reduction in price pressures.In market developments, I think it's fascinating that the2- to 30-year spread as of the close yesterday was 235 basis pointswhereas for a very long time the spread was about 3 full percentagepoints. If this spread reflects inflationary expectations, we mustask what has reduced them. It's very difficult for me to see that thedeficit reduction bill in and of itself reduced them significantly inthe recent past. There certainly was at least in some quarters abreath of relief that the perils of Pauline had ended and the lady hadbeen rescued from the railroad track and that the bill had passed.But the economic effects of the bill had been largely discounted. I-25-8/17/93believe quite firmly that the reduction in the spread has come fromtwo factors: One, the general expectation that economic growth willbe moderate; but perhaps more importantly the move to an asymmetricdirective on the part of this Committee and the recent Humphrey-Hawkins testimony. Even though we had a hiccup in rates after bothevents hit the news, once the market absorbed the significance of theactions of this Committee I think there has been a positive effect onthe level of interest rates and on the yield curve and that we havehad a very useful educational effect on inflationary expectations.Such expectations are essentially psychological and the fact that anasymmetric directive and the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony are alsolargely psychological has in my view been a very important andconstructive offsetting effect. We've done some work at the New YorkBank on the comparison between real interest rates at the present timeand at a similar point in history, which was August of 1977. At that[earlier] time the real fed funds rate was zero or, if one wants to beexact, -0.2 percent. But other real interest rates were considerablylower. Although the core inflation rate at the time was 6.2 percent,the average prime rate for the month was 6.8 percent. Now, we have acore inflation rate of, let's say, 3.3 percent with the prime rate at6 percent. And as you go out further on the yield curve, the realinterest rates at the present time are considerably higher than theywere then. That, I think, has two effects. One, it contributes to anexplanation on top of the feel of both households and corporationsthat they should restructure their balance sheets. They have to notethat the effect of taking on debt is quite expensive in real terms,and that would be another factor in the relatively slow growth. Onthe other hand, it still indicates that inflationary expectations area great deal higher than I believe this Committee should findacceptable or satisfactory. So if there is some educational effortthat we've been engaged in--and rather successfully in recent months--it would indicate that there are some educational efforts still lyingahead of us.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. Well, I think I'm about in the middle here; wecertainly are seeing slow or moderate growth no matter how we sliceit. The labor market is seeing some improvement, but really onlyslightly more than handling the demographics. And the quality of muchof that job growth has not been that good. Restructuring is clearlycontinuing. Consumer confidence, I think, is taking its toll. We'reseeing hesitant consumers and the confidence problems spreading to thebusiness sector with hesitance in some investment patterns. As forpotential home owners, we've not seen as much growth in the housingsector as I think the fundamentals would suggest. Weak internationaltrading partners, the defense downsizing, the deficits--federal andstate--are going to continue to be a drag. We haven't talked as mucharound the table today about the state deficit problems, but we may behearing more about that in the upcoming quarter. Then, of course,there's the realization of the budget package now that it has beenpassed. As Larry has demonstrated, people are now really going to beunderstanding what that tax package meant. And, of course, we stillhave to work through the flood problems and we still have health careon the horizon. So, a lot of these factors are contributing to theoutlook for slow growth.-26-8/17/93Now, having said that, we shouldn't forget or miss that thereare some strengths in the economy that could bode well for the longrun. The financial markets are really reasonably strong: The equitymarket is strong; the bond market is strong. Banks are in bettershape and individual balance sheets are in better shape. There is atleast a focus on trying to solve the deficit problem. I can't saythat I'm all that confident that the current package is the thingthat's going to solve it, but at least there seems to be a focus onthe fact that something needs to be done about it.We do have a number of anomalies that I think we're going tohave to address over the coming months. There is this question ofproductivity. I haven't heard it mentioned today, but the fall-off inproductivity in the first half of this year seems anomalous to me,given all of the downsizing and the focus on efficiency. I don't knowif this is a bad harbinger or if it's going to go away. Thepersistence of low real interest rates, at least short-term realinterest rates, doesn't seem like something that can continue forever.That can't be a stable situation. The weakness of the dollar isanother anomalous situation. Certainly M2 remains another anomaly.I, like Tom, am a bit uncomfortable that we don't have a clear focusfor monetary policy. So, I hope that we will continue to work our waytoward trying to define what is happening to M2 and how long thesetemporary factors are going to be temporary. Maybe inflation fitsinto the category of an anomaly. I've certainly been more encouragedby the recent news--the fact that in this most recent inflation reportthe last 12-month core inflation number is lower than the previous12-month number. So, there is still a possibility of making someprogress, but we shouldn't think that the progress is going to beanywhere near as good as it has been in the last year or so. I don'tsee the possibility of a big outbreak of inflation. The usual indiciaare simply not present: We don't see an overheated economy; cost-pushpressures aren't significant, if you look at the slack in labormarkets; we're not importing inflation; people aren't rushing toconvert to real assets. So, I'm a little more encouraged oninflation. But, again, if we in fact are settling into this 3 to3-1/2 percent range, we can't be satisfied with that. So, we maystill have some work ahead of us.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. In the global economy, prices and interest ratesdo adjust depending upon conditions that exist throughout the entireworld market. The one price that doesn't really move based uponglobal economic conditions is the fed funds rate because we at theFederal Reserve decide exactly what it will be. And the question canbe whether or not the rate that's chosen is in equilibrium with otherrates throughout the global market system. Six months ago it didappear quite likely that the rate of inflation for [1993] would bejust exactly where it appears it is today. I think those of us thatmade [forecasts] around that median for the group of about 3.2 percentinflation [thought] that didn't look too bad then [and it] doesn'tlook too bad now. I never believed at the worst of the conditions inMarch that the rate of inflation for [1993] was going to accelerate.It just seemed to me that we were in a circumstance in which globalforces were somewhat favorable in regard to a decelerating inflationrate in the United States and that the United States in [1993] shouldhave been poised for a continued disinflation. I thought that we-27-8/17/93should have ended up in [1993], conditions being ideal, with aninflation rate around 2-1/2 percent December-over-December. That hasnot happened and we now find ourselves in a position where, unlikeMarch and May and maybe even July, it just would not make any sensefor us to make an immediate change in the fed funds rate given themarket conditions as they are today.Certainly, I would agree with Al Broaddus and Bill McDonoughand others who expressed the view that our posturing, particularlysummarized by the Chairman's Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, has indeedworked very well for those of us who have a pragmatic inclination.That is, look at the bond market and see what has happened. It hasreally been an ideal arrangement, one which I think all of us havebeen concerned about as we brought rates down during the recession andslow recovery period. The reason we wanted to be slow in bringingrates down is because we understood that bringing rates down as fastas the market wanted would give us adverse effects on long-term andintermediate interest rates, and recovery would be slower rather thanfaster. So, I think it is always good news when things work outbetter than one might have expected. I think that posturing wasbeneficial and I share Bill McDonough's view that if it's not broke,maybe we ought not try to fix it.But I do believe that there are some out-of-equilibrium risksthat exist for us and that we ought to be conscious of them as we goforward. First of all, most of our studies of commodity prices showvery clearly that the true pass-through effects in regard to the CPIand the PPI were clearly driven by oil; that is, using U.S.consumption weights to determine the right weighting on commodityprices gives us something like a 55 percent weight on oil prices onour commodity experimental index. Not all is due to monetary policy;we're in a favorable period in regard to oil prices and that providesa wonderful window for possible further disinflation. That window maynot be open forever; just as oil prices sometimes get down toward the$16 or $15 range, we've noticed they tend to shift back up. So theprospects of somewhat higher oil prices could be somewhat upsetting inregard to future inflation, but I don't think that exists for theremainder of [1993]. Another probably more immediate worrisome out-of-equilibrium condition would be seen particularly in the dramaticchange in the exchange value of the yen versus the dollar over thelast year. Think about a 20 percent appreciation of the yen. It'ssort of like when [a team] gets down to the final four: It doesn'tmake much difference how well it performed against the also-rans; itdoesn't make much difference how it performed in December when it wasplaying those state colleges that almost paid money to come and playat your university. We are in competition, of course, with theJapanese yen as a reserve currency. We certainly lead the way in thatregard. But if we take the G-3 countries plus Switzerland and look attheir PPIs year-over-year, all of these countries but the UnitedStates have negative PPIs year-over-year. That is, Germany's PPI islower than it was 12 months ago; Japan's PPI is lower than it was 12months ago; Switzerland's PPI is about exactly where it was 12 monthsago; and our PPI--I didn't look recently but I assume--is around 1.3percentage points higher than a year ago. So there are somequestions. And it seems to me that if there's any kind of edge of acliff, it's the edge of a cliff in regard to the prospect for thesoundness of the dollar versus the yen whereby the world not onlydoesn't know what the price of yen in terms of dollars might be next-28-8/17/93month but many might say, if asked what it would be 5 or 10 years inthe future, that there is a general expectation that the rate mightfavor being in yen assets versus being in dollar assets. Clearly ourshort-term interest rates do not provide reasonable compensation forthat expectation and that kind of change.Productivity has been a real puzzle for me. Clearly, if yourforecast gets really thrown awry you say it's a puzzle; and part of myreal economic forecast for [1993] has certainly missed the mark. Ireally just don't understand productivity. I don't understand how wecan have a decline in productivity for the business sector of 1-1/2and 2-1/2 percent two quarters in a row when productivity inmanufacturing has been rising at 4-1/2 to 5 percent! Somebody reallyis doing very, very poorly; and if anyone knows who it is--who isreally snuffing on the job--they haven't been spotted yet. So, thatis indeed a real puzzle.Over time, the battle against inflation is sometimes a battleof technology; whether technology will keep up is a question in thevery, very expanding world. I [don't] want to sound too Malthusianbecause Malthus I think forgot or did not really understand howequilibrium price adjustments can take place to forestall what hewould call such dismal outcomes. But when we noticed that the world'soceans finally produced less fish last year than they did the previousyear, we knew something was going on. We have a lot of technology inregard to harvesting fish and that technology has been used by a lotof people. And it has interested me to note that fish prices of someof the good fish catches--I mean cod, salmon, and so forth--arerelatively high at the grocery store. And yet I thought it wasinteresting to note that the value of all the fish harvested in theworld was less than the cost of production, which is a ratherinteresting phenomenon. This doesn't tell us that we're going to runout of fish because we do know that aquaculture and other techniqueswill enable us to provide the demand that's there. But we will not doit at the same price that is occurring when we're doing someharvesting. I noticed that with all the attention paid to the floodsin the Mississippi Valley and the entire region, there has been a lotof talk about corn production and soybean production, which I think isprobably a pretty minor event, but very little talk about all thatsoil that went down the river.Now, over the years as China enters [the global economy] andcontinues double-digit economic growth with a billion people and asthe world makes more and more demands upon resources, we will have anadverse inflationary environment to look at in the long haul. And wehave pegged the fed funds rate at a level that can't be changed rightnow, but it does need to be changed. Since we missed the March andMay opportunities to get that rate up, I think we do want to be fullyconscious of the opportunity whenever forces are such that we can getthe rate closer to what I think the Chairman indicated would be moreof an equilibrium rate; we ought to be ready to do that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. We now adjourn for coffee.[Coffee break]MR. KOHN. I thought I would start my briefing with somethoughts on this topic using it to lead into the discussion of current-29-8/17/93policy options. Those of you attending the Jackson Hole conferencewill note some similarity between the first two pages today and whatyou will hear on Friday. It's called "Economies of Scope."[Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don?MR. SYRON. Don, I have a question that has to do withtiming. Even if one thought the probability was greater that the nextmove would be up rather than down, what is the longest that we've hadan asymmetric directive in one direction and not acted on it?MR. KOHN. I don't know the answer.MR. SYRON. Have we ever had one for five or six months?MR. KOHN. We've had very few periods of five or six monthswhere we haven't [moved] the federal funds rate. We had a period fromSeptember through December of last year in which we had asymmetrytoward ease and didn't move. Our last move was right after Labor Daylast year. We continued to be asymmetrical toward ease and didn'tmove over the ensuing months. Then we were neutral for several monthsand didn't ease. And, obviously, we've been asymmetrical towardtightening for two months and didn't tighten. We looked some timeago--I guess it was before the Chairman's Humphrey-Hawkins testimony--at periods of unchanged federal funds rates. We found a few of fiveor six months, but not too many. And I don't remember what thedirectives were in those times. My guess is that they were probablynot biased rather than asymmetrical, but I don't know that for a fact.MR. SYRON. Can I just follow up? I haven't looked at thedata, which is what one needs to do, but how unusual would it be tohave a period in which we went asymmetric in one direction or theother, then reversed and went back to symmetry, and then went back tothat asymmetry?MR. KOHN. It has happened from time to time, but it isunusual. We did look at that. We actually looked before the lastFOMC meeting for one-month switches and I think we found one or two.MR. MULLINS. We did it last year.MR. KOHN. They were sometimes associated with things likestock markets [or other] external events.MR. MULLINS. We did it in '92, maybe in May; we wentsymmetric for a time after being asymmetric.MR. KOHN. That was the one.MR. MULLINS. Yes, and then once the second-quarter [data]came in and unemployment went to 7.8 percent we went symmetric.MR. KOHN. So, there are a few examples like that; they arerare but it does happen.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.-30-8/17/93MR. MULLINS. Just a technical point. In your discussion ofreal long rates, you were not talking about the nominal rate minus theobserved inflation rate, correct?MR. KOHN. In theory, obviously, it's the nominal rate minusthe expected inflation rate over the period.MR. MULLINS. Over that 30-year period!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The full maturity.MR. KOHN. Presumably, in theory you'd want something thathas the same duration.MR. MULLINS. Yes, it has to be the same duration. So, whatwe're talking about is something that is completely and entirelyunobservable?MR. KOHN. Yes, we have these surveys but--MR. MULLINS. It's tough to go out 30 years in a survey!There is a routine just to take the long rates and subtract off thecurrent inflation rate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is the constant dollar value of thecoupon.MR. MULLINS. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Which is a different concept.MR. MULLINS. Yes, it means something. Some people use thatas the real rate and it is important to keep that straight. So, giventhat recent inflation has been about 3 to 3-1/2 percent and certainlythe average over the past 10 years has been 4-1/2 percent or so andthe average over 20 years is worse than that, probably embedded in the30-year rate is an expectation higher than the current inflation.MR. KOHN. I would think so, yes. Now, the Philadelphia Feddoes surveys and I think they have about 3-7/8ths in the most recentone; that's several months old. The Michigan surveys are closer to 5percent.MR. MULLINS. Yes, they're 5-year maturities.MR. KOHN. I don't know what they ask for--about 5 to 10years.MR. MULLINS. And the guy who is now at Dreyfus--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Hoey.MR. MULLINS. He doesn't do [a survey] anymore?MR. PRELL. A fellow named Hotchkis, his former colleague,does it. It's a little below 4 percent.MR. MULLINS. That's 10 years?-31-8/17/93MR. PRELL. Well, there's a 5-year and a 10-year rate; theyare both in the same ball park.MR. MULLINS. We have no CPI link, bond, or instrument thatwe could [use to] back out the implied--MR. KOHN. Not that I'm aware of.MR. MULLINS. Okay.MR. MULLINS. Thank you.MR. ANGELL. Don, I guess I always thought an asymmetricdirective could [mean] two things. One is an indication that theCommittee in the intermeeting period wants the Chairman to be alert toa possible move in one direction only. But I presume there's alsoanother aspect of it and that is that with an asymmetric directive theChairman wouldn't feel very comfortable, unless there was a veryunusual circumstance, moving rates the other way without a conferencecall; that would not seem to be appropriate. I didn't hear anyonetoday talk about the need to lower rates during this intermeetingperiod. What I'm wondering is, if we went to a symmetric directive,whether there is any likelihood that rates would really be lowerwithout a telephone conference call.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If we went to symmetric you say?MR. ANGELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Remember that this is a relatively shortintermeeting period.MR. ANGELL. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. My suspicion is that something thatwould require us to move rates in this period would be such astartling event that I think we'd want to speak--MR. ANGELL. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. --just to [consult] each other on whatis going on.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I think there is a question aboutwhat asymmetry means. May I just ask Bill or the market people: Whatis the market perception of what asymmetry means?VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I think historically--Joan, correctme if I'm wrong--it has been that there would be, if not a likelihood,a distinct possibility of an actual move in the intermeeting period.MR. SYRON. In the intermeeting period.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Rather than a signal of[unintelligible]. Is that right, Joan?MS. LOVETT. A predisposition.-32-8/17/93MR. KOHN. But I think it shows that you're more ready to goin one direction or another.MR. SYRON. In the intermeeting period. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. I was going to say this later but perhaps nowis the point to interject [my comment], given what has been touched onhere. What is the purpose of the directive? In its narrowest sensewe just heard that it is viewed by the market, and I think by some ofus, as the [pre]disposition of the Committee to move within theintermeeting period. If there's no likelihood that we're planning tomove one way or the other, the logic would suggest to me that thedirective should be symmetric. If there is a different message to beconveyed by the directive--that in the longer term, beyond theintermeeting period, we're suggesting to the markets that the nextmove will probably be a move one way or the other--then an asymmetricdirective I think is appropriate. If there's still a further longer-term message to be conveyed by the directive--that is, that thecentral bank is committed to price stability--then we should alwayshave an asymmetric directive in favor of tightening.MR. ANGELL. That's a good idea! [Laughter]MR. FORRESTAL. Before we decide on whether we're going tohave a symmetric or an asymmetric directive, it might be interestingto focus on what really is the purpose of [the reference to symmetryor asymmetry in] the directive. Again, in that narrow sense, which ishow the market interprets it, it conveys what it is likely that wewill do between now and September 21st. If that's the realinterpretation, then it should be symmetric it seems to me.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, may I suggest that these arequestions to Don Kohn?MR. HOENIG. May I ask Don this question? [Laughter] If weleave it asymmetric for a long period of time and do nothing, do wenot give away credibility with that kind of directive?MR. KOHN. Well, if people think you're using it to posturerather than to take action, I think there's a little danger of that.But it seems to me the Committee needs to think about what its posturereally is here. Is it more ready to move one way or another? Whetheryou move or not, that's what you're signalling with this. These areinstructions to the Desk and the Chairman about how you would like toreact to completely unexpected developments in the intermeetingperiod.MR. PARRY. Coming back to Bob's question--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're getting into policy discussionand that's out of order at this moment.MR. PARRY. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Technical questions to clarify theposition of Don Kohn? Any further questions of fact or interpretation-33-8/17/93of what was perfectly clear on the part of Don Kohn? If not, let mestart off because I'm going to be getting into exactly that question;let's do it a little more formally. Let me just say that I don't haveterribly much to say about the economy as such. I think it's movingalong moderately. I think our diagnosis of the forces driving theeconomy has been reasonably on the mark. Some numbers have not beenexactly right, but they never are, and that's not really the relevantquestion. Qualitatively, I think we've understood that basically whatwe are dealing with is an economy confronted with balance sheetproblems, problems of excess debt from an earlier period as assetvalues declined. And we basically were confronted with a situation inwhich we very consciously brought the federal funds rate down tolevels below those we could expect to be maintained indefinitely intothe future. We brought the rate down to 3 percent a year ago on theexpectation that the economy would evolve essentially in the way thatit has evolved. As a consequence of that, we have chosen not tochange policy. In other words, the presumption is that we got itright a year ago and we've chosen to stay pretty much where we are.The concern that we were running into, which one could very readilycapture in discussions of this Committee, is that we would fall behindthe curve when we had to tighten policy; there was a latent concernthat we would lock ourselves in and not move. The presumption that atsome point we'd have to move the funds rate up as the economycontinued to expand I think was fairly pervasive around this table.The only question that we kept asking ourselves was when.Above all, I'd say the general philosophy of this Committeehas been that, whatever we do, allowing something of the nature ofwhat occurred in the 1970s and the early 1980s [to happen again] wouldbe a real tragedy. [We felt] it was essential that we focus on beingahead of the curve [in anticipating inflation] just as we allconsidered that it wasn't all that terribly important to be ahead ofthe curve on the down side. In other words, this issue of pricestability sometimes requires a different type of intermediate-termasymmetry, where we try to be lagging somewhat on the down side butahead on the up side to offset the bias in our economic system. Thatbias is very clearly in an inflationary direction.With our asymmetric directives early this year and with theHumphrey-Hawkins testimony, I think we ought to be reasonably pleasedthat we have altered the view of the markets such that the presumptionthat we will do too little too late on the up side has changed. Onedoesn't have to go back very far to read as a fairly general view thatwe would be behind the curve and that that would allow inflationarypressures to reemerge. Whatever one may say about the last severalweeks, that issue has not come up. It's dead. We have changed theperception of the way the markets are functioning and we haveessentially prepped them for an eventual rise in interest rates. Iwas interested as to the way the market would react to this posturethat we took. It is very hard to argue that if the central bank takesa position that we are going to be vigilant on inflation that [such aposition] would make long-term rates go up. Now, the answer is thatit does happen, and for a very interesting reason. Clearly, inflationexpectations cannot be perceived as going up, or else we've literallymissed the mark. But what clearly has happened--and we've observedthis recently on several different occasions with our asymmetricdirective, with my testimony, and the like--is that we saw what theVice Chairman called a hiccup. It is interesting to ask what that is-34-8/17/93because I think it's important for us to understand what the marketsare doing. If we eliminate the notion that what we have is [rising]inflation expectations, we are therefore led to conclude that what isgoing up is real long-term interest rates. And the question is why.Obviously, nothing fundamental has changed in the economy, soit has to be something of an expectational variable. And the reasonI'm certain is that what we are looking at is something we've allperceived all of our lives: namely, that whenever there is a majorelement of uncertainty, or more exactly a diminution in the state ofknowledge, the position of a human being is to withdraw. As aconsequence, whenever one is dealing with any type of asset in whichthere was a net long position, the creation of uncertainty--meaningthe reduction in the state of knowledge of what is going on in theworld--leads to a pulling back, a disengaging, which means "sell."That has nothing to do with the type of asset or what it's long-termfuture is. It is not a change in the state of knowledge; it is not aneffort to move toward improved liquidity or toward safety. Those arerational concepts which are made on the basis of knowledge. I'mtalking about the proposition in which knowledge is diminished anduncertainty in the true sense of the word occurs. If that is in factthe case, what we would expect to occur under those conditions iseffectively the type of hiccup that we're talking about: namely, ithas to be a temporary affair because it cannot last very long. So,however one reads these events, they are clearly consistent with thatphenomenon. But it's important for us to recognize that thepresumption that we can go out and basically argue that we are goingto suppress inflation and that, therefore, long-term real rates willgo down or long-term nominal rates will go down, I think is amisperception and clearly one which is not supported by the data. Butthat is not to say that there's something unexplainable here. Iflong-term rates went up and stayed there, then we would be looking ata different phenomenon. But I don't think that's what this particularproposition was.In any event, this whole period, as a number of you havenoted, very clearly indicates that we should be quite pleased at theway everything has come out. That is, we are essentially in a policyposition that we haven't changed for a year. That is another way ofsaying to ourselves, rightly or wrongly, that we think we got itright. And I believe the markets think we got it right. The factthat the stock market has moved the way it has, the fact that yieldspreads have come down, as Governor Mullins indicated, the fact thatlong-term rates have moved appreciably lower suggest that all the[properties] that are related to monetary policy are behaving in apositive manner. One thing that is not is the rate of real growth,which is essentially [a result] of balance sheet restraint and repair,a process we have been observing for quite a long period of time.I conclude from all of this--and this gets to the question ofwhat we mean by asymmetry--that we can afford at this stage to moveback to symmetry provided two things. One is that we are doing it onthe basis that we are encouraged by the inflationary data we have seenand that, therefore, the [prospect] of having to respond to adverseinflationary information has lessened. But more important is that wereemphasize our longer-term views that this is not a change in ourpolicy, that indeed we still expect that at some point short-term realrates will have to move higher. As a consequence of that, I'd say-35-8/17/93that we have moved tactically, not strategically. Frankly, the reasonI feel somewhat more comfortable with symmetric--although obviously Icould readily be convinced that asymmetric is not a bad position to bein for a lot of reasons, especially those that Don Kohn raised--is mysuspicion that we may have to sit where we are now for a number ofmonths. And I'm concerned about the credibility of the Federal OpenMarket Committee sitting with an asymmetric directive time and timeagain when the purpose of that is essentially to signal anintermediate trend--a philosophy and a strategy, not a set of tactics.And while there was no way for us to convey what we have conveyed in amanner other than the way we have done it, I think having done it--andin my judgment having succeeded--we effectively can move forward andgo to a symmetric directive. The argument for going to symmetric nowis that if we don't do it now and the economy continues doing whatit's been doing, we run into the tar baby effect. When then do we doit? In the same sense that I was concerned that we would getourselves locked in at a 3 percent federal funds rate when the[inflation] pressures require us to move higher, I'm also concernedthat we'd get locked into an asymmetric directive, which we would havegreat difficulty changing. We can change it now because the data arevery encouraging and we can lock in. If we don't change it now, therationale of going back to symmetric at a later time will have to bebecause we perceive the economy to be weakening, and that wouldinvolve a wholly different type of reaction on our part. If that wereto happen, that would mean a different set of policies; that mighteven change the sense of where we are strategically because that isnot implicit in the basic path on which we're going.So, let me just say that I think the issues that are beingraised here about the meaning of the directive are very crucial. Andvery importantly, while I don't sense the slightest indication of adesire on the part of anybody here that we should move and literallychange the funds rate in the period immediately ahead, I think how weconvey our posture at this particular stage will determine whether wein a sense harvest in an effective manner what is a very significantamount of central bank credibility or whether we create difficultproblems for ourselves by sending confusing signals. So, as you canwell imagine, while I'm inclined to go to symmetry, I recognize thatthere are arguments to maintain asymmetry. That is not, as I said, anuncredible position. But I'd like to hear arguments against thesymmetry position if that's the position that the Committee itselfthinks is a more viable one. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Well, first on the rate response, I think it'snot all that clear that the market is responding negatively to theinformation, even short term. Our staff did an analysis of nineinformation releases, and I think they proved that when evidence isreleased in the market that the Fed is likely to raise the federalfunds rate, short-term rates go up. This astounding result was[unintelligible] and it has proved conclusive. It's less clear whathappens to long rates with these nine events, especially if we look atthe forward rates. So I think we might take a look at that and notread the summary of it because the way I see it 10-year forward rates7 days after were off 10 basis points. And the 1-year forward ratewas up 12 basis points. Now, I know they're declining rates. It'salso biased by one or two events. But I think that question is a bitup in the air.-36-8/17/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, they did do a study in the otherdirection, when rates were going up. They looked at the extent towhich the long end of the market came down when we raised the discountrate.MR. MULLINS. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And I think we saw similar sorts ofambiguities then. In theory, if we move in a restrictive direction wewould expect long-term rates to fall, or more exactly the forwardrates to fall.MR. MULLINS. Well, it's not clear to me that you'd expectthat because you are reducing long-term inflation expectations but youmight be increasing the long-term real rates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How would you be increasing them otherthan the risk [unintelligible] issue that I was raising?MR. MULLINS. Don, how do we do that? [Laughter]MR. KOHN. It depends on whether you're talking about theforward rates 10 years out or the 30-year rate, which is heavilyweighted by intermediate rates. If the markets perceive us as runninga tighter policy for a time, that can raise real rates--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. For 10 years?MR. KOHN. Well, it's going to tend to raise the forwardrates out a few years, I think. And then the question is: What arethe weights of those in the 10-year security or the 30-year security?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But I think that's what is happeninghere.MR. KOHN. Yes.MR. MULLINS. You're right, but it should come down. It isnot apparent to me that one would necessarily see that in theinstantaneous response of traders, with all due respect to traders.It may depend more on their inventory positions. This is worthy ofstudy. The best information comes out early [unintelligible]releases. Once you get expectations and people leaning, all you'retalking about is differences in what happens versus what peopleanticipated would happen.MR. MELZER. Just on that point about the behavior oftraders: It seems to me that if they actually see the Fed moving,they could conclude from prior experience that the Fed may be late andthat it implies the potential of higher actual inflation and maybe aneconomy that's stronger than they perceived and, therefore, higherreal rates than they thought the market was discounting.MR. MULLINS. You also get the other sort of signallingeffect, that this suggests that the economy is stronger.MR. MELZER. Right.-37-8/17/93MR. MULLINS. Particularly in the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony,some people concluded that this was the first time policymakers inWashington had admitted that we were not on the edge of an abyss,holding our breath that at any time this growth could fall away.Anyway, that's an interesting topic. We had the same thing on theother side: If we are that concerned [and] cutting rates, doesn'tthat mean things are really weak?MR. MELZER. Yes.MR. MULLINS. The bottom line is that I, too, preferreturning to symmetric at this time. In my view there's no question,though, that the probability we will tighten in the intermeetingperiod is greater than the probability we will ease in that period.It comes out to two epsilons versus one epsilon! Unfortunately,neither probability rises to the absolute threshold that warrants anasymmetric directive in my view. If we went asymmetric it would bepurely cosmetic. For me the last two asymmetric directives have notbeen cosmetic, the last one in particular. With two months of CPI andPPI and the ECI and the other quarterly data to be published duringthat intermeeting period, if the bulk of that data had come in verydisappointing, it would have been a compelling case in my view for amove. I don't feel the same way this time. As a rule, I don't likecosmetic directives and in general do not favor trying to jawbonemarkets. I think directives should reflect an accurate portrayal ofour assessment of the situation and of the probability we are going tofind it necessary to move in the intermeeting period. So, I agreethat we should declare victory, at least temporarily.I do see two problems. The first is this feeling that we areasymmetric medium term. But that's not what the [operationalparagraph of the] directive is about. The second problem is that thiscould be viewed as a negative signal, as Governor LaWare noted.Indeed with a weak first half, the budget deal, and no inflationproblem--officially now--some will choose to portray the move tosymmetry as renewed concern about deterioration in the economy. I'llalso make a wild prediction that before long there will be talk of theneed to ease, to do our part as part of this process. I think it's abit tricky. I agree that how we portray this is important; [it shouldbe portrayed] as a response to a deceleration of inflation which hasreduced the possibility that we're going to have to move in theintermeeting period. I would say that it's important [to do that]without backing away from the groundwork we've laid concerning theimportance of continued disinflation. So, while I still have thisviewpoint over the longer term, I do agree that the appropriate stancetoday is to return to symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, I think you're right that theshelf life of an asymmetric directive has been reached. It's clearthat the previous bias has been beneficial to our credibility. Thered alert served us well. We may have stared down inflation with thatbias. But we've now had three consecutive months of favorableinflation news, and the information for two of those months has comein since our last meeting. It's time to restore a symmetrical stance.We have a large retroactive tax increase that has a lot of peoplescrambling. The thing that I disagree with Governor Lindsey on his-38-8/17/93arithmetic is his view that people are going to wait until April 15thto act. I think they're out there doing it right now and it's goingto weaken the economy, and it's going to do it before next April 15th.If we wait and keep our asymmetric directive, we're going to get morepolitical pressure. And we won't want to appear to be caving in toit. We're better off to move back to a symmetric directive in thiswindow of opportunity when, as you say, we come down on the basis of[unintelligible] as well as the tax hikes. That bites the economyhard.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Well, I preferred a symmetric directive evenlast time. As I said in my comments earlier, I think under ordinarycircumstances conditions would dictate a symmetric directive at thispoint. I still am concerned that if we give the impression that wehave abandoned our determination to seek stable prices, we eithersignal a weakening in the economy that is more than is perceivedelsewhere or we set off inflationary expectations again because theythink we're backing away from our position of pursuing [pricestability]. On the other hand, the arguments that have been presentedhere for, as Bob McTeer calls it, the "shelf life" of the asymmetricdirective I think are persuasive, so I'm prepared to back "B"symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, the substance of this issue of whatwe're likely to do has been talked about. I think we've been very,very successful on this. But there's a real danger in anyorganization if we try to calibrate the cosmetics too closely. Thisis not a simple decision, but at the end of the day the thing thatstrikes me is that we spend a lot of time at this table talking aboutthe role of the central bank and how we communicate to the public andto markets as a whole and about the importance of being honest in theway we communicate. And if the perception of the markets is that ourdirective does not refer to our longer-term strategy but to what we'redoing in the relatively short term, I think it's plain that it'sintentionally disingenuous and damaging to the institution to be outthere saying that we're leaning toward doing something that we're notlikely to do in the next four, six, or eight weeks.MR. MELZER. So where do you come out? [Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. Well, I may have a minority view here, Mr.Chairman. I agreed with everything you said until you got to the lastpart. I would favor pretty strongly sticking with an asymmetricdirective. The latest inflation data are encouraging--no doubt aboutit--but I think it's possible to overstate the progress. We alwaysplay a bit of the numbers game here with respect to [the base for] thecalculation. But if I've calculated it right, the core CPI rate on anannualized basis over the first seven or eight months of this year is3.3 percent compared to 3.4 percent last year. So, the progress hasnot been excessive, it seems to me, with respect to last year. Also,as you pointed out in your Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, there is atleast some evidence from survey data that inflation expectations in-39-8/17/93some quarters may actually have worsened. So, while I think we'vemade some gains on credibility, we still have some distance to gobefore we really convince the markets and the public generally that weare going to go all the way this time to price stability. Also, Iwould make this point: I think precisely because we have not movedthe funds rate at all for a long period of time, the directivelanguage is now a very big signal. If we shift back to symmetry atthis stage of the game, it's going to get a lot of attention andinvolve some risk. So, from my own standpoint I'd rather stay withthe asymmetric directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, back in 1965 George Aiken, theSenator from Vermont, recommended that we declare victory and get outof Vietnam. I always thought that was a wise judgment. It appliestoday. First of all, I think the reason we should get out of theasymmetric directive is to reload because we are going to have tofight another day. That goes without saying. But I think the otherpart of what Aiken recommended--that we declare victory--is also veryimportant. I am somewhat concerned about what Governor Mullinsindicated: that some will take our move as a signal on the budgetvote. But actually what we're doing is that we had a very, very wellplanned--it's almost miraculous how well it worked--shift in thenuance of policy, which I thought conveyed very well to the marketswhat we believed. It led businessmen, instead of talking aboutinflation, to come back saying: "We tried to raise prices and wecouldn't." I think it really has changed expectations out there. Weshould let the world know that we've done it right and that's whywe're doing it. And by the way, declaring victory is part of makingit easier for us to reload the next time when we have to. So, I'll gowith what George Aiken said 20 or more years ago and vote to gosymmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me thatthe most important thing is that our policy should promote pricestability. So I think it's terribly important, whatever theconclusion, that the minutes of this meeting reflect that ongoing viewand that public statements, especially by the Chairman but also by therest of us when we make them, make quite clear our commitment to pricestability. Between now and the next meeting I think it's highlyunlikely that we will change the fed funds rate. So, then we comedown to the purpose of the [symmetry in the] directive. And at thepresent time I think the market is quite well prepared to believe thatwe have not changed the directive from a tactical tool to a policystatement, and we are much better off to leave the market with thatperception. Perhaps at an appropriate time in one of your speeches orin testimony you might include that remark. Since I think it's highlyunlikely that we would in fact change the fed funds rate before thenext meeting, I believe we should avoid shifting the signalling deviceof the directive to a policy statement. And since I don't think weshould do that, to stay asymmetric would put us in the position ofdoing some empty posturing, which is always extremely injurious to thecredibility of any institution and especially to one whose credibilityis so important. Therefore, I agree with your recommendation that wego to "B" symmetric.-40-8/17/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your formulationfor policy, particularly the symmetric part, because I believe as doothers that this is something that should be viewed as what likelywill happen during the intermeeting period. So, I'm for alternative"B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I support "B" symmetric.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. I also support "B" symmetric. I think theeconomy has been weaker than we previously thought. Inflation isbetter and we could declare victory. Staying with asymmetry towardtightening may in fact signal more fears about inflation than might benecessary. Doing it now would get us ahead of the curve so that we'renot seen as switching under pressure. I would like to see messageseither in your testimony or in the minutes continuing to point towardour emphasis on price stability.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I think the risks to the forecastin the intermeeting period are clearly balanced so, therefore, I wouldprefer a move toward symmetry. I do think it is important that thatnot be misinterpreted, and I would assume that we certainly can makethat point clear in the minutes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I completely agree with theposition you've developed. The opening line of the operationalparagraph does say "In the implementation of policy for the immediatefuture" and it does seem to me that in the immediate future thechances that we would we change our policy at all are very remote.Therefore, I think symmetric language is appropriate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I'm concerned that the Committee is becoming alittle over-attentive to symmetry versus asymmetry. Certainly, inMay, as you know, the fact that we went to an asymmetric directivedidn't convince me that [it was an appropriate alternative to]increased rates. And if we continue to battle over symmetry andasymmetry, then we're back in the day and age in which the Committeegroaned and moaned over an eighth of a point change in the fed fundsrate, a change that really didn't amount to much. So, the issue ofsymmetry and asymmetry is not very great, given the Chairman'sstatement that he does expect us to be in an asymmetric mode in thelong run. That is certainly more appropriate than acting as if we'regoing to tighten immediately. I recognize that the price of gold hascome down from $400 to $371 and that really is a factor that parallelsthe move that took place in the bond market; and that has worked very,very well. And even if the fed funds rate is wrong, it would not beappropriate at this time to increase the fed funds rate. I'm very-41-8/17/93disappointed that we went past that window of opportunity and did notget it done, and I am very concerned that, with the Japaneseyen/dollar exchange rate being where it is, we put ourselves in aposition in which the rate of inflation actually is going to be higherthan it would be if we had the fed funds rate at the level called forby alternative C. That is, if magically we could go to "C" right now--we can't get there but if we could get a 3-1/2 percent instead of a3 percent fed funds rate--the exchange value of the dollar versus theyen would not be so precarious and we would not have the window thatis going to be there for price action by the automobile companies.[They will raise] wholesale prices but that will show through [toconsumer prices and], we're going to have a higher inflation rate at a3 percent funds rate than we would have if we had 3-1/2 percent. Ialso am concerned that a 3 percent rate provides lots of liquidity inthe financial markets and it provides an opportunity for certainbubble events because money is scurrying here and there. At a 3percent rate, we're chasing people out of M2 accounts to elsewhere.And all of that chasing may not be in the interest of long-runstability. So, I'm very uneasy with the fed funds rate where it is.I recognize, Mr. Chairman, that this is not the time to increase it.But more important than going back to asymmetric toward tightnesswould be for us to look for windows to get the fed funds rate upwhenever we can.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I think as a tactical matter this probably is thetime to return to symmetry. It strikes me that it would take somevery surprising events to lead toward a change in the funds rate inthe five weeks before the next meeting. Having said that, I do have acouple of reservations about a return to symmetry, one of whichalready has been expressed. And that is that when it becomes public,it may be subject to over-interpretation--not necessarilymisinterpretation but a "Now what are they up to or what do they see?"kind of thing. But also I'm a little troubled by the fact that weseem to be responding again to the latest price statistics. Now, it'scertainly true that they are better, but I have not heard anybodyexpress a much more positive view about longer-run inflation. Theforecast for the balance of this year and for 1994 is pretty much whatit has been for an extended period of time. It seems to me that wereally ought to be looking and thinking about that as we do this. So,I would be careful about putting a lot of emphasis on the fact thatthe latest price data look better and that, therefore, we don't needthe asymmetric directive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I think a symmetric directive isappropriate and I don't think that changes our long-run strategytoward price stability, which is what we should have. This is anoperating paragraph and it should communicate what the Committee isthinking. I don't see any inclination to change in the intermeetingperiod. Therefore, I think we build credibility making that changenow as far as our future actions go. So, I'm for symmetry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.-42-8/17/93MR. JORDAN. I have a general aversion to the idea behindasymmetric, discretionary directives. And after listening to DonKohn's explanation of the meaning of switching back to symmetric, Ifelt it left me with no choice but to prefer asymmetric if that's whatit means to move to symmetric. But when I think about leaving thefunds rate at 3 percent in view of the Greenbook projection oninflation, it implies that the Committee says either that projectionis wrong or it's acceptable. I didn't hear any comments about whetherit was either wrong or acceptable to the Committee, which leaves mepuzzled about the comments about declaring victory. Those commentsare suggestions that the Greenbook projections on inflation are infact wrong rather than acceptable, I think. So, I'm not sure where Icome out.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. I very happily support a symmetric directive. Iwould like to underscore what has been implicit in many of thecomments--Tom Hoenig just now was quite explicit about it--that whatwe're doing here is making a directive. It is a directive to the OpenMarket Desk and its purpose first and foremost is to instruct the Deskabout what we expect over the intermeeting period. There is asecondary effect and a secondary purpose in the area of signalling.There is a large inevitability about that and it has to be considered;it probably occasionally has to be dominant, but I would say only veryoccasionally. The order of importance of these two is distinctly inthe area of first and foremost to provide direction to the Desk. Andthat direction to the Desk at this time certainly is that there'sunlikely to be a change over the next five weeks.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Alan, I agree with your analysis in terms ofgoing back. I think the directive ought to be symmetric. And Ithink, as Wayne Angell said, that we ought not kid ourselves thatdebating the language is really making policy. I don't think we usedit inappropriately. Because things didn't unfold to give us theopportunity to move in that direction, it's appropriate to go back.But we probably ought not overuse the tool because to some extent wesee the down side right now in terms of possible misinterpretation inmarkets. And I agree with Bill McDonough that a statement could behelpful at some point to clarify exactly what we mean by it because Ido think the press and others put much more weight on it than we mayintend.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Since I assume we're going to vote inthat direction I just want to raise the caution here to everyone to bevery careful about the press because that could be quite damaging tohow we wish to proceed on this--whether or not we let the minuteshandle it or make an official statement or something of that sort.The one thing we certainly want to be very careful about is that aninadvertent remark by somebody in the System about policy strategy anda variety of related issues can create some real difficulties for usin this period. In any event, I do read that a majority is supportiveof symmetry and I'll ask Norm to read the appropriate paragraph.MR. BERNARD. It's on page 13 of the Bluebook: "In theimplementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks-43-8/17/93to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. Inthe context of the Committee's long-run objectives of price stabilityand sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration toeconomic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly greaterreserve restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint might beacceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserveconditions are expected to be consistent with modest growth in M2 andlittle net change in M3 over the balance of the third quarter."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, would you call the roll.MR. BERNARDChairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman McDonough YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Lindsey YesPresident McTeer YesGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Phillips YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, the Committee is adjourned forlunch and our next meeting is September 21st.END OF MEETING-44-