Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 23, 1993A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held inthe offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 23, 1993, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Ms.Mr.Greenspan, ChairmanCorrigan, Vice ChairmanAngellBoehneKeehnKelleyLaWareLindseyMcTeerMullinsPhillipsSternMessrs. Broaddus. Jordan, Forrestal, and Parry,Alternate Members of the Federal Open MarketCommitteeMessrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Presidentsof the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City.St. Louis, and Boston, respectivelyMr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Mr.Bernard, Deputy SecretaryCoyne, Assistant SecretaryGillum, Assistant SecretaryMattingly, General CounselPatrikis, Deputy General CounselPrell, EconomistTruman, EconomistMessrs. R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, Rolnick,Rosenblum, Scheld, Siegman, Simpson, andSlifman, Associate EconomistsMr. McDonough, Manager of the System Open MarketAccountMs. Greene, Deputy Manager for ForeignOperationsMs. Lovett, Deputy Manager for DomesticOperationsMr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Researchand Statistics. Board of GovernorsMr. Winn, Assistant to the Board, Office of BoardMembers, Board of GovernorsMr. Madigan, Assistant Director, Division of MonetaryAffairs, Board of GovernorsMr. Hooper. Assistant Director, Division of InternationalFinance. Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Beebe, T. Davis, Dewald, Goodfriend, andMs. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of San Francisco, Kansas City,St. Louis, Richmond, and Atlanta, respectivelyMs. Browne, and Mr. Sniderman, Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of Boston and Cleveland, respectivelyMs. Krieger, Manager, Open Market Operations,Federal Reserve Bank of New York1/ Attended portion of meeting relating to discussion of mergingminutes of action and policy record into one document.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofMarch 23, 1993CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. The usualprocedure, as you know, is to approve the minutes first. But prior todoing that I'd like to call on Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The topic is oursubcommittee proposal for creating a new document called the "Minutesof the FOMC." The genesis of this proposal comes from the recentSenate Banking Committee hearing in which two senators, Senator Mackand Senator Riegle, stated that the Federal Reserve didn't evenproduce minutes for the FOMC. I think to some of us this episode madeit abundantly clear that the public, including important public policyofficials, has very little appreciation for the quantity and detail ofthe material that we already release. So, the subcommittee proposalwould be to assemble in a convenient and easily accessible form,appropriately titled as minutes, all the information currentlyreleased on an FOMC meeting. As you know, we issue the policy recordwith a press release. But the Minutes of Actions, the otherinformation currently produced, are simply placed in our FOIA officeand are not accompanied by a press release; and they elicit verylittle public demand.So, the specific proposal is to release a merged documentconsisting of the Minutes of Actions and the Policy Record along withan Executive Summary under the title "Minutes of the FOMC." The hopewould be that this approach would underscore the quantity and detailednature of the information we make available. The subcommittee feelsthat these materials do constitute and are appropriately described asminutes in the context of the use of that term by other organizations,both public and private. So, there would be no change in the timingof release or in the nature of the contents of the document under ourproposal. Our suggestion is to initiate the proposal with the releasethis week of minutes for the February FOMC meeting. As mentioned inthe document, the February meeting minutes will be somewhat longer dueto the organizational votes, but we thought it would be appropriate tostart with the new annual cycle. So, I would open for discussion thesubcommittee's recommendation that we do this in the form described inour memo of March 17.MR. FORRESTAL. David and Mr. Chairman, I have a comment anda few questions. The comment is perhaps minor in nature, but it seemsto me that someone on the Hill might very well question the use of theterm "Minutes of the FOMC" because what we're really doing iscombining two documents. That may or may not be a problem, but I justthrow that out for consideration and discussion. The question I haveis whether you talked about the timing of the release in your groupand whether you plan to accompany this with a press release or someexplanation of what the change is.MR. MULLINS. I guess the reason we used the word "minutes"is because we think these are minutes as they include the Minutes ofActions and the Policy Record. In terms of changes in timing, basedupon the discussion the Committee had last time we did not propose anychange in the timing. This [new procedure] may focus people'sattention more on the timing. Norm, what are we proposing to do withrespect to an explanation of what's going on?3/23/93MR. BERNARD. It would be just straightforward. There reallywould be no explanation. If someone inquired, presumably Mr. Coynewould provide the explanation that there's no new material, just acombination of these things. The minutes, including the attendanceand the items having to do with approval of operations and so forth,would be published, as I understand it, in the Bulletin. And thepolicy record part of these minutes, at least, would be published inkeeping with current practice in the Board's Annual Report. But thepress release we have--it follows Governor Mullins' memo in thepackage--is simply patterned after the current press release. Insteadof referring to the policy record, it refers to minutes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I might say that what has happened hereis that the arcane terminology of the Federal Reserve is being usedagainst us.The normal notion of what is in the minutes of corporations, asyou well know, is three paragraphs. When it gets to the fourthparagraph everyone objects because it's getting too specific. Andthat's usually after a whole day's meeting! The impression I have ofthis issue is that by any stretch of the imagination these areminutes. What we used to term "minutes" is not the usual employmentof the term in corporate America. What corporate America terms"minutes" is far closer to what Governor Mullins and his committeesuggest we put out. We're merely taking an action to alter thelanguage, which is creating a regrettable difficulty for us as I seeit.MR. FORRESTAL. I agree with that. I just wanted to makesure we focus on the fact that some of our critics might, and I usethe word "might," allege that we've tried to get away with somethinghere by just combining two documents and calling them minutes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I have no doubt that there will be suchcomments.MR. SYRON. I would think we'd have everything to gain andvery little to lose by doing this. I can't think of what we'd have tolose. We do have to be careful that we don't--and no one hassuggested that we do--advertise this as a dramatic, sweeping change.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, we won't announce anything; we willjust do it. And that doesn't have that kind of--MR. PARRY. I think the change is a good one. I wonder aboutthe executive summary. The draft that I read seemed good to me. Ihave no problems with it. But I can envision times when there wouldbe an awful lot of disagreement about what should have priority, etc.Did you discuss whether or not this would be a very difficult process?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If I may just interject: I've beenthinking about this overnight. I don't know of any minutes that havean executive summary, and I would question whether that is a desirablemove if our basic purpose is merely to put out something that is moreinclusive of the available information. The executive summary doesn'taddress that problem.3/23/93MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, you're exactly right. Theauthority is Robert's Rules of Order, newly revised. Let me read [thedescription of] minutes: "The record of the proceedings of adeliberative assembly is usually called the minutes or sometimes,particularly in legislative bodies, the journal. In an ordinarysociety, unless the minutes are to be published, they should containmainly a record of what was done at the meeting, not what was said bythe members." So, Robert's Rules of Order clearly suggest that theseare minutes and that we are doing them the way they suggest theyshould be done.MR. MULLINS. Jerry.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Dave, I think it's a good idea to dothis. I have the same question about the executive summary. I thinkthat could end up competing with the good and noble purpose.MR. MULLINS. Tom.MR. MELZER. I was just going to make a comment. This draftthat you're seeing is the first draft that we've seen on thesubcommittee too. In concept it sounded like it made some sense.When I looked at it and compared it against the policy record, itseemed to me almost impossible to do it without adding meaning. Now,I think it's a good summary for somebody who's not going to bother toread the policy record. But I think the people who will read these,the press and the Fed watchers, can read more meaning into it. Forexample--I don't want to beat this to death--where it talks about theCommittee's commitment to maximum sustainable economic expansion theword "noninflationary" was added here and it wasn't in the policyrecord. Or where it talks about the uncertainty with respect tovelocity, in the policy record that led us in effect to say that wewere willing to miss the ranges; in the summary it says that it led usto conclude that we have to evaluate monetary developments in abroader context, which is said later in the policy record. I'm justsaying that all the people who read this are going to add meaning thatwe may not have intended by how we say this, what we say, and what wedon't say. So, I have some problems with trying, in effect, torestate the policy record.MR. MULLINS. Mike.MR. KELLEY. In defense of the summary notion, we're in asound-bite situation here. People don't have long attention spans.They get impressions very quickly and those impressions are very hardto shake once they get them. I think the summary would provide for amuch wider audience than the professional, careful reader, and that'san important audience. It would provide a quick, easy, access to [theessence of] 20 pages of the policy record that people are not going toread in many cases. A few will; fine, they should. But this willgive access to the lazy, the overworked, the distracted, or theignorant.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What's left!MR. KELLEY. That I think is valuable. And it can be done ina way that presents the FOMC's story in a light that we approve of asopposed to relying on some reporter who may not understand what he's3/23/93reading and who plows through the policy record and picks out a phrasehere and there that suits his purpose and presents the Committee in anerroneous light.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Given the full policy record, isn't heinclined to do that anyway?MR. KELLEY. He may be, but if on the front of the releasethere is an executive summary, I think that will tend to be what getspicked up by a very large percentage of those who give it anyattention at all. That's important and I think it's a positive.MS. PHILLIPS. I'd like to support Governor Kelley on this.I thought the one-page summary was probably one of the more positivenew things coming out of this. A lot of these news services willextract from the summary; and if we give them what we'd like them toextract, I think we have a better chance of there being a fairerreading of the minutes. So, I support Mike's contingent on this. Andlike it or not, we are in a sound-bite, concise summary kind ofenvironment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think you're raising a separate issue,which ought to stand on its own merits, and that is whether we lookgood or bad. As I understand the proposal that Governor Mullins andhis subcommittee are making, it is to consolidate already existingdocuments and in effect not to create anything new. It's the new thatI think we want to avoid in this particular context. And as far asI'm concerned, the issue being raised should be on the table at somepoint and maybe we ought to discuss it; it really should be in thecontext of the subcommittee's work. But I personally don't feelcomfortable with anything new in here. In fact, the message isprecisely to make the point that there is nothing new, not that we'retrying to improve this.MR. MULLINS. Yes, and the Committee has steadfastly opposednewness in most proposals. It is true that this would represent astep forward in trying to communicate, and in its basic form ourproposal is not supposed to be that. It's supposed to be a betterorganization of what we do now and a better labeling to make it moreaccessible to people. I think that's a useful distinction. Si.MR. KEEHN. I think this is a constructive move. I can't seeany down side. The up side does not seem to be considerable because Idon't think it will diffuse the critics. I'd prefer to do it withoutthe executive summary. I understand what Susan and Mike are saying,but I can't think of a time--again to use the private sector context--when I've seen private sector minutes with an executive summary. AndI think the more we make it consistent with such minutes, the betteroff we are. So, I'd do it without the summary.MR. MULLINS. Al.MR. BROADDUS. I would recommend that we make some briefannouncement about the change because inevitably there are going to bequestions. Of course, we can answer them when we get them, but if wewrite the answer out to begin with, it might be clearer. I also had aquestion. Will the subcommittee continue to exist? Will some of theissues we discussed at the last meeting, such as the release date and3/23/93the possibility of doing something like the Memorandum of Discussion,still be on the table?MR. MULLINS. It's my understanding that we still will meetand consider issues as they come up. It will be interesting to seewhat response, if any, there will be to this change. Perhaps it willsharpen the issue of release time. We will continue to test thoseissues. With respect to the explanation, I think it would be usefulif we had Joe Coyne's description available to people so we all singfrom the same hymn book on that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do I gather from the discussion thatapart from the executive summary the recommendation being made byGovernor Mullins' subcommittee is acceptable to the Committee? If Ihear no objection, I will presume that that is in fact the case. Onthe issue of the executive summary, I think there's a technicalproblem at this stage. Tom Melzer raised perhaps only a few of theproblems he would have raised if he had had a chance to look at theproposed summary in the normal course of events to make amendments,and I assume there are others here who would have the same problem.The notion of an executive summary has merit and it ought to bediscussed, but I would like to recommend that we postpone it for now.In other words, I propose that we release what we already have puttogether and discussed without the executive summary and if it seemsdesirable to consider the latter, to do so at the next meeting or theone after. I personally have mixed feelings about it. I'm not sayingthat I wouldn't necessarily vote for it, but my initial reaction is tobe a little cautious. In fact, I haven't given it terribly muchthought so I don't want to say one way or the other how I may come outin the end. I'm not sure how mechanically we can effectivelyimplement the executive summary even though we don't desire to do itthis time; it just means we have to postpone the whole thing until thenext meeting. Does anyone have any comments on that?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think the worst case with theexecutive summary is that we'd have to have a meeting between themeetings to agree on the language of the summary.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What it reminds me of more than anythingis the communique of the G-7, which takes half of the meeting to argueout. If we're going to have an executive summary, it is a statementof policy of the FOMC. Everyone legitimately is going to want to gethis views in on exactly how it is phrased, and I suspect that that maytake a lot more time than anyone contemplates at this stage. I wouldrecommend that we go ahead and vote on the new version of the "Minutesof the FOMC," excluding the executive summary at this time, and wouldask whether there is any objection to that. Hearing none, wouldsomebody like to move what we now will call the "Minutes of the FOMCMeeting"?SPEAKER(?). So moved.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It has been seconded. Without objectionit is approved. Let's move on to Bill McDonough on foreign currencyoperations. Bill.3/23/93MR. MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Bill?MR. LINDSEY. It wasn't just that the dollar didn'tstrengthen, the dollar weakened precipitously on the cut in Germaninterest rates. I'm glad I wasn't in the classroom that day to try toexplain it to my students. Do you have any other thoughts on why thathappened?MR. MCDONOUGH. Well, the particular market reaction lastThursday when the Germans lowered the discount rate was that themarket had gotten itself hooked on the notion that the Germans wouldlower rates further, at least move lower on both the discount and theLombard rates. So, the market disappointed itself. But then itcorrected. So, we had that funny situation of a fair amount ofvolatility against a fairly stable 1.65 rate. But in answer to yourdirect question, I think it's just that the market anticipated moreofficial action than took place.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's move on to the Domestic Desk.MS. LOVETT. Thank you. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Joan?MR. PARRY. I have a question about some of the reasons whylong-term rates in particular responded so strongly in this period.There are a number of candidates for why that might have occurred.The one that you referred to was that it appears as though the marketsbuy the idea that there will be future deficit reduction, and I thinkstudies of forward rates would suggest that. There are otherpossibilities as well. Most of the people who have looked at theClinton program contend that it's going to produce weakness over thenext several years, and that could be a factor. Thirdly, the interestrate developments--maybe not the declines that have occurred alreadyin foreign markets but expectations of further declines there--couldbe a factor as well. Is there any discussion in the markets on theimportance of these or is it just focusing on the one you mentioned,which is the increased chance of future reductions in the deficit?MS. LOVETT. Well, I think it's what the future reductions inthe deficit portend going forward rather than the reductionsthemselves. But, as you know, the general likelihood of an economythat performs reasonably well with low prices is probably more the keypoint than, say, overseas rate cuts would be in the markets goingforward.MR. PARRY. Or short-term weakness in the economy.MS. LOVETT. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How does the market respond to thenotion that if a weakness is propelling the decline in long-termrates, why when the economy was a lot weaker than it is now weren'tlong-term rates lower?-6-3/23/93MS. LOVETT. I guess it [depends on] the point from whichthey're all starting. Some of the people in the market are looking atthe near-term weakness as being somewhat mitigated by the drop ininterest rates that has occurred already. So, if expectations beforeall this [centered on] worry that the economy's recovery was going toproduce growth rates in the 4 percent plus range early on, whichreflected some of the estimates toward the end of last year, thoseestimates are being scaled down to something that's--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The reason I raised the issue is thatwhen you're looking at a 10-year or 30-year bond you're looking atbasically either inflation expectations or real rates. And to theextent that over that time horizon expectations of a weaker economic[performance] would have impacts on those [rates], then you can'treally argue that the passage of a year or two can affect that. Thatmeans that since a year ago the longer-term outlook was far weakerthan it is today, one would expect that long-term rates would be lowerthan they are today if that were a substantial explanation.MR. PARRY. If the prospect of short-term weakness were asubstantial explanation?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. In other words, to the extent thatshort- or intermediate-term weakness is driving the long-term rateslower, the question is: Why didn't recent periods in which theeconomy was perceived to be much weaker not change the rate? I'm nottalking about the rate of change in long-term rates; I'm talking aboutthe level, which is what is crucial to this discussion.MS. LOVETT. I do get some sense that there is or has been--and maybe it's taking a long time--some underlying shift inexpectations about future price performance than had been the casebefore. I think that has been ratcheting down.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Prices?MS. LOVETT. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. My own explanation is, however one looksat this, that this is a decline in inflation expectations. And Icould argue that we had a weak economy, say, a year or so ago withoutthe expectation of significant change in long-term inflation. That'swhat strikes me as the only credible explanation, whether youattribute it to the budget deficit or policy or any variety of other[factors]. That's what makes sense.MR. PARRY. I think 1-year forward rates are a quirk becauseif you looked at 1-year forward rates 3 years out last year, they werecoming down. At the same time the [1-year forward] rates at 10- and30-year [horizons] were basically flat. So that would be in accordwith the idea that it is reflecting more short-term weakness. Whathas happened in the last several months is that we've seen a reductionin those 1-year forward rates at all the maturities, which would bemore consistent with a change in views about inflation.MS. LOVETT. One thing that has been interesting on a day-to-day basis in the market is that there has been [less] day-to-dayvolatility by a fair amount. And sometimes people are at a loss to3/23/93explain the movements in prices on any given day to the next. Many ofthe dealers in the market are not expecting to see this kind ofmovement take place and are constantly expecting to see it give backits ground. That's why I mentioned the climate being a littleskittish. Not everyone was a believer in the full degree of therally.MR. D. LINDSEY. I'm going to argue in my presentation,though, that there is a feedback effect from the lower interest rates,particularly in real terms--that the future strength of the economyand the fiscal reductions in the out years did in the markets' mindshift back aggregate demand for constant real rates such that theensuing real rate declines helped to mitigate those fears, givinginvestors a sense that the economy could continue growing at more orless a moderate pace. I also think, going back several years, thatclearly the decline in inflation expectations has played a role aswell.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. Joan, how sensitive is the market? You saidthe market is skittish; how vulnerable is it to a reversal of thisrecent rally? In other words, if we get another strong employmentreport, let's say, and maybe another month of unfavorable inflationdata, do you think the market is going to react strongly to that or isthere enough in the deficit reduction program to prevent that?MS. LOVETT. Oddly enough, at this juncture I think theinformation that the market expects on the real side is favorableinflation on prices. People generally have tended to feel that whilethe reports for January and February were sobering, they were reallynot indicative of the trend in prices. They believe that there isslack, particularly on the labor side, that is going to keep inflationreasonably well contained, even if it's not on a downward trend, andthat the employment report perhaps overstated things. They think therecovery is here and will continue, but the sense of where it'svulnerable is in [the process of] going through the Congressionalpassage of the budget. [There are concerns] that some compromises aregoing to be made to get the package through and that some of thesecompromises are going to mean the death knell for the intent of thepackage, if you will, and that we're going to end up with perhaps halfa loaf.MR. MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, if I could add something tothat. I think one of the things that would give the market a fairamount of insulation from a really nasty kickback is that theinvestment banking firms--the Street--have for all practical purposesmissed this rally completely. They have been outsmarting themselvesconsistently by saying: "Well it can't be true; inflationaryexpectations cannot be being adjusted downward." And, therefore,every time they've had a temptation to short the market they've fallenright into the trap. The net result is that they're still not long.They still are pretty much either flat or fooling around with a shortposition. And, therefore, the securities are being held by saferhands, those less likely just to throw them out if they see a badnumber. So, from a technical point of view, the markets are in prettygood shape to get some unpleasant news and absorb it very well, whichhas been the case for about three weeks now.-8-3/23/93MR. LINDSEY. Are those stronger hands bond funds?MR. MCDONOUGH. Bond funds, pension funds, and investors ingeneral. That's because one of the things that has been happening asrates have been coming down is that investors are worried about yield;they're pushing their duration out in order to get the yield. That'sone of the factors behind the strength as you go out the yield curve.I don't think it explains the strength of the long bond, but it doesexplain a fair amount of the strength in the 5- to 10-year area;people are moving out the curve to get the yield.MR. MULLINS. The thing that seems inconsistent with futureeconomic weakness explaining the long bond performance is the stockmarket and the quality spreads as well. We have seen tightening ofquality spreads both within investment grade and also among the belowinvestment grade issues, and that's quite inconsistent with the notionof impending recession and doom.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions? If not, wouldsomebody like to ratify the actions of the Desk? I assume there havebeen some!MS. LOVETT. That's how we got the 3.02 percent fed fundsrate!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would someone like to move it?SPEAKER(?). Move it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Prell.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions?MR. SYRON. Mike, people have been talking for a long time,particularly at the retail level and some at the wholesale level,about the fact that they felt very squeezed on margins. That sort oftalk has been consistently heard. What do we know? Do we know muchat all about what is actually happening to margins?MR. PRELL. Well, not in specific detail. But I think wehave seen some improvement overall in margins over the past year orso. There are still some sectors, though, where it has been verydifficult--in some of the materials areas particularly, where priceshave been soft and there has been a lot of discounting. Now, we'veseen circumstances where there has been some pressure put on capacity.Firms are looking for price increases and in some instances gettingthem; steel is a clear example. The steel industry has had extra helpfrom our trade policies, but their bookings have been very strong andhave stretched out some months. They've had some price increasesalready that have stuck and they are looking for more. And there area few other places. But it does seem to be only here and there that3/23/93we're really seeing much happening among materials prices. Lumber isanother obvious example. Again, there are special supply stories.More broadly, though, there is still considerable slack. And we seesome industries, chemicals and so on, that are still pretty hardpressed in terms of widening margins.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. A few questions, Mike. For some time now you'vehad a more optimistic outlook for the bond market than the Blue Chipforecasters or some other private sector analysts, and that was hingedon a better inflation outlook. The idea is that as they come torealize our inflation outlook is right, then the bond market willadjust. The Blue Chip pattern has been that from this point forwardinterest rates and inflation will rise; that has been [their view]over the last year. And here we are today with bond yields lower thaneven your optimistic forecast and you have them going down somewhatfurther. Yet, as recently as the January Greenbook we were looking ata CPI for the first quarter of about 2-1/2 percent; and now it'scloser to 4 percent. So, the actual numbers have gone in onedirection vis-a-vis your earlier forecast versus the Blue Chip, yetthe bond market has gone the other way or even faster than you hopedand ahead of the Blue Chip. How do you reconcile those?MR. PRELL. You've asked a complicated question. I mightobserve that there were times when our interest rate forecast was evenlower for this period into 1993 than it was, say, at the time of thelast meeting. We got worn down a bit by the fact that the marketsweren't responding to all that good news the way we thought theyshould be, so we tempered our [rate] decline somewhat. I guess ournotion involves two things. One is the view that inflation wouldremain lower than the market was anticipating. And that seems to havebeen the theme recently. As was noted earlier, the market seems tohave sloughed off the recent bad news on the price measures and stillsustains this view that inflation, at least for some period of time,will be lower than the market seemed to have been worrying aboutearlier. The other element in our thinking was that simply holdingdown short-term rates as we've assumed--it's not a prediction butsimply a conditioned assumption in our forecast--would tend to pulldown the long-term rates. One explanation of the dynamics of therecent market movements that wasn't given a few minutes ago--well, Ithink there was some hint of it--is this: People are simply growingimpatient with the low yields they're getting; they're reaching forcurrent income, and this gives us an inexorable pull on the long-termrates. It took a bit of a psychological breakthrough, I think, to getus into the current zone. Over recent years something in the low 7percent area had been a floor to rates. People had not adjusted theirthinking to bonds possibly being a good buy at 7 percent or less, butwe seem to have broken through that [barrier] recently. And whatwe're anticipating going forward is that inflation still will be onthe low side of expectations, that people will become more hopefulthat the economy is not going to bound back up to high inflationrates, and that this persistence of low short-term rates will continueto push [investors] out on the yield curve. We have only a mildfurther decline in long rates, though. Our models, which I notedbefore seem to have performed quite well over time, now are againfairly well aligned with where bond rates are and would suggest that-10-3/23/93we could still get a very large decline as people respond adaptivelyto the kind of news that we think there is going to be.MR. JORDAN. I'm left a little uncomfortable with part ofyour explanation about expectations of short rates as they relate tolong rates. Earlier this year, and beginning last year, someacademics testifying in Congress argued that the reason intermediateand long rates are as high as they are was the fear that the Fed wasgoing to raise the funds rate. They said all we had to do was takethe pledge that we wouldn't raise short rates and bond yields wouldfall.MR. PRELL. Well, there may be some element of truth to that.In fact, one story that we've heard is that the change in theperception about the likelihood of the Fed tightening over the nextyear has provided the bond markets with some encouragement.MR. JORDAN. That's starkly in contrast to the view thatlonger-term expectations about debt monetization and inflation--MR. PRELL. Indeed. I think the other story about the fearof Fed tightening was consistent with the view that as soon as thecycle begins to show some substantial growth in the economy, we'regoing to have inflation picking up and the Fed will then respond tothat. So, these things do fit together. But there are many strainsthat aren't entirely consistent.MR. JORDAN. But if they do fit together, then having 4.8percent [GDP growth] in the fourth quarter and the CPI numbers we havein the first quarter gives you a problem because it says we're gettingthat real strong growth and now we're getting the CPI popping up.This worst fear is confirmed and yet the bond market has ralliedfurther.MR. PRELL. Indeed.MR. JORDAN. The other question that I still struggle with ishow monetary policy, what this Committee does, feeds into the outlookover the next couple of years. The funds rate is currently at 3percent. You talk about it staying more or less at that level throughthe forecast horizon. You have nominal GDP [growth] slowing to abouta 5 percent rate for most of that period while the Blue Chip forecastapparently has nominal GDP rising in a 6 to 6-1/2 percent range outthrough as far as they go, about 4 or 5 quarters, and short-term ratesrising 70 basis points. So, they have higher short rates, higher realgrowth, and higher inflation. What do you say about the Greenbookforecast versus the Blue Chip forecast given those policy assumptions?MR. PRELL. Well, the difference in forecasted real growth isnot a vast one between the two. The rise in nominal short rates inthe Blue Chip is offset to a significant degree by the acceleration ofprices in assessing what their real short-term rate path is. So,their real short rate path may not be vastly different from what wehave in the forecast. The differences may be less than meets the eyein terms of an underlying sense of what the determination of aggregatedemand will be in this period--real activity.-11-3/23/93MR. JORDAN. How confident are you that a 3 percent fundsrate for the next 6 to 8 quarters produces 5 percent nominal GDP?MR. PRELL. What we've noted before and we've hinted atrecently is that we're not at all sure, given the kind of disinflationmovement we anticipate, that this level of the funds rate is reallysustainable all the way through 1994. This level implies a relativelylow real rate, perhaps one that is not sustainable; and we think it'smore likely that we'll see the rate higher rather than lower in 1994and that there may be a need for some tightening as we look out beyond1994. The other side of this is, of course, that there is going to bea clearer negative fiscal impetus as we move into 1995 and some of thepent-up demands will have been satisfied and so on. It may be alittle early to get particularly far out on a limb in predicting whereinterest rates will have to go, but our notion is that the movement islikely to be upward by 1995 and that perhaps there will be a need tomove before then.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. I assume that the forecast of the rate ofinflation is basically from a Phillips curve framework. One questionI have is this: To the extent that there's a real output surprise--that is, a growth in real output that exceeds expectations--is thereany attempt to incorporate the possibility that this could changeexpectations about inflation independently of traditional[unintelligible]?MR. PRELL. Well, I think you're saying if things turn outstronger than--MR. PARRY. As they did in the last six months.MR. PRELL. Right. I think what we saw for a while in thelatter half of last year was stronger growth and very strongproductivity and not much sign of any real deterioration in the pricetrends. But we've gotten a bit of a pop in early 1993. What we seeat this point is some evidence that inflation expectations really arecurrently higher than what we anticipated the outcome would be. In asense we may have to fight against that to push the inflation ratelower. But if things turn out stronger, I think it will create notonly a lower unemployment rate--less slack in that kind of Phillipscurve argument for higher inflation--but it may also create apsychological environment in which pricing behavior becomes a bit moreaggressive. This is in a sense the speed effect that we've talkedabout, simply that the rapid growth may create some additionalpressure. That may be what we've seen in the deterioration recently.We really did have a pickup and that may have given us a little ofthat. Unemployment was coming down relatively rapidly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Mike? If not, whowould like to start the Committee's discussion? Ed.MR. BOEHNE. Modest growth in the District continues. Whilethere is a lot of caution and we still lag the nation, there are signsof a somewhat better underlying tone. Commercial and industrial loandemand is rising modestly, and I'm hearing more reports from bankersthat small and mid-size businesses are using their credit lines more-12-3/23/93than in recent months. They tend to want to go ahead and get theprojects under way whereas several months ago that was not the case.Manufacturing, which had slowed earlier in the [quarter], may havepicked up some later, judging from rail shipments and other anecdotalinformation. Some executives in sheet steel think they should be ableto make more price hikes stick given the strength in their orderbooks. And that's the first indication of that sort of thing I'veheard in a long time. Hiring is still sluggish, particularly in NewJersey, but one does hear more reports of firms adding workers.They're adding them even if they're adding them cautiously. In realestate, residential sales were up before the snow storm, as was thedemand for industrial space. The office market continues to be quiteweak and likely will be for a long time. I hear very little talkthese days that the expansion will grind to a halt; and that's adifferent tone than was there several months ago. But there still isa lot of caution about just how fast the expansion will proceed.Turning to the nation, the national profile as laid out inthe Greenbook looks about right to me. I continue to think that jobgrowth is the key indicator as far as the durability of the expansiongoes. Job growth I think is both an indicator of business confidenceand it's a necessary ingredient in building consumer confidence. Sowhile in theory we can have an expansion without job growth, I thinkin reality it's a critical ingredient. The recent price numbersstrike me more as an aberration than as signalling a new round ofinflationary pressures. I think the lack of robustness in the U.S.economy plus really quite favorable unit labor costs and weaknesses ina number of other industrial countries argue for a continuation ofsubdued rather than increasing inflationary pressures.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, the recovery in the SixthDistrict continues to be moderate and I would say that it's probablymaturing. The District is exceeding the national pace of activity.For example, we see employment growth at about 2-1/2 percent in 1993;that's about twice the pace that we had last year, although it's wellbelow the rates of growth we had in the 1980s. Retail sales have beenfairly strong in the District so far this year, even after we factorout the impacts of Hurricane Andrew. There is increased consumerspending for a wide [range] of goods, although auto sales have beensomewhat mixed in the last two or three months. Single-family housingdid well in the opening months of 1993 but again we expect weakergains compared to 1992. Nonresidential construction is slowly turningaround, and I think that's in contrast to other parts of the country.That is due to industrial and retail development primarily. As I'vesaid before in other reports, we have certain advantages inmanufacturing and other areas but those are beginning to narrow as theyear goes along. We're seeing this, for example, in slower apparelproduction. It's also showing up in our manufacturing survey forFebruary: The percentage of firms that month seeing increases inactivity declined a little, although the percent experiencingdecreases also fell. The 6-month outlook, while still positive, isnot quite as bright as a month earlier. A major concern in theDistrict now is the effect of military base closings. The region hassuffered relatively less than others as a result of declines indefense expenditures, but we have a higher proportion of militaryemployment than the rest of the nation. On the wage and price side,-13-3/23/93pressures remain generally quiescent throughout the region. Laborsupplies are still plentiful. Factory activity is rising but firmsare reporting little change in current or future employment levels;there's just no talk about adding additional employees at this point.No significant price pressures for raw materials or finished goods areevident with the exception of construction materials. And the spikein lumber prices has [spurred] production and inventory speculationthat don't appear to be sustainable. I continue to hear from bankersthat they are looking for good borrowers--the emphasis being on "good"or credit-worthy people--and the evidence is that loan demand is upslightly. So, the outlook for the region, Mr. Chairman, is relativelygood.Looking at the nation, we have changed our forecast very,very little since the last FOMC meeting. We think also that theprofile in the Greenbook is reasonable, although we would havesomewhat more growth and somewhat more inflation, but the differencesare marginal. Having said that, I think perhaps with the relativelygood news we're experiencing that it might be appropriate and prudentat this time to express some concerns for the longer term. One thatis on my list at least is the deterioration in the outlook for theindustrialized nations. Those forecasts have been constantly pusheddown. While there is some expectation, as Mike indicated, that thismay turn around in 1993, I think the jury is still out on that withall the political and economic uncertainties overseas, particularly inJapan and western Europe. The lack of progress in the GATTnegotiations and in the reconciliation of differences in the NAFTAagreement are also causes for concern, especially because a worseningtrade situation will undoubtedly give rise to more protectionistsentiment at home, which could have an effect on our recovery. Andlast but not least, it seems to me that the turmoil in Russia and someother foreign activities that are going on are also threats to oureconomy. So, while I think things are good, it would be wise for usto keep our eye on some of these developments, particularly on theexternal side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, in the District the level ofeconomic activity has shown clear signs of improvement since the lastmeeting. At the February meeting we talked a bit about the impact oftrade restraints on the steel business. And in terms of pricing andproduction levels, I think that along with the basic increase indomestic demand is having an effect, as Mike has suggested. Bookingsduring the last two months have been running at an annual rate of 110million tons; that's clearly an unsustainably high level. Deliverylead times are lengthening to the third quarter for at least onemanufacturer, and one large steel purchaser has been put on allocationby two of its main suppliers. The mills are currently operating at astated rate of capacity of 83 to 85 percent, but there is a view inthe industry that the [stated] capacity is too high, and at least inour District we think the mills are really operating at a level ofabout 90 percent of capacity. Steel prices were raised, as you know,by $20 a ton in January; another $20 a ton increase will go in effectin April, and they have announced another $20 a ton increase to beeffective in early July. If all of these stick, it would raise theprice about 10 percent from the low point in this most recent cycle.But in a longer-term perspective the industry will only have regained-14-3/23/93about one-half of the decline from the last peak in prices, whichoccurred in '88 and '89. And that 1988-89 level was still well underthe levels that prevailed in '78 and '79 in nominal terms but, ofcourse, further under in real terms.In other District activities, the second-quarter domesticproduction schedules in the auto industry have been set at about 12percent over the second quarter of last year. That production levelis somewhat higher than the current dealer order rate. Therefore, ifthe retail sales don't pick up fairly soon, there is some downwardrisk in the second-quarter production schedules. The manufacturers Italk with have reduced their '93 sales outlook. Their forecasts aredown just a little to 14 million units. But even that level impliesvery strong third and fourth quarters. The truck business is alsoimproving. I've commented in the past on the heavy truck business,the class 8 units, and at this point both the order and productionlevels for those trucks are expected to be about 17 percent over lastyear. But this time there's also what I think is a fairly significantchange in the medium truck category, the class 6 and 7 units. Thecurrent forecast suggests that these medium truck sales, which areregarded as being quite sensitive to economic changes, will be about13 percent higher this year. Agricultural equipment is doing better.Sales there are improving at the retail level, and productionschedules have been increased by 5 percent for one manufacturer.There is a somewhat larger increase in terms of production forindustrial equipment.The only sour note I heard, and it really wasn't all thatsour, related to retail sales. The District's sales held up quitewell coming into the new year, but we hit something of an air pocketin February. It's unclear whether that reflects uncertainty followingthe President's State of the Union message or is attributable to badweather. I must say that I think it's probably more the latter thanthe former.With regard to employment, we have some mixed developments.Most of the people I talk with, particularly those in heavy industry,continue to say that despite the higher levels of production they aresimply going to produce more with fewer people and that the staffreduction programs that they have in place will continue. Yet we dothink that the underlying employment data may suggest a somewhatbrighter picture. We've been doing considerable work on some of thestatistics related to our District employment levels and we think theymay be re-benchmarked and that the net effect a re-benchmarking of thestate data will raise the employment level as of the end of last yearby some 128,000 jobs. And if that develops, it could well be thatwe've had a greater growth of employment in the District than we hadthought. If this is false, though, it may be that this higher levelof employment will be consistent with the improvement that we'reseeing in terms of economic activity.With regard to the national economy, when we did our forecastfor the February meeting we were somewhat under the central tendencyof the FOMC members. Given developments since then, if we wereredoing our forecast, I think we'd raise it a bit and we'd be verymuch in line now with the staff forecast. And despite the recent PPIand CPI reports, which we don't think represent a fundamental changein the inflationary picture, our outlook for inflation has not-15-3/23/93changed; we'd leave our fourth-quarter forecast at 2.8 percent. Thankyou.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, widely varied economic conditionscontinue in the Twelfth District. Job growth in the District statesover the year ending in January ranged from among the strongest in thenation--about 3-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent in states such as Idaho, Utah,and Nevada--to among the weakest, which was a negative 1.4 percent inCalifornia, second only to Connecticut. The recent benchmarking ofemployment data increased our measure of 1992 job growth in Arizona,Idaho, and Washington. However, California data were revised only for1992, with revisions for prior years expected in June. This createsconsiderable uncertainty about California economic statistics inrecent years. We understand that the data for prior years are likelyto be revised down significantly to correct for an overcount thatoccurred prior to January 1991. The revision likely will reduce ourestimate of job losses in California during the recent business cycle.The official figure now, with this break in the series, is about an800,000 loss since the peak of employment. That will probably be cutto somewhere closer to 500,000.The cutbacks in defense spending and aerospace continue toreceive an awful lot of attention in the District. In Californiaproposed military base closings threaten a net loss of 32,000 militaryjobs. Civilian job losses on those bases probably will be greaterthan 32,000; in addition there is some multiplier associated with it.Most of these losses as it turns out will be in the San Francisco Bayarea and not in southern California. I also heard that the morningpapers suggest that [McClellan] Air Force Base, which is a big one,and the Monterey Presidio, which is not so big, both were taken offthe list by Defense Secretary Aspin about a week ago. They are nowthought to be somewhat more iffy but they could be closed as well. InWashington, Boeing has confirmed that it intends to eliminate 15,000jobs in the state during 1993 and an additional 4,000 jobs in 1994.This would bring the total reduction of employment to about 25 percentfrom its 1989 peak, so that is a significant development for that areaof the District. Although the company remains bullish regarding long-term demands for aircraft, recent airline weakness and cancellationsof orders further threaten the company's short-run outlook. I'm sureyou all saw that there was a big cancellation or at least apostponement by United at the same time they decided to continue totake delivery of the Airbus.Turning to the national economy, it seems to us that recentdata continue to suggest that the economy is in a sustained, thoughmoderate, expansion. Assuming no change in monetary policy, ourforecast of growth over the next two years is almost the same as theGreenbook, with the main impetus to growth coming from the interest-rate-sensitive sectors of the economy. We do project somewhatstronger growth in investment and a little less consumption than theGreenbook. Obviously, the effects of the Clinton economic program areuncertain; however, the program effect to us at least appears to be aslight positive for real GDP growth in '93 and a small negative in'94. In any case, the effects of the program are likely to be lessthan that of traditional forecast errors. Despite the recent spurt inconsumer prices, the outlook for inflation in our view is reasonably-16-3/23/93favorable with real GDP remaining below potential. And withrelatively moderate growth rates, we expect the downward trend ininflation to continue even with the passage of the BTU tax.Specifically, in our forecast inflation in the CPI is expected to dropfrom 3 percent in 1992 to about 2-1/2 percent by the end of 1994,which isn't all that different from the Greenbook. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. Well, economic conditions in our District havecontinued to improve in recent weeks, continuing the trend we had seenearlier in the year. Most of our contacts are at least reasonablyoptimistic about the outlook for their respective local economies andindustries going forward despite the potential contractionary impactof at least some of the elements of the Clinton economic package. Themost recent information we have comes from our various board meetings;both our Charlotte and Baltimore boards met last week. The commentsat both of those meetings were generally upbeat, especially those ofthe Baltimore directors. That was encouraging because that area hasbeen the part of the District that has experienced the weakestrecovery to date. The Richmond board met about 10 days ago, at theend of the previous week. The comments at that meeting were lessoptimistic than either those of the branch directors or their owncomments at their previous meeting. In particular they seemed tosense some reduction in both business and consumer confidence over thelast several weeks. But generally they're still reasonablyoptimistic, and I think the picture in our District is quite strong.With regard to the national economy, the Greenbook projectionis certainly reasonable. It is close to other projections we've seenand close to many of our projections. But my instinct, and my staffshares this view, is that the risk of error in these forecasts isstill generally on the up side and that we'll get at least somewhatgreater growth in real GDP if not in the current quarter at least overthe balance of the year. Recent increases in unfilled factory ordersand lengthening delivery times are one reason for thinking this. Ibelieve we may have a greater rate of inventory accumulation andperhaps [more] growth in employment than the staff is projecting. Butfrom my standpoint the main reason for this view is the broad-basedand rising confidence about both the near-term and the longer-termoutlook for the national economy on the part of a vast majority of ourbusiness contacts. People are concerned about the tax increases inthe Clinton program. They are critical of them, to put it gently.But they don't seem to think that the program is going to derail therecovery or even slow it appreciably going forward. This optimismpretty clearly is related to the good performance we've had withrespect to long-term interest rates recently, which has enabled manyof these businesses to significantly improve their balance sheets,finance some new projects at lower rates, and reduce debt service--notto mention what lower mortgage rates have done to the householdsector.With this in mind we certainly think that one of theCommittee's principal objectives in the near-term future if not theprincipal objective ought to be to do all we can to foster acontinuation of these favorable longer-term interest rate tendencies.Because of the recent upturn in inflation statistics, the upwardrevisions in inflation projections in the Greenbook bother me. I-17-3/23/93recognize that the signs are still pretty [limited] and that therevisions are still pretty slight at this point. But both the reportsand the revisions suggest to me that the risk of an uptick ininflation at some point in the projection period is now somewhathigher than it was earlier. I don't think that's inconsistent withyour comments, Mike. And I simply hope that the Committee will beready to take whatever actions are necessary earlier rather than laterif we need to take such actions to arrest these developments.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. The Eleventh District economy continues to beamong the stronger in the country in terms of employment growth. Weestimate that total employment was up a little less than 2 percentlast year. There was an article on revised employment numbers by cityin Friday's local paper; it listed the ten top cities for employmentgrowth in the nation. The Eleventh District had three cities on thatlist; the Sixth District had four out of the ten. But while thenumbers continue to come in reasonably strong, the mood seems to haveshifted a bit negatively since the Clinton program came out, fromoptimism to uncertainty. And that does have real impact in somesectors. For example, in Houston they have a number of things toworry about: the BTU tax, NASA and the space station, and healthcare. In particular, the Houston Medical Center had been the sourceof a lot of construction and planned construction; we hear that a lotof it is being put on hold until they determine what is going tohappen with health care. There are scattered reports that somebusinesses are finally beginning to have to hire some people. Theyhave been resisting mightily because our workweek in manufacturing inTexas has been over 43 hours recently, which I believe is over an hourlonger than the national average. So, that's beginning to give and wedo believe we're going to be getting some employment growth [inmanufacturing] now. I haven't talked to a lot of people about it but,given the optimism over NAFTA that has been prevalent in our Districtfor some time now, it seems to me that all this negative press we'vebeen getting--the NAFTA bashing and the signs of disarray in theAdministration's trade policy--can only suppress activity. And that'sa source of great concern for the nation. I wish there were some waywe could weigh in with a little economic education promoting bothNAFTA and GATT.Just an observation: I believe that the Fed and the Fed'sability to conduct policy in the near future have benefited from someluck recently. In particular, I think we've been lucky to have hadthis clear demonstration that the bond markets are responding toexpectations. First, we had the rise in the bond market based on theprospects for the lower deficit and/or lower inflation. And then wehad a decline in the bond market when the price indexes looked a bitunfavorable. I think the world knew that Fed policy was not involved--it was steady-as-you-go--and that longer-term interest rates wereresponding to these things. We've been telling people that, but thiswas a clearer demonstration of it than people have had in a long time.I think that will serve us well and give us a little more flexibilityin the future.Anticipating our policy discussion, I can't resist commentingon Paul Samuelson's statement in the academic report. This is not adirect quote but about what he said was that no change in monetary-18-3/23/93policy is currently required. Given the source of that, I think wemight as well just stop the meeting and move on!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, our District recovery continues ontrack for the most part. Tourism trade is still good in the region.Oil and gas activity, though, is still subdued after the year-end peakand that does not look to be building up. Construction activity inthe District remains strong; there has been some weather-relatedslowdown, but that [strength] will reemerge. In the agriculturalarea, there is a degree of greater uncertainty, although aggregateincome should remain good for our region. But the facts [about] thegrain loan repayment and what the Russians can afford after the morerecent crisis have put a real pale on things and I think that has beenpartly responsible for the lower prices. Secondly, in the cattleindustry there have been some very significant weather-related lossesin the area. That has driven up prices to their historic highs but onbalance it probably has hurt that industry, and that may have somedegree of impact. Nevertheless, overall our District will continue togrow at a moderate pace, still better than the nation as a whole.On the national economy, in terms of the GDP growth we seethings about in line with the Greenbook. We are a little lessoptimistic on consumption and a little more optimistic on residentialinvestment. Overall, we don't really differ too much with theGreenbook. On the inflation front, our view is that inflation hascome up a little but that doesn't really portend problems goingforward, although I think it also says that our gains on inflation mayhave run out. So we're in this steady state and we'll have to makesome decisions along those lines in the near future. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In terms of theDistrict, things aren't very much different overall but there havebeen changes in the mix. I would note that several people have talkedabout this change in bench-marking of the state employment figures andthat same pattern holds in our District as well; it seems to be truein most parts of the country. I don't know that anyone is going tofeel that they were less ill during the recovery, but that's certainlywhat the data would suggest to some extent. Retail sales in theDistrict continue to show improvement; that began in the Christmasseason and there is some continuation more recently. There has been afair bit of improvement in consumer durables--autos particularly,though, were affected by the weather. They are changing, as you mightexpect, the composition of auto sales. Four-wheel drive vehicles arevery big and little convertibles are very small. Actually, this isexacerbating the trend toward the increasing competitiveness of U.S.vehicles. It's really quite striking when you talk to people whocarry Japanese, European, and American cars. They really see thebeginning of a dramatic change under way here. In the manufacturingsector, I'm quite struck by a differential pattern depending to someextent on the size of the manufacturer. The larger manufacturers suchas United Technology, GE, Raytheon, Polaroid--not all defensebusinesses--really seem significantly more pessimistic in theiroutlook and are still planning to continue restructuring as they goforward, whereas the smaller manufacturers of instruments and-19-3/23/93pollution equipment and a variety of other [products] feel a bit moreupbeat. Everyone seems a lot more concerned about the outlookoverseas, particularly in Europe. We happen to have a lot of tradewith Europe and there is almost no one with any real anticipation ofsignificant employment increases. The real estate sector has shownsome improvement. In Boston on the commercial side, rents havestabilized and actually have picked up a little. That's very unevenacross the District; parts of Connecticut are still doing quitepoorly. There is a substantial amount of homebuilding activity goingon, with house prices rising. They're rising very much town-by-towndepending on the availability of lots to build on and that kind ofthing, consistent with other considerations. Banks are seeing someloan demand now, slightly more than offsetting the runoff. There's areal mind set--a bit too much I'd say--in some banks in terms of theirview toward the future and wanting to get going on acquisitions andthings like that. The nonbank financial sector--and we talked a fairbit to people in the mutual fund business--continues, as reflected inthe data, to see very, very strong inflows. There is a lot ofnervousness among the managers in that area because of the inevitablereach for yields and some concerns about credit quality spreads andabout the market getting ahead of itself. One last comment on thestate and local fiscal side: There will be a lot of pressure onlocalities because of having overspent their budgets due to weather-related [expenses] from the snow and [ice].As far as the nation goes, we agree with the Greenbook. Itseems to us that economic growth is ebbing and flowing around 3percent. Right now, for a short time, it may be ebbing a little morethan flowing. But it's always difficult to forecast and it seems tome that it's even more difficult in the current situation given all ofthe structural changes that we have going on. I have been struck inmy conversations with people--again many of these people are in thefinancial sector--by how much more optimistic they are than perhaps ayear ago on the inflation front longer term, but not in the short run.And a fair amount of that has to do with a kind of enhanced confidencein the Fed over time. It seems to me that there's not very much wecan do in the immediate situation to enhance that confidence. Thatmay be something that happens as the economy strengthens, which isreally when people are going to look to see what we do.[Unintelligible] undoubtedly what we say and other things that we cando to diminish the confidence in the short run.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, economic activityin the District continues on the more or less steady upward course ithas been on for quite some time. At a recent meeting somebody usedthe phrase "silently successful" to characterize the District and Ithink that's a pretty good phrase. There doesn't seem to be anychange in inflationary pressures so far as I can detect, but there area couple of areas of spot labor shortages. I referred to this alittle the last time; I've picked up a few more indications of it. Itdoesn't seem to be very pervasive at the moment but the fact that itexists at all has surprised me. There has been almost no discussionof the Clinton program that I've detected, certainly in its broadestterms. What people are mostly concerned about, as you might expect,is what it implies for either the military bases in the District orfor the agricultural programs. I get the sense that whether they like-20-3/23/93the program or not, they're willing to accept it as long as theybelieve it's affecting the country more or less across the board.What they're worried about are the differential impacts that mightaffect the region.With regard to the national economic outlook, I have noproblems with the Greenbook forecast both for growth and forinflation. What does concern me are some of the same issues that BobForrestal alluded to. I don't know, obviously, where theAdministration is really going to come out with regard to trade policyor health care or industrial policy as it pertains to the airlines ortechnology or whatever. But it seems to me that those things all workin the direction of resource misallocation. While I don't know thatthey are going to be very significant quantitatively, they certainlycut in the wrong direction both in terms of growth and in terms ofinflation, assuming that the Administration doesn't just go ahead andsupport NAFTA or GATT. And I'm worried that there are some thingsgoing on there that may not help the economy in the long run. Havingsaid that, there's a question about why interest rates have finallycome down. I think, as several people have commented, that it is dueto more favorable expectations about future inflation; it's really aconsequence of the conduct and prospects for both monetary and fiscalpolicy, given the way those things have evolved over the last 6 to 12months. And I do think the credibility of monetary policy hasprobably improved a bit. I doubt that we could demonstrate that inany convincing way; that's just my sense of things. And I think thathas been a principal factor in the decline in rates.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As for the District,conditions are very similar by sector and industry to what Si Keehnreported for the Seventh District. I won't repeat those kinds ofobservations except to add a couple of observations. One is on steel.While the orders are good and the production level is very high, andwhile there is a comfort level over the recent price increases andhopes for more, there is no confidence after midyear. There is a realconcern that they've borrowed on subsequent activity. What they cansee and what they can report are coincident or lagging indicators;there's nothing to suggest what [demand] might be out in the future.And that's similar for nonferrous metals; there's a lot of caution.They say the current situation is very good but that they don't knowabout the future. Motor vehicles are strong in a general way but in aspecific way it's the Big Three that are doing quite well in theDistrict, recalling workers and adding new labor. The transplants,the import manufacturers, are not doing well; their inventories areextremely high. The overall inventories look pretty good but that'sbecause they're low for the Big Three. Their sales are good both fortrucks and cars, but sales at the transplant firms are much, muchsofter. As for heavy trucks, they came into the year with a very goodbacklog but they say the rate of new orders has dropped off sharplyrecently. They're working off what they carried before. A bicyclemanufacturer, a very major manufacturer, says they came through thefourth quarter quite strong; December was excellent and they came intoJanuary feeling good, but the orders just collapsed. As far asemployment goes, state revisions are going to be different for us. Wewere reporting a decline in the state of Ohio for the 1991-92 period-21-3/23/93and that's going to be changed to a plus 1/2 percent. So, we neverdid have a decline in the recession period.In our meetings with small business groups, the capital goodsproducers are all reporting quite strong markets, especially thosethat sell labor-saving equipment. They say their backlog is good,both domestic and foreign. The services firms are in reasonably goodshape, especially those in civil engineering and software supply; andthe communications-related firms are in quite good shape. Most,though, when they say they have to hire put it in that sense of "haveto." There is a great reluctance to add workers, especially lowskilled. And they say they'll do everything they can to maintaintheir higher-priced labor and get rid of their low-cost labor. It'sthe entry level positions they want to automate out of existence.Now, there is a sophistication about what their true total cost is andwhat government policies are doing to their cost that's partly comingthrough. A concern frequently noted by the homebuilders recently islumber prices and what they are doing to costs; the increases areextremely large and there is no reason to expect prices to go backdown.On the national scene, there's certainly a mood of caution inthe District. One major firm whose business is national--repair,maintenance, and renovation of aircraft, rolling stock, buses, andrail cars and so on--said that they had a very good backlog throughthe fourth quarter and coming into the year and then in February thephones stopped ringing. They feel it is because of concerns aboutnational economic policy. They're hoping that turns out to be wrongor that it goes away. But they say there's just nothing new going on;they're working on what they have and they're extremely cautious. Isubscribe more to the view about the 50 mile an hour head winds, whichwere holding us back before, rather than the view of at least someacademics that it was restrictive monetary policy somehow measuredthat was holding us back. In my view what we've seen in recent months--through the fall and into the beginning of this year--is thedissipation of those head winds. And we shouldn't misinterpret thatas sustained momentum if it is a one-time release from negativeforces. I have no confidence that current monetary policy is gearedright for that environment--that a 3 percent nominal fed funds ratewill promote the kind of environment for growth that's in theGreenbook. And I worry that the head winds that were coming from allthe restructuring--all those things that we talked about--are nowbeing replaced by a fiscal head wind that is decidedly negative. Isee no way to interpret fiscal policy other than as a negative shockto the economy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. In my view the economy is doing fine. The wayI view the capital market environment is that the performance of thelong bond market suggests that participants are not looking forunsustainable robust growth and accelerating inflation. As I look atthe stock market it suggests to me that stock market participants arenot expecting recession. Again, the quality spreads would also raisequestions there. All this adds up to moderate growth in my view. Thereduction in long rates should sustain housing and business fixedinvestment. We're starting to break through; there's some progress onemployment in many parts of the country. There is still plenty of-22-3/23/93uncertainty with respect to the fiscal policy package and even moreuncertainty about the health care package. And, of course, there arenagging concerns about protectionism, Russia, and our tradingpartners. I see many of these uncertainties posing risks down theroad in '94 and '95. In '93 it looks to me as if the benign capitalmarket environment we have should provide enough momentum. We havethe lowest interest rates in several decades and the stock averagesare within whispering distance of their all-time highs despite thehits taken by drug companies and biotech companies and multinationals.So, I view all of this as pretty consistent with moderate growth.With respect to inflation, we've made quite a bit of progressover the last couple of years and the underlying fundamentals suggestthe likelihood of continued progress in gradually reducing inflation.There is ample slack in the economy both on the labor side and interms of capacity utilization. Competitive conditions still seemtight. We've seen no sign of an unsustainable surge in activity or insupplier delivery times, or other sorts of measures. We have verysubdued money and credit growth still. Even M1 has decelerated, sothere seems to be little monetary thrust to inflation. So, I think wewould all agree that the underlying fundamentals appear to be in placeto sustain a continued gradual trend toward disinflation. The onlything that doesn't agree is measured inflation itself, which seems toshow signs of rising from the grave, apparently oblivious to the factthat the Greenbook has pronounced it dead! It's not just the twoconsecutive core CPI numbers we've had. But in three out of the pastfive months core CPI has been 1/2 percent and over the past six monthscore CPI has been 4 percent. We've had 4 percent inflation over thepast six months versus 3.3 percent in the 12 months ended in December.It's still early but, based upon these data, it's hard to convinceoneself that we're safely gliding on the Greenbook path towardcontinued gradual disinflation. It may be hard to reject thehypothesis that instead we're on the Blue Chip highway of a gradualreturn to 4 percent inflation. Core PPI in the last two months was4.1 percent and in the last three months 3.6 percent. The purchasingmanagers' inflation diffusion index, which had been below 50 for manymonths, jumped above 50 last month. Expectations survey data remainhigh. It is true that the implied forward rates have come down on the10-year bond, but so have foreign rates. And the implied forwardrates remain 200 to 300 basis points above those in Germany and Japan,and commodity prices are twitching. The CRB is up; lumber prices areup. Presumably this is due to the housing recovery, the spotted owl,and perhaps the paperwork requirements of FIDCIA! I'll leave moredetailed analysis to my colleagues. I think there's some reason to betroubled by these trends. All of this could be an anomalous blipwhich will soon succumb to the disinflation forces described in theGreenbook. Indeed, we've had a couple of these episodes before, mostnotably in the early parts of '91 and '92, which were swamped by thetrend and soon forgotten. What's different this time? It's already abit longer-lived, six months at 4 percent. It's not just a first-quarter phenomenon. In the third quarter of '92 core CPI was 3.8percent, which followed two quarters of 2.5 and 2.8 percent. So, thismay be a little more; it has some commodity price increases attendingit and a growing economy now. Still, I must admit that the notion ofa reemergence of inflationary pressures is not confirmed by many otherindicators such as precious metals; gold and other metals appear deadin the water. The ECI appears well behaved and wage increases areunlikely to swamp productivity gains, so that should assure that unit-23-3/23/93labor costs [will remain] in line. And I can't detect inflation fearsin the long bond market. Of course, I don't think the long bondmarket foresaw the disinflation. So it seems to me, given therelatively high implied forward rates, that the long bond market 5 to10 years out may have been looking at 4 to 5 percent inflation duringthis entire period.I do think at some stage that we may have to decide howseriously we want to take this index, the CPI--whether we want to takeit very seriously or mechanically in a price level targeting sense.The Greenbook says not to worry: Core CPI after all the hand wringingwill come in at 3.1 percent in '93 and 2.7 percent in '94. And themarket appears not to take the CPI seriously. We know the index isnot perfect; we've seen it made much like sausages and laws, whichcauses us to lose some respect for it. Still, there is some bottomline credibility to measured inflation. It's difficult to rebut witheconomic arguments saying it shouldn't be that high but it has been.And there is some risk in putting our faith too long in economicfundamentals. Before the next FOMC meeting we will receive two CPInumbers. If those are poor, we will be facing a 6- to 8-month trend,an embedded trend, of core CPI in the range of 4-1/2 percent toperhaps close to 5 percent. And I think that will raise significantconcern that after all the progress of the past two years we may beback to where we started. A more mechanical perspective that we mightthink about is: If the near-term inflation outlook is really 4percent or higher, as it has been over the past six months or so, thena 3 percent federal funds rate looks a bit low in terms of real rates.It's hard to reconcile this with the negative M2 growth so far thisyear, but I think we should think about it. If the Greenbook is rightand we're really looking at 3 percent inflation, that's roughly a zeroreal rate; but if inflation is really 4 percent, as it appears to havebeen, then perhaps that's a significantly negative real rate.When I add this up I can't find a lot in the way of clearconvincing evidence to be concerned about. We have as many wellbehaved inflation indicators as misbehaving indicators. Still, I'mslowly developing the uneasy feeling that if these trends aresustained for not too much longer, we're going to be forced toconfront the difficult issue of whether we're satisfied with a returnto 4 percent inflation--it may have arrived by the time we face this--and whether that 4 percent inflation is consistent with ourobjectives. Perhaps we're not there now but I'm increasinglyconcerned that the day is rapidly approaching when we will have toconfront this issue. There is a risk of getting behind therecognition curve. I must admit that I don't relish confronting thisissue in the current political environment. I'd hate to have anational referendum on the issue much less a local referendum on it,but I do have the sense that, obviously, in some fundamental sensethis is the job for the central bank. And I'm getting increasinglyuneasy that we may have to go to work soon.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I have several comments to make on the Districteconomy. First of all, on the employment side we're seeing muchstronger growth statistically. We look at this on a 3-month movingaverage basis, so it's more than just the most recent month. One ofthe two big shifts there is that we're seeing reasonably strong-24-3/23/93manufacturing employment growth, which we hadn't seen up to thispoint. That had been slightly weak and we were offsetting that withnonmanufacturing employment. Nonmanufacturing employment is strong aswell. So, at least for the most recent period we have a much strongerpicture there. On the other hand, in terms of anecdotal informationI've picked up the same things some others have mentioned. Since theannouncement of the economic program, expectations have been dented alittle. The uncertainty associated with that I think has underminedconfidence a bit. In terms of credit demand, we are still not seeinga significant pickup at the larger banks but we are at smaller banks.We had a group of bankers in last week and [their reports were] amixture; it was interesting to watch the bigger bankers listen to thelittle community oriented bankers who deal with small businessestalking about their increased credit demand. So, I think that's goingon. One interesting comment that was made in that regard is that thisdemand is associated both with capital spending and in one case inparticular with some inventory building. The banker associated itwith concerns about building price pressures. It may be overstatingto call it speculative inventory building, but I haven't heardcomments like that for a long time.The final comment I would make about the District economyrelates to the issue of price pressures. I have heard a number ofcomments recently about building price pressures. Just three monthsago if you even brought up the idea of inflation, people looked at youas if you'd lost your mind. It's very interesting how quickly thishas shifted. Some of it is in the obvious areas. Scrap steel is upin the first two months of the year by close to 20 percent, I think,and we've all heard the stories about lumber costs. Also impactingresidential building, at least in the St. Louis area, are finished lotcosts. The inventories are being run down; they're not being replacedand there are probably only a handful. I heard one person mentionthat maybe three developers could get financing to develop lots inthis environment. That's not a credit crunch comment totally. I justthink the nature of that business has changed. Probably some peoplehave been washed out of that business who maybe shouldn't have been init for the long haul anyway. In any event, I'm hearing more commentsabout price pressures, not just in places where one would expect butmore broadly--comments by people just hearing about this [from variouscontacts].On the national front, I'd associate myself with what AlBroaddus said and what Dave Mullins just said in that I don't thinkthis is the time to take action, but I think we are in a difficultposition in a sense. We don't have monetary indicators that we have alot of confidence in and we're in a very difficult politicalenvironment. But I think the day is probably fast approaching whenthese straws in the wind that we're seeing now may really take hold--and maybe it's more than straws in the wind--and we will have to move.I was struck by what Mike Prell said in his presentation--I think thisis what you said, Mike--that it wouldn't take much of an overshoot innominal GDP to see greater price pressures.MR. PRELL. Real GDP.MR. MELZER. Okay. In any case, we're going to have our workcut out for us in the not too distant future.-25-3/23/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I have very little to add in termsof anecdotal-type insights. I think the tone at the moment is better.Nowadays when one talks to business leaders and community leadersabout a 3 percent economy they no longer look at you as though you'refrom Mars. But having said that, I don't find many, especially amongthe big firms--for the reasons that Dick Syron mentioned--talkingabout even 3 percent being a shoe-in. But at least there is a clearcentral tendency of popular opinion. It's hard, whether from ananecdotal base or empirical base, to disagree with the kind of outlookthat Mike has in the Greenbook, and I would not. But I still havethis nagging sense of unease that things are either going to be betteror worse than that rather benign forecast, and I can't decide whichway it's going to be. I do very much associate myself with thecomments that Bob Forrestal and Gary Stern made about some of theintermediate- to longer-term problems or potential problems that aresitting out there. Indeed, some of those things could turn out to bemore imminent rather than further down the road than we suspect rightnow. And I think one has to stay at least sensitive to those.Like Dave Mullins, I cannot bring myself simply to dismissthese latest inflation numbers as nothing more than an aberration.Like Dave and others, if I look at the fundamentals it's very temptingto say it's just an aberration. But it's hard to dismiss. Now, onething these numbers have done already is to make it a lot harder justto stand there and confidently say to somebody that, looking out over'93 or '94, the inflation rate is going to continue to edge down evenas the economy does much better. You get the feeling that maybe yournose is growing as you say that. And that in its own small way is oneof the reasons why I find it hard to dismiss those numbers out ofhand. Partly for that reason but for some other reasons as well--andnotwithstanding all that has been said including by my distinguishedcolleagues from Liberty Street--I think this long bond rally isvulnerable. I think we could see a turnaround in the long bondmarket. And I say that partly because of that nagging sense ofuneasiness about inflation, but I want to go a bit further on that.It's quite right, of course, to take the indisputable viewthat the long-bond rate has a real component and an inflationexpectations component. That's the Bible. But I don't think it'squite right to argue that the dynamics of the marketplace as reflectedin the prices of those bonds in periods of 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 monthsdissect quite that neatly and easily in terms of what's drivinginvestors, especially when the so-called professional investors havemissed the whole thing as Bill McDonough said. When you look at thebehavior of the bond market over the last 5 or 6 months, I think youhave to allow at least for a phenomenon that isn't quite as neat andprecise economically and logically as we'd all wish it to be. Forexample, you could put this on one of three levels coming out of theperiod of the election. There's one very, very unsophisticated viewof things that simply says people started to feel better; I don'tquite know why, but they began to feel better. And there's a slightlymore sophisticated version of that, which to me seems consistent withGary Stern's comment, that says: "Well, at least fiscal policy isgetting into the ball game here." It has been on the sidelines for 12years and they don't quite know what it's going to do, but it's goingto make things a little better no matter what. And then, of course,-26-3/23/93there is the more sophisticated view that I think Al Broaddus broughtup very early in the meeting and that is the net result of the Clintonpackage and all the rest leading to the view that there's distinctlyless of a threat of forced monetization of debt over time and that iswhat's working its way back into inflationary expectations and fiscalpolicy being on the table and so forth. Now, having said that, Idon't know where the truth lies. I don't think anybody knows wherethe truth lies. But if for any reason--and I'll get to the reasons ina minute--the public at large or the marketplace in particularconclude that something on the order of magnitude of the deficitreduction that is thought to be on the table cannot or will not beattained or that the whole program whether you like it or not is upfor grabs, I think that bond market could turn around with a vengeanceand in a hurry.Unfortunately, my own comfort level with those prospects isnot as strong as I'd like it to be. Just as an example, if everythingwent according to Hoyle in the context of the deficit reduction effortand economic assumptions were perfect and there were no technical mis-estimates, Medicare and Medicaid costs alone behaving over the nextthree years or four years like they behaved over the past two yearscould easily offset most or all of the deficit reduction part of theClinton plan. So, I don't think that [deficit reduction] is a shoe-inby a long shot. Now, I'm not ready to throw in the towel either. Ithink this is the best chance that we've had in many, many years toget some of this stuff done. But if there is disappointment in how itbegins to evolve in practice, there are going to be a lot of peoplescratching their heads asking: "Where did that wonderful rally inlong bonds go?" I don't think it's secure by a long shot. So, again,I am essentially as comfortable as I can be with the kind of outlookshown in the Greenbook, but I must say that the multiple sources of myuneasiness about how things may in fact work out are no less todaythan they were two months ago.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I'd like to take a few minutes to review theeconomy's performance in the monetary environment that has prevailedsix months before earlier troughs in economic activity. As you know,we've eased the fed funds rate from 990 down to 300 basis points.What struck me when I reviewed this was that we only had the fed fundsrate down from 9.90 to 8 percent six months before the [latest]trough. So a fed funds rate of 8 percent six months before the troughseemed to be conducive to blunt the downward momentum that the economyhad at that time. We know that we had some head winds that occurredaround the trough and after the trough. And yet monetary policyseemed to be succeeding in overcoming the head winds and gettingeconomic activity up to a somewhat lackluster 1-1/2 percent annualrate of growth in the second half of '91 through the first half of'92. Then, I think it's important to note that we lowered the fedfunds rate. In some sense we were trying to buy insurance as you willrecall. We kept saying that we must be sure that we don't [falter]because this recovery is pretty tentative and the outlook is prettyprecarious. So, we continued to buy insurance. But at the time whenthe recovery was beginning to take off in the second half of 1992 witha 4.1 percent growth rate, the fed funds rate was 4 percent. Over thefirst three quarters of the recovery, the average rate of expansionwas 1.2 percent; the real growth rate was then 2.2 percent in the-27-3/23/93first two quarters of 1992 and up to 3.2 percent in all of 1992. Andall this was occurring in an environment with a fed funds rate of nolower than 4 percent--that is, unless someone believes that monetarypolicy works faster than it seems to me that it works. Now, we knowwhy we bought the insurance. And as we were buying the insurance oftaking the fed funds rate lower we said that there seemed to be verylow downside risks to taking the fed funds rate lower just to be sure.But there was all this talk about when the time comes, of course, wewill pull that rate back up. The tough thing always is to know wherewe are on the monetary ease/monetary restraint path. It seems to methat monetary policy ordinarily needs to be in a slight restraint modeand ought to avoid having to be in a severe restraint mode. That is,we have made a mistake if we have to go to a severe restraint mode.Now, let's look at the indicators of monetary ease. It doesn'tsurprise you that I would use rising commodity prices. Let me giveyou some of the numbers. Our ex-food, ex-energy experimental index isup 20 percent year-over-year. It's up at an 87 percent annual ratefor the first quarter. I put the numbers in my machine this morningto [include] yesterday's commodity prices so I'd have them almost intothe first quarter and it was an 87 percent annual rate. Now, iflumber prices in this quarter are up at a 1000 percent annual rate,let's take lumber prices out and see what we have left. If you takelumber prices out then it's "only" a 33 percent annual inflation ratein the index and I would agree that lumber prices alone ought to bediscounted as being a monetary phenomenon--MR. MULLINS. You can take other things out, too.MR. ANGELL. It's always so easy to take something out so onecan say: "I don't need to be worried about this." Our total index isup 26 percent at an annual rate in the first quarter, given a veryfavorable energy price environment with energy weighted at somethinglike 55 percent of the total. Then there are food prices, and I lookat food prices because when we see these favorable unit labor costfactors there for us I think we have to know that that's really quitea positive. But we also have to know that when food commodity pricesstart moving upward as rapidly as they now are. And food commoditiesin our experimental index are now up in the first quarter at a 50percent annual rate. Now, gold prices are no longer falling. Infact, gold prices are only 1.7 percent lower than they were one yearago. Gold prices have been on a downward trend for a long period oftime as the world adapts to a different monetary policy environment.But gold has had a particular kind of technological evolution that istaking the United States from among the also-rans in gold productionto the number two producer in the world with the new technology.That, of course, is unlike an equilibrium price for gold that wouldhave occurred in an earlier period. That is, when we saw the price ofgold get to $280 an ounce in the last decade, that was not in thisenvironment with this new low-cost technique of producing gold. So,we're in an environment now in which U.S. gold production [incurs]variable costs somewhere between $220 and $250 an ounce. Andnaturally in this environment gold prices tend to move downwardrelative to other commodities. But gold prices have stopped thatdownward move. Now, I don't know that this 12 percent annual rate ofincrease in gold prices in the last six weeks is all that meaningful.Frankly, if it had not been for gold prices moving down, [I would havediscussed this sooner.] That's kept me quiet on this subject forlonger than I otherwise would have been.-28-3/23/93As for the second indicator of monetary ease: It seems to methat we're at a somewhat tepid foreign exchange value of the dollar inthe face of the relative strength of the U.S. economy versus economiesabroad. With our economy so much stronger and the other economies somuch weaker and interest rates abroad coming down and interest ratesin the United States being fixed, I'm asking myself: Why isn't thedollar stronger? That seems to me an indicator that we may have moredollars out there than we realize. The third thing I would suggest--Governor Lindsey already mentioned this prior to the meeting--is thatshort-term real interest rates are approximately at zero, and thatseems to be an indicator of monetary ease. The fourth thing we haveis an unprecedented steepness of the yield curve, which indicates thatshort-term rates have been pegged below the Wicksellian natural rateof interest. I may sound very eclectic today but I guess that's how Iam. I suppose another perspective on that would be that a 3 percentpegged fed funds rate when the economy was moving at 1-1/2 percent isdifferent from a 3 percent pegged fed funds rate when the economy isexpanding at a faster rate. Even I remember the IS-LM analysis! Wehave to have disappointing PPI and CPI numbers. It worries me alittle to be trying to run monetary policy based upon the CPI and PPIbecause those are not forward-looking enough, and the dangers thatGovernor Mullins mentioned are certainly apparent. Now, in thisenvironment I think we have to recognize that the favorable employmentcost numbers continue to be extraordinary. Also, commodity prices andsteel scrap prices are rising--and by the way, Mr. Chairman, steelscrap prices are up 89 percent at an annual rate in the first quarter,though annual rates, of course, tend to get exaggerated. But I thinkall of us know that if labor costs are being restrained and if pricesare moving forward, indeed isn't that a wonderful opportunity inregard to profit expectations. So, that causes me to believe that theeconomy may be stronger; and I continue to stand with my forecast,which is 1 percentage point stronger than the Greenbook's. Now, ifthe Greenbook [forecast] keeps creeping up, at some point in time itmay get closer to mine. But I haven't moved mine up any since myHumphrey-Hawkins [submission].Now, let me also look very briefly at three historicalperiods of concern. My first concern is: Where are we? I feel thatwe are in a position that is very similar to where the WilliamMcChesney Martin Fed was in 1967. The inflation rate was still in the1-1/2 to 2 percent range and yet I think they ignored what they neededto look at and instead set the stage for that decision that had to bemade to scrap Bretton Woods, in a sense turning the Fed's moneyprinting machine loose as it was in the 1960s. But, clearly, whenArthur Burns became Chairman, we already had launched into an era inwhich some very severe choices had to be made. I'm talking aboutover-restraint. Those severe choices, of course, were not made andthe U.S. economy suffered gravely from that era at the last of theMartin period and the first of the Burns period.I'd also like to look at a more favorable example fromhistory, the Volcker Fed in 1984. Now, I think that anyone knew [theFed had] to do what was done in 1981 and 1982, but to do what was donein 1984 was really unprecedented because the Volcker Fed at that pointof time--and some of you were here--in a sense began to tighten upbefore they looked at the CPI and PPI numbers. They didn't wait untilthey had bad PPI and CPI numbers. I think Paul Volcker was always acloset commodity price watcher! [Laughter] And clearly he took the-29-3/23/93steps that needed to be taken in a preemptive way. And what that didwas to lock in the progress on inflation. It meant that the double-digit inflation came down to 4 percent and they locked it in. It alsomeant that we introduced a period of rolling recession adjustmentsector by sector rather than having the whole economy synchronized,and that prolonged the economic expansion.The last period in history I want to look at is one in whichI participated--early 1987. I knew in January and February that Ishould be voting "no" to accepting a status quo monetary policy. Iknew we had over-extended ourselves in regard to lowering the fedfunds rate in 1986 and we did not correct it. But somehow or other inthe mood of the time I went along. Now, I think we're at a verydangerous crossroads. We are pegging the short-term fed funds rate,and pegging the fed funds rate is a very dangerous exercise. We haveto recognize that the fed funds rate may not stay in neutral verylong, pegged as it is. I agree at least with Jerry [Jordan] that weshouldn't peg the fed funds rate, whether or not we agree on thedirection it ought to go. Now, it seems to me that we ought to entera period here in which we let ourselves in for a little trial anderror, [moving] the fed funds rate in response to the outlook foreconomic activity. At this stage I don't believe that it is necessaryto accelerate [our move to] the natural rate for fed funds--that hasto be higher than the 3-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent range. I just say thatnow is the time to say that monetary policy is working and we need to[begin to adjust] it before the time comes to do something drasticbecause doing something drastic is always very disruptive to the U.S.economy.So, I think we're in a dangerous period. I don't know thatinflation is going to rise to 4 percent; I think not. I don't thinkwe have 4 percent inflation on the horizon. What I do think is thatour progress to get inflation down low enough so that it [isn't afactor affecting] any business decision is now in jeopardy. And Ithink we have to bring restraint on board which gives us a chance torealize a continued diminution of the rate of inflation because 3percent is really a very, very bad inflation rate. The newspapers sayinflation is gone; they mean 3 percent. Three percent is terrible,and we have to keep on our course. If we don't keep on the course toget it to 2-1/2 and then to 2 percent, I'm quite certain we'll lose iton the other side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. That's a hard act to follow!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I measured the decibel level and Wayneis about 3 or 4 percent higher than his normal!MR. LAWARE. Well, Mr. Chairman, to some extent I share theconcerns that Governor Mullins and Governor Angell have expressed thatwe run the risk of hanging in here too long with this lower ratestructure. On the other hand, forecasting in this environment is liketrying to solve an equation with 23 unknowns. It seems almostimpossible to assess accurately the full impact of President Clinton'seconomic and health care programs. But on the face of it, highertaxes and simultaneous cutting back in government spending have to beconsidered to be contractive. And while the full effects of the-30-3/23/93program won't be felt for some time and the financial markets havereacted favorably in the belief that it represents a credible attackon the deficit, we still have not seen what the full impact onemployment will be of defense cutbacks and other spending cutbacks,including something that hasn't been mentioned here today and that'sthe armed forces personnel reductions, which are clearly going tocontribute to unemployment. What worries me is the potential impactof these impending developments on consumer and business confidence.Now, we may be seeing a signal, a first signal of that, in the recentdeclines in the Michigan survey particularly as to consumers'expectations for the future. If in fact consumer spending contractssharply and business investment retreats from present announced plansand if we get a dramatic enough slowing in the economy, there is thespecter of a retreat from fiscal discipline toward outright stimulusthat I think is almost inherent in this government, and a probableinflationary result. The realities of the situation I suppose willbecome clear later in the year; and certainly in my opinion a policyshift at this moment is not necessary. But I think we ought to stayon red alert.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all I'd liketo thank David Mullins for his good balanced commentary on theinflationary outlook a few minutes ago and I certainly share [hisviews]. I must say that if we are looking at the re-emergence of someinflationary pressures, what scares me most about that is that wecould wind up looking at it in a stagflation-type context. How did weget there? Well, I'm very encouraged by the comments that I hear fromaround the country that the uptrend continues and seems to begathering strength. That's certainly good news and I share thefeeling that I hear around the table that we're in less and lessdanger of having this economy swoon out on us. On the other hand, Idon't see the economy as being very likely to run away on the up sideto say the least. If the Clinton program goes through, we're going tobe looking at some level of fiscal drag beginning to set in during '94and [continuing] thereafter. The old constraints that we've beenliving with for a long time have not been excised yet. The 50 mileper hour head wind may have slowed down some to 25 or 30, but wecertainly haven't gone into a calm. We have a lot more defenserestructuring to go through. At least on the consumer side, if not onthe corporate side, we have more debt restructuring to do in myopinion. The outlook for net exports certainly doesn't begin toimprove over the forecast period and may be deteriorating further.The economy was carried by the consumer in '92 and I worry that theconsumer doesn't really have that much reserve buying power buildingup yet. Consumer debt is off a little in terms of the service-to-income ratio, but that's mostly due to lower interest rates not tolower absolute levels of debt. As we know, the latter were at an all-time high recently and I guess they're still [close to] an all-timehigh even though they're off their peaks. But none of that leads meto believe that we can have much confidence that consumer spending isgoing to continue to carry us the way it has so far, particularly if,for whatever reason--inflation fears or whatever--interest rates beginto rise again. That could have an effect on the consumer and justabout everything else, and we could possibly be a part of causing thatto occur. Then, of course, there is [the question of] what thebroader monetary aggregates may mean, and I certainly don't know what-31-3/23/93that may be. Nevertheless, they have been extremely weak and continueto be so; and as we speak they seem to be weaker than ever. Takenall-in-all, I think the Greenbook's path is the best one; I hope weget it; it's the most likely one. But if we are looking at thepossibility of a re-emergence of inflation here, and we could be, thenI really fear that stagflation may be the context within which itcould occur. And that, it seems to me, would [cause us to face] somevery, very special and very painful kinds of considerations.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. Well, with a few uncertainties or exceptions,the economy appears to be showing signs of being in the upswingportion of a more traditional business cycle, although certainly notof the same strength that we saw in the fourth quarter of '92. We areseeing consumer purchasing continue; it's not surging, but it's atleast continuing at a reputable pace. Employment is showing somesigns of strength. We're seeing pretty strong corporate cash flows.Long-term interest rates, as we've discussed this morning, havefinally come down, and the financial sector appears well positioned tocontinue to provide capital to a budding recovery. Prices are firmingin some areas and certainly that has negative connotations, but it'salso a sign of a strengthening economy. Now, given those traditionalsigns of an improving economy, I think there are some forces that arelikely to continue to restrain [it and preclude] a more robustrecovery; we're certainly seeing that in the monetary aggregates. Thecorporate and household restructuring is continuing and this is bothbalance sheet repairing but also on the operating side. I don't thinkwe're seeing any diminution in the operating restructuring that beganlast year. We still have ahead the defense restructuring and theeffects of that on employment.On inflation I had written down some nascent signs ofinflation reoccurring, although after listening to Governor Angellmaybe I should just say plain old signs, not nascent signs. I wouldhave pointed certainly to some of the anecdotal evidence that has beenreported--lumber prices and so on. We could probably find some storyfor every one of these things, but we can't keep throwing out piecesof the indexes. At some point, it all starts to add up. As for theinternational situation, [problems] seem to range from a very weak G-7to a potential crisis in Russia. So, certainly that could have aneffect on this economy. On the fiscal side, we really don't yet knowwhat the full impacts of the fiscal package are going to be. And wehave the health package yet to come. We all have great hopes thatwe're going to see the deficit reduced, but I think there'sconsiderable skepticism as to how much deficit reduction in fact isgoing to occur as we move forward with this package. The taxes andredistribution effects may well be more contractive than some of uswould like to see. In sum, I think we really can't be complacentabout this recovery. Maybe a year ago we would have been glad to seea 3 percent type of recovery. But any one of these downside riskscould certainly upset a very fragile consumer confidence situation andsend the bond market into orbit again.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I think the comments to thispoint really reflect the divisions that we're seeing. It's almost a-32-3/23/93dissonance. So, I ask myself: What's wrong with this picture? Wehave a soggy economy and rising CPI numbers. We have a Greenbook thatsays one thing and Blue Chip forecasts that say another. We havecommodity prices pointing toward a boom and a dollar which is weakerthan it should be given the current economic situation. On the otherhand, we have a bond market rally and [weakness in] M2. What I haveto conclude from that is that we're probably looking at the wrongthings. What I'm struck by as I go around the country--and this ishow I tend to piece it together--are the regional [variations] in thecurrent economic situation. What does that signal to me? It mightmean that we could have a version of stagflation, but more likely--well, let me sum it up this way. The statistic called theunemployment rate outside of California--not to pick on a particularstate but it's a good state to pick on when it's down--is 6.7 percent.That's a lot closer to NAIRU than our 7 percent sounds. And I supposeif we could pick out other states such as Connecticut, it would helpus get the number down closer to NAIRU. In other words, in manymarkets of the country we are closer to what we call full employmentthan we seem to be when we look at a 7 percent unemployment rate [forthe nation]. That might be why we're starting to see the CPI pick upa little. My mind was changed last week when I was in the ThirdDistrict, which I never think of as a particularly booming district.But a number of comments were made to me. One was byI've already told this to my colleagues [on the Board]--a man I'venever viewed as an inflation hawk. I was sitting next to him at lunchand asked him what his forecast was. And he thought that we easilywould have 4 percent inflation this year. He's worried about labormarket [pressures] picking up. Then I spoke to the dean of theschool; he is a macroeconomist who has to negotiate. His theory goessomething like this--again we're looking for what's wrong with thispicture: That we have a change in attitude. [Unintelligible] workershave been rehired; the airlines have been told that they're going toreceive loan guarantees; we saw what I thought was a humorousspectacle of going to the Administration and urging themnot to impose import quotas. In other words, the tough guys are outand the easy guys are in and now's our chance to grab something. Idon't know how much [credence] to put in that, but it does signal tome that when there is the capacity for people to ask for a greaterwage settlement than they otherwise would or [for firms] to raiseprices, the kind of hesitancy that we may have seen in the '80s is nolonger there.My objective function is to maximize long-term growth. Itseems to me that we might be nearing a point, and it might be today,where if a stitch in time saves 9, maybe 25 stitches today will saveus 200 down the road. If that's the case, I would much rather see ussignal that we are concerned about these inflation numbers than takeanother chance and find that maybe in 6 months time we do not have a 3percent fed funds rate but a 5 or 6 percent rate. That's[unintelligible] from Larry Lindsey anyway!MR. KELLEY. It surely is.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we have cold coffee![Coffee break]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Dave Lindsey.-33-3/23/93MR. D. LINDSEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, Dave. Let me start off bymaking a few purely self evident observations. One, at a 3 percentfunds rate and effectively zero or slightly negative real rates, thereis no way that we can stay at this level for any extended period oftime without courting the types of problems that emerged in the late1960s and the late 1970s. For us to fail to be fully cognizant of themistakes that were made in the past would be extraordinarilyunfortunate for the economy, the country, and a lot of itsinstitutions. And when we do move, it's unlikely that everybody willcheer, needless to say; they never do. Indeed, if we waited until thecheering was there, we wouldn't be doing the job that we have to doand are called upon to do.In my judgment this is not the time to be immediatelyconcerned about this problem. I do not disagree that the measuredprice indexes are showing some firming. I think, as Governor Mullinssaid, that the CPI is an interesting construct. If we take it apartin very considerable detail and realize how it is put together, ourgeneral confidence in its ability to measure prices does not getenhanced. It's like sausage meat. Nonetheless, it's measuring realthings. A problem that I have with looking at the data at this stageis the issue that a number of you raised earlier--namely, that thecost structure is not going anywhere. The underlying materials costsare. There is a significant firming trend in a large series ofmaterials prices and I think that's going to continue. I don't thinkwe have seen the full effect of endeavors to increase profit marginsfrom the price side in a number of manufacturing products, includingchemicals, paper, and [others]. And I must say that I'd be mostsurprised if we did not see a firming in the general price level. Theincreases in steel prices very obviously are being significantlyassisted by trade policy, which is as [dangerous] a process as one canget into; fortunately it [does not extend to] too many other placesbut it is a very dangerous type of policy, which I think we are alldeeply aware of.I think everything we can see is exceptionally well behavedin the crucial area of labor costs, which on a consolidated basisobviously comprise the great chunk of our underlying cost structure.There is no ambiguity here; wage rates are clearly under control. Andwe are not yet seeing, despite our saying that we might, any signs ofa significant pickup in contract wage pressures on the union side,which incidentally is now a very small part of the economy--and it'san even smaller part if you take out the government workers that haveunions. The major area of wages in our system is basically outsidethe union area; and compensation, which is far more important thesedays than the underlying wages, is [not] under very significantpressures. One of the reasons we have seen such a huge increase intemporary versus non-temporary employment over the last several yearsis that the underlying cost structure is enforcing pressures torestructure, [inducing firms] to go to temporary workers to try toalleviate all sorts of costs. And basically that is succeeding. Thatis, unit labor costs clearly are under very significant restraint.Productivity is picking up in a fairly substantial way, and I suspectit is basically real. Having said that, however, it is a mistake totry to look at the price indexes or the cost indexes themselves as an-34-3/23/93indication of anything other than what history has been. I don't knowof any really significant inflationary pickup that has been foreseenvery far in advance. I might also add that I've never seen deflationforeseen very far in advance either. The forecasting capability inthis area, especially through econometric models, is very dubious.The one major factor that gives me great concern about movingtoo fast in the area of restraint is that we have at this stage astill severely impaired financial system. The ordinary structure ofmoves that the Fed takes is usually to restrain credit growth. Andthe purpose of restraining credit growth is because we perceive veryextraordinarily expanded credit as feeding the underlying inflationaryfires. In fact, while we all talk in one form or another about NAIRUsand slack and the like, as far as monetary policy is concerned we arelooking at or should be looking at the financial system because it isour job to restrain the expansion of credit before it becomes aninflationary force in the economic system. At this particular stage,there is absolutely no evidence that we have anything other than anextraordinarily restrained credit and financial system. Leave M2aside; M2 is a different problem. We are not getting an aggregatelevel of finance that is anywhere near being consistent with verystrong nominal GDP growth. What we find is that we are getting asignificant profit margin opening up which is financing a good deal ofthe activity. [Businesses] are financing essentially from cash flow,not from credit. So, the way I look at this particular system is thatI think at some point we are going to have to move; and I think we'regoing to have to move in a somewhat aggressive manner. It's just thatI cannot get myself to believe that this is the particular point.I'm worried that if we galvanize ourselves too soon and theeconomy slips back or sags or if we should get two straight months ofvery low inflation, we will dissipate the vigilance that I think isrequired here. I'm worried that in endeavoring to move too soon orgetting ourselves psyched up to move too soon we will find ourselvesin the same position, though in exactly the opposite direction, thatwe were in 6 or 8 months ago. And I remember sitting here and sayingin effect that unless the economy picked up in two weeks we would haveto move. I knew at that time that if there had been a vote on thetable to lower the rate structure, it would have passed. I'm sayingto you that we have to be very careful about reacting to short-termnumbers. The problem that I have is that I cannot get myself tobelieve--and I'm more than willing to be convinced--that we can havethe type of accelerating inflation problems we've been trying toconstrain without first seeing some evidence in the credit markets.If we're going to restrain economic activity without constrainingcredit growth, I say to myself: Well, we could stop acceleration ininventories but we are not going to do it with 25 basis points; we cantry 400 basis points and that may not be enough. We can constrain thegrowth in capital investment by getting a significant reversal in thebond market, and I agree fully with Jerry Corrigan's concern.Frankly, if I were in the private sector at this stage, I would behaving fits on the bonds in my portfolio. This bond rate decline isrunning faster than I think it probably should, granted the particularevidence. Then there is the stock market, which is high at thisparticular stage. So, I must say that I've listened to thisdiscussion--and I've been in the forecasting business since the late1940s--and I will tell you this business cycle is different fromanything any of us has seen. It has different dynamics; it has-35-3/23/93different characteristics; and the one thing I cannot get myself tobelieve is that we are at the point where inflation has accelerated.I think we're going to get to that point; and if we stay at this fundsrate indefinitely, we are inviting a major problem. It's just that Ithink the time is not this meeting. It may be the next meeting.David Mullins raises an interesting point that there are two CPIs tobe released between this meeting and the next one.I must say I almost prefer that we make our next move out ofa symmetric directive rather than an asymmetric one because I'm notsure in this context that we're going to be dealing with evidencethat's going to become very clear except very close [to the time for adecision]. My feeling is that when we have to move we may have to doso with very little advance notice because this is such a differenttype of phenomenon. Having said all of that, I would like to put onthe table that we do nothing at this stage; that we stay symmetric butrecognize that the risks are on the up side from a policy actionstandpoint. I don't want to put that in the directive because if wewere to move at this stage to an asymmetric directive tilted towardtightening, we would set in motion some of the other forces that wedon't need. My view is that when we have to move that we should moveand not get terribly involved in how we say it or how it is structuredin terms of asymmetric directives or the like. So, I would say thatmy preference at this stage is to stay where we are and be vigilant.But I do acknowledge most of the issues that have been raised by WayneAngell, David Mullins, and a number of the others here: That there isa potential here of our being caught behind the curve and that if weget caught behind the curve, we are going to have to catch up veryquickly. As everyone knows, when you have to catch up you have to gofaster and harder than you ordinarily would, and that's what usuallycauses the next recession. If I believed that's where we were at thisstage, I would be jumping up and down [in favor of moving]. But Imust tell you that when I talk to people and look at the details ofwhat is out there in the economy and the structure of the financialsystem, the presumption that we are at the cusp of significantinflationary pressures does not yet strike me as credible. The nextmeeting I may say to you that I've now seen enough to say thatsomething has fundamentally changed. I cannot in all honesty say thatthat's what I see out there now. So, that's my impression at thisstage.MR. PARRY. I could support that recommendation both forstaying with alternative B and for symmetry for the reasons that yousuggested, including the fact that we really don't know at this timewhether the signs of inflation that we have are of a temporary natureor are more likely to be sustained. I do have a comment and then aquestion. The comment is that even with symmetry, we certainly havethe capability of taking action in the period between now and the nextmeeting. The asymmetry would be mainly a communicating device which,of course, is communicated the Friday after the next meeting. So, ifwe have some concerns about what we should be doing [in the periodahead], I'm not so sure that acceptance of symmetry limits our fieldof action. Therefore, I can very easily--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it this way. It involves animplicit premise that the wonderful security that we've kept here forthe last number of months will continue.-36-3/23/93MR. PARRY. Yes, but it seems to me that the symmetry doesgive flexibility. I have one question, though. For a long time we'vetalked about the advantages of being ahead of the curve and I think wecomplimented ourselves on doing that and talked about how that hasserved us very, very well. As I listen to this I get the impressionthat we may be rethinking that view and going in the other direction.I just wondered what you thought about that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, on the contrary, I think if anythingwe were very cautious on the down side in trying not to be ahead ofthe curve. On the up side we have to be. I think that's in thenature of a central bank because if we are too easy coming down, weset into motion a secular upward bias [in inflation]. There should beasymmetry in that respect; we should be ahead of the curve on the upside and behind the curve on the down side.MR. PARRY. But not too far ahead of the curve.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, we can't be too far ahead of thecurve because the markets don't give that much advance notice.Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. A question, if I could. Mr. Chairman, if wegot a .5 [increase] for the next CPI or, say, a couple of .4s for thenext two CPI numbers released before the next meeting, would youconsider that sufficient evidence?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would say it's certainly significantevidence, but we'd have to make certain that--. Well, let me put itthis way: The CPI strictly by itself and only by itself I'muncomfortable with. If we don't get other evidence on the underlyingcost structure of the economy or in the financial system that isconfirmation, it's an interesting [question] of what is happening inthose indexes. I don't know the answer to that; I don't think I haveenough information in just the numbers you gave.MR. LINDSEY. If I could just ask a follow-up to that. Ishare what you said about the CPI. I wonder what the bond markets'reaction would be to our not responding to, say, a .5 number or .4 oreven .3.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that is the consideration I thinkwe'd have to be aware of. In other words, if we get evidence that issignificant and of concern [to the markets], I would say that we'dhave to move. If we were at a 5 or 6 percent funds rate, I'd say weprobably could sit tight. But at this [funds rate] level I think thebias is [to move] since we know we can't stay here. I don't disagreewith what Governor Angell had to say on the issue of [reducinginflation] from its current levels. But I'm hesitant at this stage tothink in terms of hypothetical considerations. This is such a complexissue that we really want to know what else is going on at all times.But I do agree that if we are in a position where the markets think weshould be moving against the CPI and we do not, we're in trouble.President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd intended to ask aquestion to Dave Lindsey but your analysis and the factors you citedjust punctuate what is my concern about the decision that needs to be-37-3/23/93made and the criteria at this meeting and other meetings back to lastfall. Specifically, I want to refer to the table on page 8 of theBluebook and the associated analysis and to put it into a broader[perspective]. I don't know whether this is a question for the staffto answer or for the whole Committee to address itself to. I rememberseeing this kind of table 20 and 25 years ago and it hasn't changed awhole lot. What role it serves is not so clear to me. The variousmonetary and reserve aggregates that are shown in the little matrixhave changed over time. It's still a puzzle to me how this serves toguide the Committee in formulating a directive on a meeting-to-meetingbasis. In the discussion before our break and in your own commentarynow, I thought it was very interesting, with all of the discussionabout inflation concerns and all of the other things cited, that therewas virtually no reference at all to M2 or any other monetarydimension to that problem. I take it that the purpose of this tableor the commentary in Dave Lindsey's presentation or Don Kohn'spresentation when he's in that seat, is to guide the Committee on atradeoff of selecting higher or lower fed funds rates and what we areto expect associated with that. But nobody is talking about reserveand monetary aggregates. And there was your own response to SenatorSarbanes in the last question of the Humphrey-Hawkins hearings abouthaving your staff work with his staff to move away from M2 in terms ofHumphrey-Hawkins or at least to supplement that by looking at otherthings. And I don't know whether--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It was to supplement, not to move away.MR. JORDAN. Supplement, right. I don't know what thoseother things are.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Nor do we at this point!MR. JORDAN. Well, in the meetings during the fall I thoughtthe discussion was clearly over real economic activity, output,nonfarm payroll employment, and jobless claims, with very littlereference to where we were compared to money [objectives] as towhether we ought to lower the funds rate or not. And today it's aquestion of concerns over inflation with little reference to money andreserves as to whether we ought to raise the funds rate. So, doesthis serve any useful purpose at all or should we recast the input tothe Committee that we get from staff in the Bluebook?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is that a question!MR. JORDAN. For Don Kohn maybe, but he's away.MR. D. LINDSEY. Oh well, I'll fill in for Don. I do thinkthe alternative sentence that we gave for the directive concedes thatthe meaning of that table for policy implementation is not what itused to be when M2 relative to the Committee's expectations truly wasa factor in decisions to alter the degree of pressure on reservepositions or the federal funds rate. It was not the onlyconsideration but it was an important one in a way that one can't sayis still the case today. So in that sense I think your insight is acorrect one. The next question you also asked is: Okay, what otherintermediate target variable then do we use as a substitute for M2?If I knew of one, I'd supply it. But I'm not sure there is a uniquealternative intermediate target that could play that role, at least-38-3/23/93for a time. Down the road I think there's a chance that M2 or someother, possibly redefined, aggregate might show itself worthy ofreasserting that kind of role. But I can't say that I can offer onetoday for you.MR. MCTEER. May I ask a follow-up question to that? Forsome time now I have wondered if we pushed harder on the fed fundsrate to reduce it whether that might just accelerate thedisintermediation around the banking system and result in smallervalues for the Ms rather than higher. But according to this, if wehave a 3 percent fed funds rate, we will get a certain set of growthrates for the monetary aggregates; if we lower the fed funds rate 1/2point we will get a faster rate of growth in the aggregates, and if weraise the fed funds rate by 1/2 point we will get a slower rate ofgrowth in them. I question that, but my question is: Was this takeninto account in the Feinman/Porter work, which I interpreted in partto cast doubt on this?MR. D. LINDSEY. Well, let me take a minute to answer thatquestion because it is complicated. First of all, the answer dependson the lag that you look at. Here we're simply going out four monthsto midyear. There I think the evidence is pretty clear that we've gotthe sign right. Around the ends of the two prior years the Systemeased and we got big increases in money growth in February of thesucceeding years. Indeed, it was such a large effect that we're nowsaying we think X-11 distorted our seasonal factors. So, I think overthe short run, given the lags and how quickly deposit rates adjustdownward, there clearly is an effect from the narrowing of theopportunity costs and inflows particularly into liquid accounts. Soin answer to that part of your question I would say I'm confident ofthe signs for these near-term effects. It gets tougher as you go outfor a year. You'll recall in the February Bluebook that we puttogether simulations that did show that a decline in the federal fundsrate would tend to increase the rate of M2 growth over a year's time.You, I recall, asked Don if he thought that was reasonable and hisanswer was--I'm paraphrasing it--that it's questionable in the sensethat we had to make the intermediate-term rate adjust down faster inresponse to a funds rate [decline] than is standard in the quarterlymodel in order to get a result like that. If you allow theintermediate rate to come down with the speed that we did in thatsimulation then, yes, M2 will increase. We used the Feinman/Portermodel for that simulation; that's the result we got. It isinteresting, as Governor Angell pointed out at that meeting, thatnominal GDP [growth] was more responsive to the decline in the fundsrate than was M2. In other words velocity in that simulation tendedto rise when we lowered the funds rate. Nevertheless, that simulationwas based on the Feinman/Porter model with an extraneous assumptionabout how long rates react to movements in short rates. Finally, andI'll try to keep this very short, my own view is quite different fromthe Feinman/Porter model. My own view is that that model attributestoo much to interest rate spreads and attributes, therefore, toolittle effect to reductions in short rates over time; it has a verysmall interest elasticity because there are certain variables that itdoesn't embody at all. And it seems to me that those variables wereat work over that period pushing M2 down at the same time our easingmoves were tending to support M2. In my view, the model doesn't fullyappreciate the support that we were giving to M2 through our easingsbecause it isn't quite rich enough to capture the omitted variables.-39-3/23/93So, my own personal answer to your question is: Yes, even over ayear's time, there is an appreciable interest sensitivity to M2.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think it's quite appropriatethat several members have raised concerns about inflation in thefuture. After all, that is our responsibility. We need to be, inyour terms, "vigilant." But I think we need to be vigilant on bothsides of the equation. First of all, it seems to me that the evidenceis far from persuasive that we are now in an inflationary cycle oreven at the beginning of one. Secondly, it also seems to me that thisexpansion is really quite young; I don't know whether to describe itas being at a tender age or in its adolescence, but there is still aquestion as to its sustaining quality, although things are certainlylooking better. So, having said that, it does seem to me that it ispremature to make any move at this time. I think it would be aserious mistake for the Committee to take action at this time, so mypreference is the same as yours--that is, to have alternative B with asymmetric directive. I would add that I would prefer the alternativeparagraph for the directive to the one we've been using because of theuncertainties surrounding M2 and M3.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree with BobForrestal. I think it's a good thing that people raised the concernsthey have because I think maintaining our credibility is veryimportant. I think 3 to 4 percent inflation is too high because itmay creep up beyond that; the evidence in the past certainly issupportive of that. I strongly support [the view] that it is thewrong time to change for a variety of reasons, which I'd like toquickly mention. I look at the Bluebook--not just at page 8 and thequestions that Jerry Jordan raised--but at table 2, which shows thecredit flows over the last 6 months. And I have a hard time thinkingthat that has been very expansive in virtually any sector because I'mlooking at bank credit but also at the debt measures. There justisn't a whole lot there. That, of course, is consistent with the weakMs that we've seen. Also, we are in the early stages of a recoveryand I think it's hard to say it has been overheated so far. There's alot of uncertainty about these structural issues. None of us has anyidea what this Russian business means, though I don't want to put toomuch weight on that. But beyond that, at least in my own mind, I haveto think about how we affect prices and what determines inflation.And I don't think we can avoid [the conclusion] that the effects comethrough the real sector. There is no magic in this. I think, asJerry and others have said before, on the way down we got prices downbecause the economy was quite soft; and I just don't see that we're ina position now--and of course this is what is reflected in labormarkets--where there's the kind of impetus that's consistent with alonger-term rise in inflation. Having said that, I'll fully admitthat that story is going to be way too old if the price numbers keepgoing up and we keep saying that it can't happen in the analyticalframework we have. But I think it would be premature to move at thisstage. I also would prefer the alternative language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.-40-3/23/93MR. MCTEER. I agree with Bob Forrestal's desire forsymmetric vigilance. Maybe another way of putting it is that we nowhave a policy equivalent of a kinked demand curve. We're notnecessarily happy with the price that we have--that is, the fed fundsrate--but there are great disadvantages in moving it in eitherdirection. So, we're sort of stuck with it for a while. I was movedby the Mullins-Angell argument. I didn't expect us to be seriouslyconsidering tightening because of accelerating inflation, and thatargument did make an impression on me. But for the time being I wouldprefer to follow Governor LaWare's admonition to remain on red alertin that regard. So, I support "B" symmetric with the alternativeparagraph.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think we have moderate, not robust, growth.We still have structural drags on the economy in the financial system;we have slack in labor markets and subdued labor costs; and we'refacing a restrictive fiscal policy. While we need to be vigilant oninflation and avoid the mistakes of the past, we also need to look atthe fundamentals when statistics are mixed. And I think thefundamentals still point toward an outlook of moderate growth andslowly declining unemployment and a still fairly persuasive case thatinflationary pressures are likely to be held in check. When I add allthese up, I come out with a constant monetary policy at this point,and I have a strong preference for keeping an even hand regarding whatour next move might be.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Did you indicate a preference on thesentence?MR. BOEHNE. The alternative is fine with me.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I support your proposal. My ownview is that we're in a stage where we're looking at a moderaterecovery. The issue is whether inflation will stay at the currentlevel or begin to rise. We don't know at this point. And because wedon't know, I don't think we should be acting as if we do. So, Iwould feel comfortable where we are and I strongly support symmetriclanguage. I don't think we should be trying to tip our hand oranticipate at this stage. On the language, I prefer the alternativelanguage at this time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. "B" symmetric, alternative sentence.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. A man of few words. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I would strongly supportalternative B with symmetric language and the current languageindicating specific growth expectations with regard to M2 and M3. Wehave been in an easing mode for quite some while now and a change inpolicy is going to be a very, very major change. Somehow theasymmetric language does imply a somewhat automatic shift. Well,perhaps not, but there is an implication of a somewhat automatic-41-3/23/93shift. If we do make a change, and it's entirely possible that wemight, I would far prefer to do that from a consensus in the group,perhaps in a telephone call between now and the next meeting. But fornow I think maintaining our current stance is absolutely appropriate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I, too, would support alternative B,symmetric. Again, in the face of all these conflicting signals, Ithink we have to go back and look at the fundamentals. And thefundamentals, as best I can judge them, are still okay even though therisks have changed. Again, in the context of Governor Angell'searlier point, I don't remember '68 or '69, but I do remember '84 and'87. I might add '88; I think '88 was a watershed, too. In all threeof those cases I was on the same side of the ledger, whatever that'sworth, but in all three of those cases I had some conviction about theeconomy itself. I might feel differently six weeks from now but atleast at this moment I still don't have that conviction about [where]the real economy [is going]. And it's for that reason that I preferto stay where we are at least for a little while longer.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I, too, support alternative B, symmetriclanguage, and the alternative description of the monetary aggregates.Like many others, after the discussion before the break I re-thoughtthe price situation and went back to fundamentals a little,recognizing that we're probably not going to be very good at gettingthe timing precisely correct. Most of these factors have beenmentioned and I won't belabor all of them. But it seems to me that[we are in] an environment where most of the other industrializedeconomies are either weak or contracting, where labor markets here arerelatively soft, and where fiscal policy is probably going to give usat least some dose of restraint; that just doesn't strike me as anenvironment in which inflation is going to accelerate for any durabletime. I think we can certainly wait until at least May before acting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. "B" symmetric, alternative language, Mr.Chairman, for all the reasons that have been mentioned.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, I certainly accept yourproposal. Let me just say, though, that I think the next severalmonths are going to be a really critical period for monetary policy asyou suggested in your comments. It seems to me that what's happeningis that we are now moving from a somewhat tentative recovery into aperiod of mature expansion; certainly the chances are that that ishappening. And this has been the period in the business cycle in thepast when inflation pressures often and quietly have begun to build,even though there was some slack in the economy. As Jerry and othershave suggested, I think the markets are going to be watching us veryclosely in this period to see whether we act to resist thosepressures, if in fact they do arise. More specifically, they're goingto be watching to see how we react to the increased risks of inflationeven before we see undeniable evidence of it. And in that context-42-3/23/93Governor Angell's comments about the way we ran monetary policy backin 1984 and again in the 1987-88 period were right on the money. Idon't want to overdramatize, but I don't think it's an exaggeration tosuggest that the credibility we have fought so hard to establish--andI think we've done so successfully--over the last 10 years could wellbe on the line in the next several months. But again, as I said, Icould certainly go with "B" and symmetric language. I agree with BobForrestal and you and others who expressed the need for some caution.But, frankly, if we get another month or two of crummy inflation data,I think we need to think about a change or at least a tilt towardtightening in the directive language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. "B" symmetric. This certainly seems the timeto keep our powder dry. I guess I have no objection to thealternative language; I'm not crazy about it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Mullins.MR. MULLINS. First, with respect to the rate adjustment,there's not only the question of tightening to restrain inflation;there's also the question of aligning the rate with what might beconsidered the observed rate of inflation, which has been 4 percentfor the past 6 months, and 6 percent for the past 4 months. It seemsto me that there is some possibility that we've eased in real rateterms as this inflation rate has gone up; so, that's something tothink about. In general I am concerned that if we get a couple of bad[inflation] numbers, the market will respond. And the market willalso start to wonder whether we're still on the job. I don't feelcomfortable putting our faith in a quirky index with no persuasiveeconomic logic as well as indicators on the other side. There is somerisk in putting [our faith] in fundamentals in the sense that we mayreassemble in May and look back, if we do have a couple of badnumbers, on almost three quarters of an imbedded trend in core CPI at4-1/2 percent. But at this stage I would support the Chairman'sjudgment to ride this out a bit longer before responding and thereforehold off. I don't know that there's much advantage in trying tosignal with an asymmetric directive; we might as well make a judgmentas we go along here. So, I would support "B" symmetric and thealternative language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I could accept your proposal, Alan. As I thinkabout the symmetry issue, we might as well take the heat when we makea move, not through some words. We've been to that movie recently andit's probably not worth it. There are two things that influence mythinking right now. I'd probably be more concerned if we hadn't seenthe slowdown in M1, reserves, the base, and so forth over the lastcouple of months. As you know, I don't think those are an appropriatetarget for policy, but I do think they have some value as an indicatorof the thrust, and they have slowed down. The other thing is thatwe're looking at higher inflation numbers, although David makes thepoint very well that we're still probably not looking at enoughnumbers yet to be sure. It's dangerous to overreact to high frequencydata. But I agree with what Al Broaddus said, that if we wait until-43-3/23/93we're absolutely sure we're looking at inflation and expectations havebecome imbedded, it's very hard to catch up, as you said too.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Then we're several months late.MR. MELZER. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I agree with everyone on the issue of symmetry.You've got that right. I hope I'm wrong on the other score. I hopethat I'm worrying about something that doesn't need to be worriedabout. I guess I'm also engaging in a confessional; I'm sort ofapologetic for my past criticisms of the Martin and Burns Fed because[the job] really is tough. It's very easy to sit there and lookbackward and say: Why did they do that? The signs are very clearwhen looking backward; they are not so clear when one is lookingforward. I certainly recognize how tough this kind of call is. But afew of the things you've said convince me even more of my position. Ihear the Committee being satisfied with 3 percent inflation. I hearthe Committee targeting 3 percent inflation. I hear the Committeesaying if the rate of inflation doesn't go up, we are all right. Now,stop and think about this a minute. What that means is that theCommittee is confining the periods of diminishing inflation to periodsof economic slowdown and recession, which is just the opposite of whatour responsibility is, it seems to me. Our responsibility is to applythe pressure that brings the rate of inflation toward zerocontinuously and gradually and consistently. That's what our job is.And I hear you saying that if the rate of inflation doesn't go up--andmaybe it won't--we're okay. I'm not more pessimistic on the rate ofinflation going up than the rest of you. I'm just very pessimisticabout inflation staying at 3 percent, and [I'm concerned that] if itstays at 3 percent, somewhere in this expansion it'll go higher. Theminute it goes higher than 3 percent, then we're going to put thebrakes on and we're back to a stop/go policy. It really is verypainful for me to be a part of this kind of operation. So I therebystep aside from so many people I respect. And I am willing to saythat I am only the fool who sees it correctly! [Laughter]Choosing a fed funds rate is quite different from changingthe fed funds rate by increments. If all of a sudden we dropped intothe room and none of us had anything to do with where the fed fundsrate is and we looked at the U.S. economy, at the world economy and atinterest rates around the world, what rate would we choose for the fedfunds rate? I wish, Jerry, that I could rely upon M2. I alwayswanted to rely upon the Ms. And I only left the Ms when the Ms leftme! [Laughter] So, what we're doing here is that we're caught in anincremental creep. You see, in the Martin Fed it was those eighth ofa point changes in the fed funds rate that they belabored over; inlooking backward with hindsight we see that they were clearly out ofthe ball park in terms of what they should have been talking about.But we have the benefit of looking at that history and knowing thathistory.As for the bond markets, what I hear you saying is justsetting the bond markets up for a real spill. If we act now, some ofthe people in the bond markets will say: "What in the world are thepeople at the Fed doing?" But they'll think about it, and I don't-44-3/23/93think that the bond markets will react by saying: "Well, my goodnesslook what's coming." Incremental creep, of course, gets the bondmarket participants to believe that the fed funds rate is not a randomwalk. Consequently, if we get behind and they make the first move,the bond market will say "Here they come" and then anticipate all themoves that are there because they will also see those price numbersthat are going to cause us to act. I believe the fed funds rate oughtto be set at such a rate that we would have just as strong a chancethat the next move would be down as that the next move would be up.Otherwise, we're going to do the bond market in. But if we ask whatshould the fed funds rate be and say we should set it high enough thatwe would think the next move may be down because we really are in afiscal mode change here--that I'm certainly very well aware of--it'spossible that the fiscal drag in 1994 would be such that lowerinterest rates may very well be called for. But if we start off intothis environment with the fed funds rate at 3 percent when we may needto be easing, I think we'll be lost.Finally, I guess I have only pretended to be thinking the waymany of you think because I really don't. I really do believe inprice level targeting. I really do believe that our job is somehow orother to mimic that wonderful golden era, the gold standard, in whichmoney is restrained in such a way that people have confidence in moneyand its purchasing power, and thereby I'd like to see credit growthright out of the roof in an environment in which people know that theycan depend upon the Federal Reserve to maintain the purchasing powerof the dollar. So, Mr. Chairman, as no surprise to you, I choosealternative C. And I really don't care what you people do with youralternative language.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'd say that was "C" symmetric!MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I listened to what you said, andunlike Governor Angell, I'm not the fool who sees it the way it is;I'm probably the fool who sees it wrong! You stated, and I agree,that we now have an unsustainably low federal funds rate. You alsostated that at some point in the future we're going to have to moveand move aggressively. You also pointed out that slowing down anoverheating economy through monetary policy is expensive. Youmentioned inventories; you mentioned that 400 basis points would slowdown real investment, and I agree with you--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I was saying: What do you do in anenvironment in which the credit markets are dead and you decide youwant to slow down the economy? The question is: Why do you do it?The other question is: How do you do it? And I say that under thoseconditions you need extraordinarily stringent tightening whereas ifyou're responding against a credit expansion you can do it byincrements.MR. LINDSEY. And we are not now talking about a rapidexpansion of credit?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. When was the last time you saw inflationwithout support from the credit market?-45-3/23/93MR. MULLINS. The last six months.MR. LINDSEY. I think you're right on all counts, Mr.Chairman, but if we have an unsustainably low [fed funds] rate,wouldn't it be better to have a mild move now? The mechanism by whichI see that being translated into the real economy is that, frankly, Ithink we have overextended financial markets. I think you said soyourself; you said you would be quitting the bond market right now.And you said that the stock market is quite high. There's probablynot a lot of real effect from 25 basis points on the fed funds rate.I do think, though, that it is a signal to those markets that perhapswe think they are overextended. And I would rather raise the fedfunds rate 25 points now to put a little cold water on them than to bein a situation in a few months where we might have to raise itsignificantly more. Again, I am saying that with full respect foryour judgment, which is far greater than mine. I'm lucky that I amjust a governor and not chairman; that perhaps gives me more freedomof movement.When it comes to other [developments that people] mentionedthat are holding us back, fiscal policy and the internationalsituation were mentioned. As for fiscal policy, this year the fiscalpolicy situation is not contractive. In fact, they've decided topostpone the tax increase in order to make it that way. The timing isprobably smart from their perspective. With regard to internationalpolicy, the transmission mechanism from international weakness shouldbe a strengthening dollar. That is what is going to restraininflation in this country and it is not happening. And I am veryconcerned that it is not happening. When industrial production isrising 3 or 4 percent at an annual rate in this country and is fallingat a 3 or 4 percent annual rate in every other country in the world,to have the dollar unchanged should be sending out alarm bells. So, Iam not persuaded that those two factors, which should normally holdback inflation, are going to hold it back.Finally, the real reason that decided me to jump off the deepend and join my colleague is the point he just made. When I joinedthe Fed I had to go through the cells in my brain and ruthlessly ripout all those I had learned in college that said inflation is reallyokay. And I prepared a speech in which I wrote down every reason whyI thought price stability was crucial. Unfortunately, I have nowgiven that speech so many times that I actually believe it. [Laughter]The point is that what we are really saying--every one of us aroundthe table said it, perhaps by indirection--is that it's fine as longas inflation does not accelerate, meaning that 3 or 4 percent is fine.Well, that should not be acceptable to anyone here. Three percentinflation is not acceptable. In fact, it's in my speech; I havemanaged to convince myself that 3 percent inflation is not acceptable.Furthermore, if it goes back up to 4 percent, then we go back to thesituation where we ask what was gained by the last 5 years of monetarytightness. And the answer is absolutely nothing. And our friends outthere who were my former professors will say: "You see, we told youso. You can't hold inflation down; you can try for a little while attremendous cost to the economy; but you can't hold it downpermanently." So again, Mr. Chairman, I have tremendous respect foryour point of view and I know I'm voting in a tiny minority but I havemanaged to convince myself that at this point long-term economic-46-3/23/93growth without inflation can best be had with a small rise, maybe 1/8point, in the fed funds rate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're taking alternative--MR. LINDSEY. "C."MR. MULLINS. Alternative language?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Alternative language?MR. LINDSEY. Oh, I don't care. Yes, it looks fine.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Let's try "B" symmetric with thealternative language.MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for theimmediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degreeof pressure on reserve positions. In the context of the Committee'slong-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economicgrowth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, andmonetary developments, slightly greater reserve restraint or slightlylesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in the intermeetingperiod. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to beconsistent with a resumption of moderate growth in the broadermonetary aggregates over the second quarter."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesVice Chairman Corrigan YesGovernor Angell NoPresident Boehne YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Lindsey NoPresident McTeer YesGovernor Mullins YesGovernor Phillips YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. The next meeting is--MR. BERNARD. May 18th.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May the 18th.END OF MEETING-47-