Meeting of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 6-7, 1993A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in theoffices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System inWashington, D.C., on Tuesday, July 6, 1993, at 2:30 p.m. and continuedon Wednesday. July 7. 1993, at 9:00 a.m.PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, ChairmanMr. Mullins 1/Mr. AngellMr. BoehneMr. KeehnMr. KelleyMr. LaWareMr. LindseyMr. McTeerMr. Oltman 2/Ms. PhillipsMr. SternMessrs. Broaddus, Jordan, Forrestal. and Parry,Alternate Members of the CommitteeMessrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Presidentsof the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,St. Louis, and Boston, respectivelyMr. Kohn, Secretary and EconomistMr. Bernard, Deputy SecretaryMr. Coyne, Assistant SecretaryMr. Gillum, Assistant SecretaryMr. Mattingly, General CounselMr. Patrikis, Deputy General CounselMr. Prell, EconomistMr. Truman, EconomistMessrs. R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, Promisel,Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld, Siegman,Simpson, and Slifman, Associate EconomistsMr. McDonough. Manager of the System Open MarketAccountMs. Greene, Deputy Manager for ForeignOperationsMs. Lovett, Deputy Manager for DomesticOperations1/ Acting Vice Chairman in Mr. Corrigan's absence.2/ First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, attending asalternate member for Mr. Corrigan.Mr. Madigan. Associate Director, Division of MonetaryAffairs. Board of GovernorsMr. Stockton. Associate Director, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Danker, Assistant Director, Division of MonetaryAffairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Small. 2/ and Whitesell, 1/ Section Chiefs,Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMs. Kusko, 3/ Senior Economist, Division of Researchand Statistics, Board of GovernorsMs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant.Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of GovernorsMessrs. Beebe. J. Davis, T. Davis, Goodfriend, andMs. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, FederalReserve Banks of San Francisco, Cleveland,Kansas City, Richmond, and Atlanta, respectivelyMr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank ofBoston,Messrs. Coughlin and Guentner. Assistant Vice Presidents,Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and New York,respectively2/ Attended portion of meeting relating to a discussion of the usesof a broad monetary aggregate that includes bond and stock mutualfunds.1/ Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussionof the economic outlook and its longer-run growth objectives formonetary and debt aggregates.Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting ofJuly 6, 1993CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The staff has circulated a memorandum[on a monetary aggregate that includes bond and stock mutual funds]and I assume you've all read it. Nonetheless, it would be useful forus to have a broad overview from Ms. Danker.MS. DANKER. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Ms. Danker?MR. BOEHNE. What are the data gathering costs involved withhaving something like M2+ [unintelligible].MS. DANKER. Well, most of the data gathering costs areincurred by the investment companies that provide us with the mutualfunds data. We have access to these data entirely through the ICI atthis point. If we want to enhance the quality of those dataconsiderably, that entails at the first level dealing with ICI andconvincing them that that would be a good idea or convincing them tolet us deal with the funds one-on-one in terms of editing the data.There are, of course, alternatives--vendors that sell these data. Butthe ICI seems to have the best series on an aggregate basis.MR. KOHN. We, of course, have no legal authority to forcethe mutual funds to report to us. It's not like the deposit data usedto calculate reserve requirements. We have worked with the ICI insetting up their weekly data series--they consulted with us lastsummer about that--and on the money market funds data. They are torn;they would like to have data; they want to be cooperative. On theother hand, they don't want to put burdens on their membership. It isentirely voluntary and they hear a lot of complaining from theirmembers if they call them excessively to clear up data anomalies. So,there's quite a bit of tension on this score with Board staff and ICIstaff even on the money market funds data.MR. PARRY. Are they going to an end-of-week collectionanyway, independent of our prodding? Don't they now have end-of-monthdata?MR. KOHN. Well, they had an experimental process under wayto collect a weekly series on the bond and stock mutual funds.MR. PARRY. But that's not a daily average?MR. KOHN. No, it's not; it's still a one-day number.MR. PARRY. And they plan to do it now, so that would be someimprovement.MR. KOHN. Yes, absolutely. Still, there's the issue ofchecking the data, looking for anomalies, calling the funds back andso forth, and there's not a lot of appetite for that. Now, maybe onething we could do is to help subsidize them if that were a problem.But I think the problem is more the tension; they don't [want to]involve their members too much.7/6-7/93MR. SYRON. I happened to talk to about five people in thefunds industry recently; I was doing it coincidentally. I raised thequestion of how they feel about this; this was after we got the memo.Two points: One is--these were economists from the funds--that theythought the idea was crazy in the first place. But beyond that, evenif they were in favor of it, they expected they would have a lot ofinternal difficulty with their data processing people [at a time] whenthey are trying to cut costs; they thought it would be quitedifficult. Then, they raised several technical questions about thingswe'd have to do. There's a lot of concern about this, including nothaving any theoretical foundation. Also, what is set as the boundaryfor what to include and not include that's spendable? But beyond thatthis would be a new venture for us, using data that we don't reallycontrol in some sense.MR. KOHN. We do have the money market funds data already inM2 but it's a very small piece.MR. SYRON. But even on a practical level, independent ofwhat one thinks is the value of this--which I personally think isquestionable--it would be quite difficult.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are you getting an impression from themthat they would be quite concerned about their numbers becoming partof policymaking and then having the Congress require them to dosomething?MR. SYRON. Exactly.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, are we getting an objectiveappraisal of their view of the difficulty of getting the data?MR. SYRON. No, probably not. There has been all thisdiscussion as to whether they should be included in the CRAlegislation and that sort of thing, so they have become very, verynervous about any step they see that makes their liabilities closer tobeing money assets. I wouldn't be surprised, say, in the case ofthat it would become quite difficult because thefellow who runs it--John LaWare can tell you--can be a feisty guy.They might just refuse to do it because they're very, very worriedabout being seen as a [depository] institution.MR. PARRY. Well, in addition to that, we don't exactly havethe strongest case that could be made for a need for it! As the studyindicated, [M2+] really does have some significant limitations.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the only plausible possibilityis to publish it for a limited period of time on an experimentalbasis. But if that's not possible or is too difficult or has theas you would say, there isn't much [promise] there.I thought Debbie Danker was more forthcoming toward this in her oralcomments than in earlier versions [of the memo that] I read. This isvery difficult to pick up without asbestos gloves!MR. BROADDUS. It's hard for me to think that this measurewould ever be very useful operationally given the changing assetvalues that will affect it. That's just a fundamental conceptualproblem for me. I'd like to ask Debbie: Have you all thought about7/6-7/93doing anything like shift adjusting this, using inflow data--the waywe dealt with M1 for a period back in the early 1980s--as opposed tousing the stock concept? You would still have data problems and someother difficulties, but at least you'd get rid of that majorconceptual issue.MS. DANKER. I think the data on the inflows--rather thanformally shift adjusting the aggregate--are very helpful in looking atthe developments in M2 and in figuring out how it's [behaving] vis-a-vis its path. The Feinman/Porter work last year looked at using anaggregate that just cumulated the inflows. But that's not verysatisfying when viewing it in terms of an aggregate and one thinks ofthe capital gains that occurred 10 years ago not counting as moneytoday. But on a shorter-term basis thinking about inflows as somekind of shift adjustment I think can be helpful.MR. KOHN. The problem is that if we just do that, theoutflows could exceed the inflows because of that capital gain thatpeople are taking out and we could have a very funny looking [number].But we could use the inflow data to help analyze M2 rather than tryingto build an artificial aggregate that doesn't have capital gains.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You can't really. What were the grossflows we used in M1 early on? I guess I'm not quite clear what you'resaying.MR. BROADDUS. Well, we did a formal shift adjustment of theM1 aggregate to take out--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. A one-shot thing?MR. BROADDUS. Yes.MR. KOHN. That was when the NOW accounts were authorized.MR. BROADDUS. Right. That's what I was thinking about.MR. KOHN. We did surveys of consumers and did micro analysesof banks to see what was happening between NOW accounts and otheraccounts.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but that's a one-shot sort ofthing.MR. KOHN. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Using growth figures with stock data canget very difficult. I don't see how one can do it.MR. LINDSEY. Conceptually, why does that differ? Peoplecouldn't write a check against the capital gains of 10 years ago, touse your phrase. They can now. Isn't it really the innovation, thenature of the consumer product, that has made us more suspicious thatthis is M2-related? So [why] wouldn't a stock-adjustment-type[process] or looking just at flows be appropriate?MS. DANKER. Well, if you think of it as a stock adjustmentprocess, it's going to be over after some period of time and this7/6-7/93isn't a brave new world or something like that. So, maybe we'd justwant to shift adjust it for a while. There has been an explosion inbank offerings of mutual funds that might make that appropriate. Idon't know that we get a sense of there having been a discrete step somuch as a somewhat more gradual broadening of assets.MR. LINDSEY. But, again, to use the analogy of the capitalgains that happened 10 years ago, [then] I may have been in that fundfor reasons other than liquidity reasons whereas today I might putmoney in that fund for more liquidity oriented motives. That in mymind would be a reason for counting the flows in today or stockadjusting at some point. I agree with you that it is not a stepfunction, but clearly the product is different today than it was 10years ago, and some kind of adjustment might be [appropriate].MR. PRELL. I don't think it's clear that the product is thatmuch different from the perception of the investor; it's how he isreally using it. Transactions, turnover kinds of measures, are notparticularly high. Indeed, they are for many people a substitute fora time deposit or a very dormant kind of savings account as opposed toa transaction vehicle. Transactions are clumsy out of the mutualfunds that have capital gains and losses because of the complicatedtax accounting one has to do if nothing else. I don't think there isstrong evidence that these are liquidity so much as investmentholdings.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. I have a couple of conceptual problems thatrelate to what Larry and Mike were just discussing. One has to bevery careful about the distinction between the value of a dollar andthe value of assets denominated in dollars. Even if we have no netinflows, if we have an environment where we're stabilizing thepurchasing power of the dollar and the inflation premium and interestrates are coming down, we can have a capital gains that would indicatepolicy is expansionary when in fact it is anti-inflationary and thereverse. If we got into a period where people expected the value ofthe dollar to decline and interest rates to rise, the value of thesefunds would fall, indicating policy is restrictive. The comment aboutit being an accurate picture of the thrust of policy comes fromrelating it to nominal GDP. But if the Committee is acceptingstabilizing the purchasing power of the dollar as its objective, wemeasure policy as a central bank from that objective--not targetingGDP but stabilizing the purchasing power of the dollar and not assetsdenominated in dollars.MR. KOHN. I think that over time the two wouldn't be thatmuch different. I would assert that the capital gains and losseswould make it a not very good predictor of nominal GDP. It's partlyfortuitous events--the changing way people react to the yield curveand the accessibility--that have made this velocity relativelyconstant over the last few years, and we can't really count on that.MR. JORDAN. I agree. But even if it were, I'd have aproblem with it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do we have any evidence that suggeststhere is a partial inverse relationship between stock prices and M2?7/6-7/93 -5-MR. KOHN. We do have the bond yields in the sense that we'veput yield curve variables in our M2 equations. And when bond yieldsgo up and the yield curve steepens, then we tend to get flows--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm asking whether in fact capital gainsin stock funds or funds generally are substitutable for depositoryfunds?MR. KOHN. My guess is we just don't have enough experiencewith that. That's basically what this aggregate--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I'm raising a broader question.We have the wealth effect occurring on savings, and a more generalquestion is whether M2 is inversely affected by the level of stockprices.MR. KOHN. I'm not sure. We had a huge runup in stock pricesin '86 and '87 and we didn't notice much of a shortfall in M2 growth.When stock prices came down--the crash of '87--we had a little surgeinto M2.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What happened in 1987 would be extremeevidence of it. If you couldn't find a lot there, you're not going tofind a little any other time.MR. KOHN. The stock market is an alternative repository forsavings. And peoples' expectations about future returns in the stockmarket will affect their assessment of what they're going to get outof a time deposit versus [the stock market]. So, there's going to besome relationship. But I would doubt that it's very strong.MR. JORDAN. Your question implies a reversal of the signsbecause traditionally we would have said that wealth enters the demandfunction positively, but you're suggesting that this is a substitutioneffect.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's implicit in thisdiscussion.MR. JORDAN. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's curious that there's not the rightevidence that would confirm that.MR. JORDAN. It certainly goes against our theoreticalframework.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions or comments? Let meask a more general question. Does anybody think we should do otherthan Option 1--that is, nothing? Option 1 is just to leave it alonefor the moment and look at it. Does anyone have a proactive view asto our even publishing it, not to mention going to targeting it?MR. MULLINS. I wouldn't say my view is to be proactive, butI'd at least not be comatose exactly. Obviously, there is strongevidence that these [accounts] are substitutes for time deposits andCDs since one can observe people carting large sums of money from timedeposits and CDs into these instruments. And it is true that it's7/6-7/93available to spend in the same sense as a time deposit, which is thelogic of CDs. The basic advantage of not simply ignoring all this isthat it provides some empirical content to the velocity story, which[per se] sounds a bit like a tautology or a bit artificial. Now, wehaven't received a lot of flak lately so maybe we've been successfulwith that story and that's why I don't think [a new measure] is soimportant. I do think it's instructive to show these flows to people.I don't think we should anoint M2+ even as an experimental newmonetary aggregate. I suspect were we to do so it would promptly blowup on us. But it is nice to point to something that is growing![Laughter] And it illustrates what is going on; it's the story thatwe're giving behind the increase in velocity. I personally don't likecalling it M2+; in my view that goes a little toward saying we'rethinking about [using] this. But regularly making these flows publicin some way would be helpful, although it seems to me that six monthsago we had a much more contentious situation with respect to M2growth, and the evidence from '92 clearly supported the distortion inthe relationship between M2 and GDP growth. So maybe it's less of anissue--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You mean there's evidence in '93 aswell.MR. MULLINS. Yes, in '93 as well. But it seems to me thesteam came out of the argument, really, with the fourth-quarter 1992numbers. We were getting pounded regularly on this M2 growth topicand after that period--when all the data were in for 1992--it seems tome that it hasn't been an especially big issue. So, maybe it would beokay simply to do nothing, and I wouldn't bother the mutual funds. Ido think it would be useful to provide the data at least for someperiod of time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We can publish part of it.MR. MULLINS. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We can just add it to one of the monthlyreleases.MR. MULLINS. There are two ways we could do it.MR. SYRON. The Board might want to publish it in theBulletin rather than as a release. If we put it in the release itdoes start to look as if we're thinking about it for the money supply.MR. KOHN. There are a number of alternatives that the Boardcould contemplate in terms of publishing this, including just makingit available on an informal basis to researchers [and others] whocall. We did include a chart of the flows in the Humphrey-Hawkinsreport last time--in the back where only the aficionados look--and wecan certainly continue to do that.MR. MULLINS. One could call it M2 plus the flows to stocksand bonds and mutual funds.MR. KOHN. Right.7/6-7/93MR. MULLINS. I don't like the idea of having a new label.Another option is to have M2 and just publish the flows to the fundsand then people could do the calculation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're taking about flows rather thanstocks?MR. MULLINS. Yes.MS. PHILLIPS. Could I ask a question? Are any of the CDsthat are included in M2 indexed in any way?MR. KOHN. I think there are a few.MS. PHILLIPS. Any with equity?MR. KOHN. Institutions have offered them from time to time.I think it's a very, very small amount.MS. PHILLIPS. With equity?SPEAKER(?). Citicorp.MS. DANKER. The only thing we subtract out of those areforeign currency denominated [assets].MS. PHILLIPS. So we already have a piece in the CDs?MR. KOHN. But it's minuscule.MR. STERN. Don't those tend to have some sort of guaranteedcomponent so we don't necessarily get big changes in net asset values?SPEAKER(?). No.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I was just going to raise a general question.Is there a case to be made for doing some more generalized work interms of household portfolio behavior?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we're going to be doing thatanyway.MR. MELZER. One of the things that's not particularlysatisfying about this is that we're only capturing a piece of thattotal picture. If we're willing to commit resources to do more work,I'd be in favor of committing them more broadly and looking at thatbasic question of household portfolio behavior.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me ask this: Can I just get ageneral show of hands of those who would prefer that we publishnothing official, other than to include something in the Humphrey-Hawkins report periodically? The next question would be: Do we wantto elevate it and put something special in the Federal ReserveBulletin beyond that? So, who would prefer to do nothing more thanwe've been doing at this particular stage? [Secretary's note: Nearlyall hands were raised.] Offhand it looks as if a majority prefer to-7-7/6-7/93do nothing. Why don't we just keep an eye on it. I think whathappened is that Debbie's memo soured a lot of views on the usefulnessof some of this. I think the worst thing that can happen, if we startto focus on this, is that it may fall off the cliff, as GovernorMullins suggested. But we can keep the issue open and if at a futureCommittee meeting we want to change--MR. KOHN. One addendum, Mr. Chairman. To the extent thatmembers of the Committee are aware of people at their own Banks oralso people outside who are doing research on this issue, we'd be gladto share our data.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh, yes. That's what we're doing nowunofficially.MR. MULLINS. Where are the data available currently?MR. KOHN. Well, we've sort of put together a series. We'realmost a troubleshooter! [Laughter] That wasn't fair. The ICIpublishes monthly data. We've been trying to adjust them to take outthe IRA/Keough accounts, to separate the [holdings of] institutionsfrom [those of] non-institutions, and generally to put them more on anM2-type basis in terms of trying to put together a data series that isa little more comparable with the concepts--MR. MULLINS. How much difference is there between ourinternal version and the ICI version?MR. KOHN. In dollar terms?MR. MULLINS. Does it give a really different picture?MR. KOHN. I doubt it but I'm not 100 percent certain since Ithink those things move pretty slowly. On some of these we only haveonce-a-year data, the level on December 31st. So, we just smoothbetween two December 31sts.MS. DANKER. For example, the aggregate value of these thingsis about a trillion dollars, but only about half of that will show upin M2+ because of the institutional and IRA/Keough accounts.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, shall we move on? The ForeignDesk is next on the agenda. Mr. McDonough.MR. MCDONOUGH. [Statement--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. First, are there questions?MR. BOEHNE. In these joint discussions with the Treasury,which side do you think had more enthusiasm for the intervention?MR. MCDONOUGH. If you were to ask which side had lessenthusiasm, the answer would clearly be ours. I don't thinkhad enormous enthusiasmeither. Rather, there was the notion that with the cacophony ofofficial statements, it had just become so confusing as to what thepolicy was that some clarification once again was in order.7/6-7/93MR. BOEHNE. And was there some attempt within theAdministration to try to reduce all those voices out there talkingabout the yen?MR. MCDONOUGH. Yes, I think so. We were promised that therewould be an effort. And I think if you look at what has not beenhappening, including in the first 24 hours or so of the Summit inTokyo, the silence is remarkable.MR. TRUMAN. President Boehne, I think there are two pointsto be made on this. One is that, clearly, the Administration has notgotten itself into the position of saying they don't want the yen toappreciate further. That's going too far in terms of all the ironsthey have in the fire. So, they are somewhat exposed inevitably.But, for example, when they lifted one of the veils--I guess that'sthe right way to put it--around the proposals for this frameworkdiscussion, they had already whowere involved that [unintelligible]. I was told one story about[someone] who got up to answer a question at the press conference; thequestion was not on the yen but he gave the yen answer as part of thisdiscussion. So, I think at leastto try to keep it out [unintelligible]. Obviously, thecentral players--MR. MCDONOUGH. They got their stories straight.MR. LINDSEY. What are your bets on what the market will doafter the Japanese elections on the 18th?MR. MCDONOUGH. If you assume that the likely outcome is avery uneasy coalition, I think there's a fairly decent chance that thedollar would strengthen a little. But the single most importantaspect is that the fundamentals, with that tremendous current accountand even bigger trade account surplus, point toward a graduallystrengthening yen and a weakening dollar. And we don't have theconviction, as I mentioned, about a stronger dollar against theEuropean currencies. From what we can see of the more speculativeplayers, they find the yen situation sufficiently confusing thatthey'd rather go and play somewhere else where they can figure out theodds better.MR. LINDSEY. So, a weak government is pretty much built intothe market right now?MR. MCDONOUGH. Yes. The market assumes the weak coalition.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If that happens, it means the marketcould remain unchanged or go in the other direction.MR. MCDONOUGH. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions? If not, wouldsomebody like to move to ratify the transactions undertaken since thelast meeting?MR. KELLEY. So moved.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?-9-7/6-7/93SPEAKER(?). Second.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Let's move now tothe Domestic Desk and Joan Lovett.MS. LOVETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Messrs. Prell and Truman.MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We've distributed toall of you a package of charts labeled "Staff Presentation to theFOMC." [Statements--see Appendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. May I just ask for aclarification on Chart 9, showing automotive products as a share ofdomestic absorption? That includes parts and that's the reason whythe numbers are--MR. TRUMAN. That includes the measure for parts excludingtires. We figured that was what people counted too much!MR. KELLEY. I'm glad you asked!MR. LINDSEY. [You said] "workers' comp." That's workmen'scompensation?MR. PRELL. For political correctness reasons, it's nowcalled "workers'" compensation. I knew it would cause confusion. Iwas tempted to say "workmen's" compensation, but I didn't!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What is happening to all the statutes!Questions? President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. With regard to this analysis that you did oninflation and what you had at least in the written report of thebriefing to the Board last Friday: The speed effects as I interpretthem really say we have to look not just at static comparisons ofunemployment versus inflation but also the kinds of changes that arebeing made. If you look back over the post-World War II period, therehas been a tendency over those years for inflation, when it escalates,to escalate from cycle to cycle. We've also had examples in the 1950sand again in the 1980s of disinflation from cycle to cycle so that onthe upside of these cycles we end up with peaks in the later cyclebeing higher than the previous cycle. The same [is true] for thefloors; when inflation de-escalates, we make progress from cycle tocycle. One question is whether that is just a variation of the so-called speed effect. If there is something to this speed effect orthe cycle-to-cycle kind of phenomenon, should it be so strange that ascycles mature there ought to be times during those cycles when we makemore progress against inflation where things flatten out? If you lookat it from cycle to cycle, what we want to do is to keep inflationfrom escalating so that in a subsequent cycle we can keep bringing therate of inflation down. My question is: How much have you looked atthis cycle-to-cycle phenomenon? It does strike me that it is part ofthis dynamic or speed approach to looking at inflation.-10-7/6-7/93MR. PRELL. I guess in the abstract I don't view this speedeffect as relating to the kind of phenomenon I think you're talkingabout. The effect should in essence wash out over the course of thecycle as you get back to the same unemployment rate level. You'vegotten the bad part on one side and the good part on the other side ofthat cyclical movement. But I suspect what has been more at work overthe postwar period has been a gradual, and at some points maybe not sogradual, escalation of inflation expectations, which have gottenrather deeply embedded and have not been reversed from cycle to cycle.And as we attempted to move the economy back to higher levels ofemployment through macro policy, taken as a sort of base is thishigher level of inflation expectations. We don't seem to be headedinto this pattern this time where over a long period of time now therehas been a lower inflation. I think we've made some progress inlowering inflation expectations from what prevailed a decade or adecade and a half ago. I think such expectations are the morecritical element probably in this movement to higher inflation levelsfrom cycle to cycle. But I don't think we've really investigatedthings in that particular cyclical context.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mike, on Chart 12, referring to the householdsector, down in the lower right corner you have the cash flow burdenand the fixed-rate mortgage is shown. But I wonder if you have it forall consumer debt?MR. PRELL. Obviously, the nomenclature here has misled you.This is the cash flow burden of owning a home: How much the monthlypayment on a home is relative to disposable income. What we plottedhere is a new home, constant quality price measure, and a currentfixed-rate mortgage. So, this is what it would cost to buy a hometoday, setting aside issues of the down payment. And the downpayment, as I noted, seems to be a big hurdle for a large segment ofthe population, particularly the younger group; relative wages havenot worked to their advantage in recent years. If you're looking atdebt service burdens in general--MR. KELLEY. Yes.MR. PRELL. We've seen a significant decline in those burdensover the course of the last few years; debt has grown less rapidly,interest rates have come down, and refinancing opportunities haveopened up. We're not expecting quite that rate of improvement butthere may be some room for that in our forecast largely through therollover of debt into lower rate loans. Debt growth in this forecastis certainly keeping pace with income in the household sector.MR. KELLEY. How far is that overall debt service level stillabove what one might call the "norm" back a few years ago, maybe inthe '70s?MR. PRELL. Well, it's certainly back down a considerable wayrelative to the mid-1980s. To go back much further than that we canlook at the table in the Greenbook, page 11-2.MR. KELLEY. I'm sorry I missed it. Okay.-11-7/6-7/93MR. PRELL. As you can see, we're still above, by at least asmall margin, the levels that we had through the '60s and '70s.MR. KELLEY. That's what I was looking for, thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. A theoretical question on sacrifice ratio, whichsupports the question about speed effects: Would that necessarilywash out over the cycle, depending upon how quickly the economyaccelerated and decelerated, or is it [not] neutral in a sense? Onecan conceive of patterns in which it wouldn't be neutral.MR. PRELL. My colleagues can correct me, but I thinkmechanically as one conceives of this model it will wash out as wemove back to the initial level of unemployment. Now, there could beproblems that arise as inflation expectations build so that a dynamicprocess is created here that works against us. But in terms of justisolating this conceptually, it should be no net effect.MR. SYRON. What are your thoughts on the sacrifice rationow, given what we're seeing on inflation expectations?MR. PRELL. That is very hard to judge and even difficult tocharacterize in our forecast because the sacrifice ratio is a sort ofnet effect observed ex post. Ex ante one can think about what theslack effect in the model should be and then one can parcel all thesethings out. Our past experience is, as we noted, that in the firststage of this disinflation we seemed to be getting unusually goodtradeoffs. It was well below the traditional two-to-one rule ofthumb. In the recent period, we've been getting either nothing orvery little, depending on how one dates this. On average, it hasn'tbeen much of a departure from our rough rule of thumb. But, indeed,this may be a reflection of the speed effects, which worked favorablythrough at least a good part of 1992 as unemployment was rising. Ithas been working against us more recently.MR. SYRON. It could be a very long distributive kind offunction on people's expectations. And as we get down toward [pricestability] it could be that the portion of people in the labor forcewho remember the '50s level of inflation as compared to those whothink that 3 percent is favorable has diminished. [That would have]unfavorable implications in terms of the sacrifice ratio. Maybepeople think inflation can get only so low.MR. PRELL. Well, that is probably one of the elements of thestickiness of inflation expectations that we've seen. I think we'reclearly a long way from breaking through that barrier.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. On the speed effect, if you were usingthe "seasonally adjusted" seasonally adjusted CPI, would that have anyeffect on the slope of this chart or the correlation coefficients init?MR. PRELL. Well, I seriously doubt it, given that we'relooking at some annual numbers over a long period of time. I don'tthink that would have a great [effect].-12-7/6-7/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry, these are annual numbers?MR. PRELL. You're looking at the middle panel, the scatterdiagram?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Those are annual numbers?MR. PRELL. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh, I'm sorry.MR. PRELL. I'm sorry. That really is poorly labeled. It is30-odd years of data; it goes from 1960 to 1992.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mike, Chart 13, the capital-labor cost ratio,is an exciting chart, if I'm reading it correctly. I don't know if Iam or not.MR. PRELL. I hope we calculated it correctly! [Laughter]MR. LINDSEY. If I interpret this correctly, between '88 and'94, say, the relative price of capital, the user cost of capital, hasfallen 40 percent relative to the wage rate, roughly. Am I reading itcorrectly?MR. PRELL. Yes.MR. LINDSEY. Do you have an historic series on this?MR. PRELL. Yes, we can provide you with a longer timeseries.MR. LINDSEY. Is this an unusual amount of change?MR. PRELL. The computer prices have been falling fast for solong that if we stretched this back--at least going back to the '70s--I think we'd probably still have a pretty steep drop.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But the rates have changed.MR. PRELL. Yes, it may be more in recent years.MR. LINDSEY. If you're talking about computer prices, okay.But when you use cost of capital, there are some tax effects andinterest rates and weighted cost of equity and debt and things likethat in there. And the compensation rate is something like an hourlywage rate?MR. PRELL. Yes, we've used the ECI here.MR. LINDSEY. And this has been falling like that since the'70s?MR. PRELL. Well, undoubtedly, you [have to] go back to aperiod when interest rates were moving sharply enough to havesignificantly moved this.-13-7/6-7/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The computer prices are falling now atrates that are very large; and when you consider the size of thecomputer industry itself there is [unintelligible] effect[unintelligible] earlier period.MR. PRELL. Certainly, this would be the case going backseveral years before this, but I don't have data going back muchearlier.MR. SYRON. This would forecast a real investment boom over along period of time.MR. LINDSEY. Well, it also forecasts problems in the labormarket.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's what part of it is.MR. LINDSEY. That's a part of it, but what's the good ruleof thumb for cross elasticity substitution?MR. PRELL. I can't answer that.SPEAKER(?). Fudge!MR. LINDSEY. Even a tiny number there when you've got a 40percent decline is going to knock a heck of a lot off employment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It explains a good deal; the plant andequipment numbers are low.MR. LINDSEY. They are, yes. My heavens! Thank you.MR. PRELL. I have a chart on the growth rate of the cost ofcapital and it clearly has been falling on average since the beginningof the 1980s expansion. There were a few periods when there was someincrease but we have seen a significant decline over time. It isfaster in this period than it was earlier by a significant margin.MR. LINDSEY. When the crush is off, you can send me a copy.I would appreciate it.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One of the interesting inferences fromthese data is that depreciation charges currently coming on are comingoff equipment from 5 and 6 years ago when the prices were much higher.MR. LINDSEY. Yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, the cash flow is very large relativeto--MR. ANGELL. To the investment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So incentives--. It's a fascinatingprocess in many different ways that we're looking at. And that's whythe capital goods markets are--MR. ANGELL. And lo and behold the credit demands are notrobust!-14-7/6-7/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Exactly.MR. LINDSEY. Because the internal flows--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The cash flows are very large, noquestion. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mike, I have two questions. The first is on themeasurement problems issue. I wonder if you could talk about thatjust a little. I know there's a discussion in Part II of theGreenbook and I'm not sure exactly how this problem originates. Iseach of the series seasonally adjusted except those series where thereapparently is not a statistically significant seasonal adjustmentfactor? And then is it added and the combined unadjusted apparentlyhas a seasonal factor?MR. PRELL. That's right. As I understand it, BLS does notlike to use seasonally adjusted sub-components unless at a moredetailed level there are indications of seasonality in them. If theycan't find it at the very detailed level, they won't do it for thatmajor sub-component of the CPI. And most of this residual seasonalityappears to be in the not seasonally adjusted components of the index.MR. PARRY. So, at the end is there a seasonal adjustment ofthe entire series?MR. PRELL. No, it's an aggregation of seasonally adjustedcomponents.MR. PARRY. Okay. So, it's almost like a deflator that theysee when they publish that. There is a number which is called theindex [unintelligible] implicit.MESSRS. KOHN and PRELL. The weighted average.MR. PARRY. The weighted average, okay.MR. PRELL. One of the things BLS has pointed out and whichgave us pause--we thought about this some months ago in terms ofwhether we should expect something--is that it is hard to find at adetailed level a consistent pattern in recent years. Certaincommodity groups were behaving in a way that suggested there was aseasonal problem. One year it was one thing and another year it wasanother, and that gave us pause. But the accumulation of evidence nowcertainly shows, at least at a statistical level, that there'ssomething going on there. As I said, it doesn't explain everything.The best you can get out of this is that the pattern this year looksmuch like the pattern last year.MR. PARRY. Yes.MR. PRELL. The question is: Why [isn't] the pattern thisyear better than the pattern last year, given the ongoing slack in theeconomy?MR. PARRY. My other question is: In Part I of theGreenbook, and you also referred to it here, you have a table on therelationship between tax increases and expenditure cuts, and for 1994-15-7/6-7/93it's rather interesting. Will it be possible at some time in thefuture to get that out through the entire program? It would be ratherinteresting--MR. PRELL. Certainly. When they pass [some legislation],then we can do something similar. Let me just say--MR. PARRY. It's very interesting because now we see in thenewspapers that Boskin has the ratio at 9 to 1 and somebody else inthe Administration is saying it's 1 to 1.MR. PRELL. Part of the problem here--I touched upon this inmy comments a few minutes ago and unfortunately we didn't emphasizethis in the write-up in the Greenbook--is that this is not all of thedeficit reduction that is occurring in essence.MR. PARRY. Oh, I know that.MR. PRELL. This is more or less the mandatory spending andthe tax changes that are in the package.MR. PARRY. Right.MR. PRELL. The ceilings on discretionary spending would haverequired significant cuts. That is where, for example, the defensecuts are coming in.MR. PARRY. I think in assessing the program you have theright data.MR. PRELL. Well, we hope it's relevant and not throwingpeople off.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Incidentally, on the seasonal adjustmentissue, has anyone looked to see what the bias in the CPI does to thedeflator for the fourth and first quarters and, therefore, the GDPestimates for those quarters?MR. PRELL. We've looked at that. And our finding, tentativethough it may be, is that it probably doesn't have significantimplications for the deflator. There are different indexes used forsome things and different seasonal adjustments. It's not clear thatthis feeds through in an obvious way to the GDP number.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does Commerce seasonally adjust theprice indexes separately? [Unintelligible] I think they may be doingsomething of that nature which would pick this stuff up.MR. PRELL. Well, we've talked many times, at least to thestaff, about differences in the seasonal pattern for food, forexample, where they have used seasonal factors that were sufficient toalter the picture of the PCE deflator from what one would think[looking at] the CPI. There are also different weights, too, in someof these things. So, it really is hard to translate.MR. SLIFMAN. Even within consumption, [for] their PCE, thereare some places where Commerce does not use the CPI. For example, Ithink for air fares, which as you know has been a player in this-16-7/6-7/93seasonality problem, they use independent information rather than CPIinformation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mike, a question on capacity utilization, thelower chart on the lower panel on Chart 14: In the past it seems tome that when we got the capacity utilization to a sustained 85 percentwe had price increases. But with so many industries now becomingglobal, the question is whether this is really a meaningful indicatorat this point. Isn't it entirely possible that we will see domesticcapacity moving up to the higher levels but at the same time we'llcontinue to see prices coming down?MR. PRELL. Discerning flash points is difficult. Certainly,a level of 85 percent is a very high level, and any time we've been inthat area I think we've been in a period of significant inflation.People have declared lower levels of capacity utilization to be flashpoints. We're not sure that's a particularly robust result. In ourforecast I don't think we get into the zone where, unless we'regetting some speed effects as well, this is particularly worrisome.You're right, though: The more open the economy is, the more[important] the cost of transportation or the lower relative value ofthe products and so on, [and] we're going to have more of a potentialrole from foreign supplies in the market. The question is on whatterms. And exchange rate developments, obviously, would affect whatthe price pressures--or the depressing price pressures--would be fromforeign capacity. But, indeed, currently in our forecast there isample capacity abroad. We think the exchange rate movement will befavorable in this regard, so it removes still further the concernsthat industrial capacity limits are going to be a major source ofinflationary pressure.MR. KEEHN. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. A couple of things. First, a comment on yourexchange with Larry Lindsey on the cost of capital. The majorcomputers buy millions of instructions per second generally. And ifyou compare the price of a million instructions per second on a 1980computer with the 1982 computer when [unintelligible] chips came outit's a factor of one-one thousandth in the cost. But the problem isworse than that because we don't include software in capital stockgenerally; it's a perishable factor input. And a lot of softwarewe're using today didn't even exist in 1980, so we can't even makethat comparison. And businesses' real costs of that kind of capital,at least versus labor costs, has fallen far more dramatically than 40percent.MR. LINDSEY. But what surprises me--I understand withcomputers--but in the cost of capital equation [1 minus] ITC minus tauz over 1 minus [tau], the only things that have changed would beeither a rise in the real term or a fall in the true depreciation ofplant and equipment. The tax variables haven't changed since 1988. Isuppose--I made a quick calculation--that if you took a seven-yearpiece of equipment, the [unintelligible] has gone up 19 percent inreal terms, but that's going to work through to maybe a 6 or 7 percent-17-7/6-7/93change in user cost over that time out of 40 percent. So, Jerry, Ithink all the computer effect would have to be in the[unintelligible]. You're saying that computers have caused the realreturn of capital to rise.MR. JORDAN. You can say it that way. I think a part of theproblem is that you're not measuring output the same anymore. You'refocusing just on the input part.MR. LINDSEY. Right, right.MR. JORDAN. But you also have a problem on the output part.The other comment is really a question to Mike. I want to go back tothe questions that Ed Boehne and Dick Syron asked earlier aboutsecular and cyclical inflation and your response to them. If I lookat your numbers, the implications of the central tendency of the bondyield, essentially you're saying to us that compared to '92 or acouple of years in here we may have a cyclical increase in inflationbut that we are still on a secular downward trend. Whereas it wouldappear from household behavior and other things like forward ratesthat businesses and households are assuming that we have seen asecular low in 1992--holding aside whatever cyclical peaks and troughsfrom this point forward--and we have not only a cyclical increase[ahead] but probably a secular increase. Households and businessesalso seem to be assuming that we have seen a secular low in tax ratesbeginning with the '90 tax rate, whatever is going to happen after.So, if you make the assumption that businesses and households alikeare acting in the belief that from this point forward we will have agenerally higher drift of both inflation and tax rates, how do youfactor that into your split between your kind of growth and inflation?MR. PRELL. It's a complicated question; I'm not sure I cangive a good answer. I'm not sure that the perception is that we'vereached a secular low in inflation, though I find it hard to arguewith that. I certainly think there was a notion that with a growingeconomy we probably had reached a cyclical low in inflation. Now, itmay be that many people thought we'd never go below 3 percent; I don'thave a basis for judging that, but maybe that's true.MR. JORDAN. Wouldn't you say that mortgage refinancings andcorporate debt issuance, quite aside from the surveys, are at leastconsistent with the view that the household and business sectors areassuming we've seen the secular lows?MR. PRELL. Everybody is operating in an environment ofuncertainty, and people get to a point where they are satisfied ifthey can make a gain that's worth the transaction cost. A householdmay indeed feel that if they knew or really were convinced thatinterest rates were going to go down another point in the next threemonths, they'd hold off. But not knowing for sure and having seenrates come down a good deal, they see they can make a saving. Theyalso see that some have refinanced a couple or even three times, sothey haven't foreclosed that possibility. Corporations may be in thesame boat; a corporate finance officer knows he can lock in areduction in the coupon on his long-term debt and doesn't want to becriticized for having missed that opportunity if rates back up. He'dhave to be very certain at some point that the rates were going to godown still further not to go ahead and jump. If you look at bond-18-7/6-7/93issuance over the years, it seems to be motivated as much by themovement in rates as by the level. And that, I think, wouldcorrespond to this kind of logic, at least to an extent.MR. JORDAN. And the same holds for taxes.MR. PRELL. On taxes, I guess it's plausible to assert thatpeople feel that the bottom in the marginal tax rates may have beenreached a few years ago. How that is affecting the various decisionsat this point isn't entirely clear. It presumably affects decisionsabout capital structure and so on. There is a wide range of thingsthat could be affecting [decisions]. As I suggested, it's probablythe notion that taxes are headed up, including possible taxes relatingto medical care. This whole situation is probably making many peoplefeel poorer than they did a year ago. So, there are a lot of thingsgoing on here which may relate to the kinds of perceptions that you'retalking about.MR. JORDAN. Even if you cannot do it formally in your model,wouldn't you say that at least theoretically that should be factoredinto a forecast of the growth in output and the composition of thatgrowth?MR. PRELL. Sure, in various ways. And as I said, one of thethings that has disinclined us to follow the models to significantlylower inflation rates over the next year or so, which would seem to beimplied by an unemployment rate near 7 percent, is the notion that itmay be difficult to get those inflation expectations to move down tothe 3 percent rate of inflation that we've observed over the past fewyears. We seem to be a long ways from that point. Now, if there wassomething that suddenly brought a collapse in expectations, then Ithink we could have a much better result: more growth or lessinflation, or both.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.MR. MULLINS. On your seasonal adjustment--you partially gotinto this--how about the other GDP measures, such as the ECI, theaverage hourly earnings, and all the other ones that have tended toaccelerate over the past few months?MR. PRELL. We did some investigation of the ECI. I don'tremember the numbers but it smoothed things out some but still leftsome acceleration on the double seasonal adjustment.MR. MULLINS. I assume as soon as we discover this it startsto work against us! [Laughter] How much should we add to the nextcore CPI number to adjust for the seasonal bias? Four-tenths?MR. PRELL. A tenth or so per month. It's not a great dealat this point.MR. MULLINS. Okay.MR. PRELL. This is a quarter in which we are getting theadvantage of this, but I don't think month by month there's a bigeffect.-19-7/6-7/93MR. MULLINS. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, June is one of the big months;it's .1.MR. MULLINS. It was .1 in May, too, wasn't it?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It was less than .1 in May.MR. MULLINS. I won't hold you up but we might just look atthat as we start to smooth it out. I just had one question on[Jerry's] comment. How do we interpret the rather large increase inthe number of 50-year maturity, noncallable debt offerings? Do we seethat as indicative of the secular bottom of rates or a very longcycle?MR. SYRON. It's longer than a Kondratieff; it's the Mullins'cycle!MR. PRELL. I don't have anything to contribute to thedebate!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. Mike, I just want to make sure I'm readingcorrectly the upper left panel of Chart 14, which deals with theseasonal factors. As I'm reading that now, the increase in themeasured core CPI through May was at an annual rate of about 4percent. And if you assume there is a seasonal in the seasonallyadjusted data and this accurately measures it, what you do then is totake about five-tenths out of that so the corrected measure would be3-1/2 percent.MR. PRELL. That's right.MR. BROADDUS. That is still an uptick from the 3.1 percentlast year; that's the way that has been structured?MR. PRELL. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions?MR. MCTEER. Just a comment. In Texas what they callseasonally adjusted, seasonally adjusted data is refried beans![Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to start theCommittee's discussion?MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think what we'vejust heard in the Chart Show is very similar to what is going on inthe Atlanta District. Growth in the District has been decelerating.We led the nation in growth for much of 1992 but now the gap isnarrowing. And I think the weaker activity we've been observing ispretty evident in our survey of manufacturing plants in the District.Even though the margin of favorable responses remains positive inseveral of the categories, it has been eroding. Also, the early datafor June suggest a further weakening in expectations of activity and-20-7/6-7/93spending six months from now, and that includes about 80 of the 120 or130 respondents. So, the trend in manufacturing continues to be down.Consumer spending had been quite strong but it appears to be losingmomentum. At the same time, demand in the interest sensitive sectors,including single-family homes, is boosting purchases of housing andrelated items. And the demand for new automobiles and trucks alsolooks reasonably good. Business loans apparently have been growing atthe national level and banks appear to be making more effort to bookloans. That's true to some extent in the District but I'm stillhearing a lot of complaints about the famous credit crunch and thedifficulty people have getting credit, particularly small businesspeople. I was in Orlando about two weeks ago and I got an earful fromabout eight or ten small business owners who have had longrelationships with banks and are now finding it very difficult to getcredit. Housing developers also are reporting that credit is hard toget even in cases where market conditions are favorable. Inventoriesof unsold homes are small. Nonresidential construction appears to bebottoming out. There are some new projects under way in some parts ofthe District, particularly build-to-suit kinds of projects. Again, asI have reported many times over the past several months, pricepressures are virtually nonexistent. Business people are reportingvery highly competitive market conditions.The main problem is the same one that I and many othersreported last time, and that is the uncertainty about fiscal policyand the health insurance situation. Everyone seems to be expectingnegative impacts, and I think that's having an effect on businessplanning and on business fixed investment at the moment. So, that'sthe situation in the District. Our regional economy is stillrelatively strong compared to the nation but it is weakening, and themomentum seems to be fading to some extent.Now, with respect to the national outlook, our forecast issomewhat stronger than the Greenbook throughout the [projection]period. To a large extent our forecast assumes that the economy willreturn to a stronger path of economic recovery when this uncertaintylifts, whenever that might be. Even with the revisions to capacityutilization, there is still enough slack to support growth that issomewhat above potential, for a while at least. The only area wherewe have a more pronounced weakness than the Greenbook is in netexports. And consistent with our higher GDP, we have a lowerunemployment level and a less optimistic price forecast than theGreenbook. In the case of prices, we are less certain that pressuresfrom the interim tax can be confined in the economy. In addition,we're looking at the seasonal adjustment problems and we believe that1993 doesn't show any improvement in inflation over last year.Even with that stronger forecast, Mr. Chairman, I myself feelthat the risks to the economy are asymmetric in the sense that I thinkthe risks are on the down side. It's very difficult, of course, toestimate the risks and the cost of uncertainty and what that is doingto the economy. But I do think the uncertainties we have in theeconomy at the moment may very well threaten this expansion,especially if resolution of our fiscal policy and the new health careprogram is delayed any further. And while the employment numbers havebeen fairly good up until recently, the continued public announcementsof layoffs, particularly by large corporations, are clearly in myjudgment eating away at confidence. Finally, I continue to be-21-7/6-7/93concerned about the continued deterioration of the economies of ourtrading partners and the severity of their recessions and what thatmeans for our economy. So, I think we're in a very difficult period,Mr. Chairman. Again, I would repeat my judgment that the risk is onthe down side.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, may I just interrupt to answer aquestion? Our guess is that the core CPI is depressed by half a tenthin June.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but that is [unintelligible].President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. Thank you. I've continued to tour the District,visiting not only with bankers but with a lot of their customers,mainly small businesses, and staying away from the big guys becausethey all continue to shrink anyway. What has stood out in all of thisis the extraordinary increase in the utilization of technology [inareas] that I would never have imagined. It's one thing to see a veryhigh level of software development and computer usage in somethinglike titanium hip replacement parts and to see how strong their marketis on a global basis, how much their volume is increasing, how muchtheir prices are falling, how proud they are of having reduced theirwork force, and how determined they are to do more of the same. Butwe've also visited turkey processing plants, agricultural feedproducts, and an egg-laying operation producing 350 million eggs ayear with 70 workers and a bunch of 486 PCs. Again, the emphasis ofall these people is on the reduction in their work force--how manyfewer people they're able to get by with than they were five yearsago. When people talk about a perceived shortage of something, theytalk about people with the right software to [fix it]; they say theyknow they could automate if somebody could just get the time and learnhow to do it with the software. What stands out in this somewhatcasual impression that everybody's emphasis is on substituting[technology] for labor is that if this period is in time generallyviewed as something comparable to, say, a third industrial revolution,as some writers have already started to argue, then trying to measurethe economy in terms of jobs and the number of people employed isgoing to lead us far astray of what's really going on out there.At the beginning of this century the largest employer inNorth America was the U.S. ice trust. Had we had the emphasis onpreserving jobs at that time we would have made a terrific mistake forthe national economy. It might have precluded air conditioned housesand offices, which might have helped out on the side of the governmentbut otherwise probably would have held the economy back veryconsiderably. So, I think we have to be very, very careful ininterpreting all of the output numbers because we're having moredifficulty in just conceptualizing using the 19th century framework,which is based on tons and numbers of things when we look at output.We have to be careful about productivity. The whole retail tradesector is shown to have had negative factor productivity for more thana decade mainly because its output goes to the benefit of theconsumers, these optical scanners and so on. And I think it defiesall reason to think that the retail trade sector has negative-22-7/6-7/93productivity gains given what they're doing; [the same goes for] thebanking industry and so on.Turning to just a few sectoral comments about the District,our agricultural sector is very strong. Our farmers are delightedwith the floods and problems in the Mississippi valley area. They'relooking forward to higher prices; they have their crops in and theylook for good volumes. The disturbing aspect is that some bankers--and this is not farmers themselves talking so I don't know how muchreliability to attach to it--are talking in terms of the price of anacre being up as much as 25 percent from a year ago. Some of theprices they quote--what they say they're getting on loan requests--look unrealistic to me related to the values of the crops associatedwith [the land]. Our contacts point out that these prices remain wellbelow the peak of the agricultural bubble back a decade or so ago, butthey are still very, very sharp increases in land prices.Confidence of the smaller businesses I would say is stillvery, very negative; [it stems] from their perceptions of Washington.In our discussion in May there was a question as to whether this wasjust political bias--usually these small businessmen are Republicans--but my sense of that now is quite the contrary. John LaWare was withus at our joint board meeting in June and he heard one of the commentsmade by one of the directors who comes from a district where theDemocratic registration is 8 to 1, and they are the most upset. [Themood is beginning] to take on a jilted lover effect; those who hadhigh hopes and aspirations and expected the most from thisAdministration are the ones who are most angry. So, I don't thinkit's politics when they tell us how upset they are about things.Other conditions in the District generally have not changed.It's still probably the strongest region in the country. The retailsector is very good; exporting is very good; auto sales in our areaare very good. There's really nothing there of a negative tone. I dowant to comment and ask a question, too, about the Greenbook and theseFOMC central tendency projections on Chart 16. Maybe I misunderstoodwhat they are. When I look at the Wall Street Journal's summary ofeverybody's forecast or any of these other [forecasts], it's one thingthat [unintelligible] is going to happen. I don't think in terms of[a forecast] by the central bank when it comes to putting down numbersfor inflation; rather I think of these as our objectives because it'sour policies that are going to produce these [outcomes]. And [itbothers me] to see the Committee raise the central tendency for thisyear and also to have the central tendency for next year the same asit is this year and above where inflation came in in 1992. Am I tounderstand that the consensus of the Committee is that inflation isnot going to go down anymore because we're not going to try andproduce lower inflation? Is this an objective or is this aprediction?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is a prediction and I've made avery special point to avoid any implication that any of these [data]are goals. [We do this] because we are required by statute to presentthis sort of [stuff]. If we ever put down actual goals, then wereally will have problems. So we fudge it for the Committee as bestwe can.-23-7/6-7/93MR. JORDAN. How do you handle that then when it says thatthe Committee's policies are related to inflation? Our objective isto go to price stability, but we're predicting that the rate ofinflation is going to be sticking in the 3 to 3 plus percent area.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the implication of this is thatit's not clear whether it's pre-policy or post-policy.MR. JORDAN. Don't you announce them at the same time youannounce our policies?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I purposely never ask anybody aroundthis table what policy assumptions they are making when they makethese forecasts. So, I feel free to make the statement I just made!MR. SYRON. The problem you'd clearly have when you get intoit on other side is that someone would note that some people haveraised their estimates on unemployment and would ask if that is ourobjective on real growth of employment. It seems to me prettyperilous if you are going to have to talk before the Congress and sayour objective is this on prices with this employment figure. You arein just an intolerable position.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, it's an intolerable position. Thewhole process is. We would be far better off just dispensing withthis, but we can't. It puts us in an impossible situation.MR. JORDAN. Well, there are a couple of things [I'd say]about that. One, the numbers that we provided are not a prediction ofwhat is going to happen. When we put down a number [for inflation],such as the number [we gave] in February, the way I interpret it isthat it's the intent of policy to try and achieve a downward trend.And I think it's different than unemployment or real GDP or anythingelse like that because those are not part of the ultimate objectivesof our policy. Our ultimate objective is to stabilize the purchasingpower of the currency.MR. SYRON. Wait a minute. I thought our policies ultimatelywere to maximize real growth and that what we did on prices was a wayof doing that.MR. JORDAN. I agree, but in a one-year ahead [framework]like this--MR. STERN. Well, you could say the same thing about pricesif you really want to get into that and talk about lags. After all,there's uncertainty as to how quickly things react to whatever policymoves we might make.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If you all get too detailed into thisissue, I will not be able to plead ignorance for the Committee!MR. JORDAN. Well, one final question: Are the ranges[showing the central tendency of our forecasts] for 1993 and 1994 tobe taken as acceptable to the Committee?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The answer is no. President Parry.-24-7/6-7/93MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. New data paint a weakerpicture in the 12th District than I reported at the May meeting.Employment revisions and subsequent monthly releases show a continueddeterioration in employment in California. Rather than flattening inearly 1993, the new payroll data show a continuous rate of decline.Preliminary numbers for June show employment down 1.6 percent from ayear ago and falling at a 2 percent annualized rate between May andJune. Only services have actually shown gains in employment in thelast year. The household survey, which had shown a strongeremployment picture, reported a decline of 187,000 jobs in Californiabetween May and June, bringing the level of employment in that surveyslightly below that of a year earlier and raising the unemploymentrate to 9.1 percent. Now, economic conditions elsewhere in theDistrict are somewhat better. But even there conditions appear alittle less positive than they did at the time of our last meeting.Outside of California employment is up 1.7 percent from a year ago,with employment growth exceeding 3 percent in three of our states:Idaho, Nevada, and Utah. However, all states except Hawaii and Utahreported month-to-month declines in employment between April and May.Also, our Beigebook respondents have become increasingly cautious andpessimistic about the national outlook. Moreover, our contacts in theDistrict report that investments in business expansion are beingslowed by uncertainty attributed to tax, health care, and tradepolicies.The state and local governments are facing rather substantialfiscal problems in the coastal states. California just put in place afew days ago a budget that closed a $9.3 billion shortfall. Theagreement, however, created significant problems for local governmentsby shifting $2.6 billion of property taxes away from them. Theyobviously are going to have to make adjustments in their budgets,which will have a significant negative impact at least for the currentyear in many counties and local areas. Oregon is facing thepossibility of a 20 percent cut in state expenditures because of lostproperty taxes or tax revenues due to Measure 5. And Washington,which closed a $1.8 billion shortfall earlier this year through abroadening of the sales tax base and cutting expenditures, is facing aballot measure in November that would reverse the tax increase. Insummary, for the District the news is not particularly pleasant.If I can turn to the national scene, our forecast is verysimilar to that of the Greenbook. We do have a second-quarter growthrate of around 2 percent. Clearly, the more recent statistics withregard to inflation are more optimistic, but I would say that theinflation outlook is still very uncertain. We really only have hadone month's data that suggest improvement. And I must admit that themeasures of the degree of slack in the economy are clearly uncertain;some of that was referred to in the discussion by Mike Prell. All ofthis would suggest to me that we have to continue to focus on theinflation numbers over the next several months because it's really tooearly to see what the trend is likely to be.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our District economycontinued to grow in May and June although at a very moderate rate.We do a couple of surveys prior to the Beigebook, and the latest oneshows that retail sales edged a bit higher in this two-month period.-25-7/6-7/93Manufacturing activity in our District seems to be steady. I thinkthe manufacturing situation in our region is probably a littlestronger than nationally because of the composition of ourmanufacturing base. Textiles is a big industry in our District andthat industry has been doing reasonably well recently. I think mostbusiness people in our area expect both the regional and the nationaleconomies to continue to grow slowly in the months ahead, but at leastsome of the anecdotal commentary I'm hearing has been less positiveover the last several weeks. Concerns about tax increases anduncertainty regarding the prospective additional tax increasesaccompanying health care are part of the problem, but I think theprospective military base closings in our District are the centralcurrent worry. If the Federal Commission's recommendations areaccepted, and I guess most people think they will be, that's going tohurt the Fifth District particularly hard, especially the states ofSouth Carolina and Virginia. The Charleston, South Carolina area hasestimated they would lose about 14,000 jobs. One local newspaperreferred to that as another Hurricane Hugo coming throughprospectively. In Virginia, combined potential losses in Norfolk andnorthern Virginia would amount to about 18,000 to 20,000 jobs andthose estimates don't include the multiplier effects of these directlosses on local job markets. So, that's a cloud hanging over at leasttwo states in our region.Regarding the national picture, our basic forecast is notterribly different from the Greenbook. Our real GDP projections are alittle higher for both '93 and '94 but close to most of the privateforecasts I've seen. On the other hand, our inflation projections aresimilar to the Greenbook's, which generally are more optimistic thanmost private forecasts out there. Still, on balance, we're a littlemore optimistic than most people which gives me a bit of a pause. Butthis optimism is relative optimism. It's justified because we baseit--and I don't want to get too detailed here--fundamentally on theassumption that this Committee will do whatever it has to do to helpincrease the credibility of our longer-term strategy. And if we dothat, I think that will allow for both continued moderate growth andcontinued disinflation. Obviously, some of the latest data are prettydiscouraging, especially the June employment report; but it strikes methat the overall picture is not all that bleak. As the Greenbookindicates, aggregate hours worked in the second quarter were up quitesubstantially, so I think the bounceback in real GDP growth in thesecond quarter, as the Greenbook is forecasting, is certainlyplausible; and it could even come in a little stronger than that.Beyond this, we in Richmond think it's reasonable to expect at least amoderate further acceleration in the quarters ahead. In particular,it strikes us that economic conditions are improving in a number ofour major export markets; some of the data that Ted recited reinforcedthat view. It's possible, therefore, that exports can be a somewhatgreater source of strength for us going forward than is generallyanticipated. That's not to say there are no downside risks.Obviously, the potential substantial tax increases are especially bignegatives. But my own feeling is that the moderate projections in theGreenbook and the slightly higher projections that we have are bothplausible outcomes despite the fiscal drag.With respect to inflation, the rate of increase in the coreCPI in the first five months of the year, even if it's a little lessthan the published data, is troubling. My own view is that the-26-7/6-7/93increasingly widespread perception in the financial markets and to acertain extent in the broader economy is that we at the Fed areprepared to act to hold any potential increase in inflation in check.I think that's already beginning to have a measurable effect inholding inflationary expectations down. I think we see that in thebond markets recently. If we can maintain this posture andcommunicate it, I think it's reasonable to expect at least the modestfurther improvement in inflation [projected] in the Greenbook.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, with regard to the nationaleconomy, our forecast really is quite close to the staff's forecast.But it is interesting that when we first made a forecast for 1993 thistime last year, we started off lower than the staff forecast. We wereat the time somewhat pessimistic but as we've gone through the year[unintelligible] and at this point the differences aren't that large.Our outlook for inventory levels and residential construction issomewhat stronger than the staff numbers. This is perhaps reflectiveof conditions in the District.In the District, the level of economic activity continues toexpand but the pace of the increase is beginning to show signs ofmoderating. The auto industry continues to be our bright light.Retail sales are continuing at good levels and inventories are in goodbalance. The third-quarter production schedules, which have been setabout 18 percent over last year, seem reasonably firm at this point.The heavy truck business continues to be solid; retail sales of heavytrucks are forecast at about 129,000 units this year; that's a goodyear for them. But some of the strength is being driven by pendingchanges in regulations rather than normal market forces, and there aresome preliminary indications that the heavy truck order rate isfalling; indeed, there are a few signs of order cancellations.In the steel business, while the order and production ratescontinue at good levels, the significant development has been thepreliminary settlement of the contract the USW has been negotiatingwith the first company. It seems to be coming out on a non-inflationary basis. The contract preliminarily agreed to calls for a$500 signing bonus, a $500 lump sum payment in the second year and a$.50 per hour wage increase in the third year; there are no wageincreases in the first and second years. There's also a $1,000 lumpsum payment in 1996 if the company earns over a specified level in1995. Given the substantial changes in work rules and the substantialgive-back on health care, the company feels that it can easily coverthe higher cost through productivity increases. That deal is farbetter than what they had hoped for at the outset of the negotiations.Retail sales in the District have been reasonable thus far,running about 3 to 4 percent over last year. There is some strengthin appliances and home improvement items. In the agriculturalsector, we have something [akin to the reverse] of what Jerry Jordanreferred to. His good news, of course, is our bad news. I will say,though, that the ag equipment business has been very good up untilnow. Therefore, based on these higher sales levels, at least onemanufacturer has increased its production schedules for the secondhalf of the year by some 13 percent. But the miserable weather thatwe've been having and continue to have is a real downer. The corn-27-7/6-7/93crop planting is in one sense complete, but as of late last week itlooked as if in Iowa alone some 6 percent of the corn crop would haveto be replanted. The soybean crop has been badly delayed and I thinkit's not going to get completed. It's clear that we're going to havean acreage shortage in soybeans once things get straightened out.It's going to take quite a while to assess just how much damage isgoing to result from all of this rain but, clearly, that has not beena plus for the District.On the inflation front, despite the discouraging numbers thatwe've talked about for the early part of the year, I really don'tsense any significant upward pressures on prices on a broad basis.Competitive conditions remain very, very intense in the market.Certainly, this is true in the retail sector where it takessignificant sales and discounts to move products. One manufacturingcompany that I talked with follows the cost of their purchasematerials very closely; it's a large manufacturer. They had beenforecasting a decrease of 1/2 percent in the cost of their purchasematerials this year. They re-forecasted just last week and they nowexpect the cost of their purchase materials to decline by 0.9 percent;they really have a very constructive look on the price of theirpurchases. As for wage costs, with the steel contract seeminglysettled on a non-inflationary basis, the bargaining focus will shiftto the auto negotiations which just started. It's far too early totell just how that's going to work out, but that certainly will be akey item on the wage front. Net, while the economy continues toexpand, it just doesn't seem to have that much strength, and I thinkwe could be facing a pretty mediocre outlook. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Did you say something on whether yousensed that the capital goods markets are being affected by the taxuncertainties?MR. KEEHN. There's no question about it. People are veryuncertain; the level of uncertainty caused by the discussions [inWashington] has led people to hold back.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know of projects on hold as aconsequence?MR. KEEHN. I don't think I could be specific about majorprojects on hold, but I know that capital purchases are clearly beingaffected by this.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Bob Forrestal's discussion of the Southeasteconomy pretty much describes the Southwest economy. During therecovery and expansion we have pretty much led the nation, but as wemoved into 1993 that gap was narrowing. And possibly in April andMay, based on employment numbers, we may have fallen behind thenation's pace of growth. So, things are weakening relative to therest of the country even though they're still moving forward. One ofthe changes has been that Mexico, which had been a major source ofstrength both to our manufacturing industries and to retail salesalong the border, may be turning into a weakening factor as they'vehad slower economic growth and as they've continued the collection ofduties at the border that they imposed at Christmas. Bob mentioned-28-7/6-7/93that the credit crunch was still alive and well. I think that's truein the Eleventh District as well. Although we get more and moreindications of banks going out and aggressively marketing loans now,I don't have a lot of indications that many more loans are being made;but at least on the surface that seems to be improving. In additionto the uncertainty surrounding the tax and spending plans of theFederal government, we have some added uncertainty in our part of thecountry over the prospects for NAFTA. There is some anxiety aboutthat, which is probably slowing things down just a little. Also, theenergy tax probably did more to slow things down in our area of thecountry than it did in the rest of the country, but that has fadedsomewhat given the way they're changing that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. The District economy continues to be mixed. I'mnot sure that overall it is deteriorating sharply, but its growth hasbeen slower than the nation's all along. And while the gap may benarrowing some, that's not so much because we're picking up butbecause the rest of the nation's economy seems to be coming to meetus. We have seen the same quite noticeable deterioration in themanufacturing sector that Bob Forrestal pointed to and it iscontinuing into this month. That's affecting employment plans and hascut significantly into the capital spending plans of the manufacturersin our region. While manufacturing has been showing this noticeableweakening, the retailers seem to have been doing better--certainly thesecond quarter was better than the first quarter--although in recentweeks that seems to have flattened out some. Nonetheless, I think thetone in retailing is better. The residential construction people arefeeling better. Not only are sales of new homes moving but there alsois new residential construction. The nonresidential area continues tobe a big drag and will be, I think, for a number of years.One of the areas that has been a mainstay of strength in theThird District, particularly the greater Philadelphia area, has beenthe health care industry. And that is changing. Where that has beena plus in employment gains, I think we are going to see that turnnegative. The hospitals, which had been adding people, have made anumber of cutbacks; and some of our hospitals are laying off people.In terms of defense, I think the best way to describe it is that theDistrict economy expected to be hit by a cannon ball and it's just ashotgun blast and not a cannon ball, so it feels better because atleast it's not as bad as expected. Overall, employment has increasedbut not a great deal. The financial institutions are out there tryingto drum up business. They report some uptick in lending activity, butit's still rather flat on the whole. As for inflation, there just donot seem to be upward price pressures. Wage rate increases, however,do continue higher than one might expect in this kind of market, ataround 4 percent or so, I'd say, rather than decelerating.As far as the nation goes, our forecast is somewhat higherthan the Greenbook's in this slow-to-moderate growth range that Ithink we all see. Nonetheless, I think the uncertainties that are outthere do put the risks on the down side. There are these macro risksthat we all talk about, the budget package. In some ways I think thebusiness community is more concerned about health care reform than theimmediate tax increases. But for the individual, at the more microlevel, the uncertainty instead of abating, if anything, is increasing.-29-7/6-7/93I think people are as much if not more concerned about their own jobs,their own companies, their own futures; and they sense that the marginfor error is not very great. We are in one of those situations wherethe unexpected shock--all shocks by definition are unexpected becausewe don't know what they will be--[would be troublesome]. I don'tthink we can take a very big one at this point.On the inflation side, I think we can continue to make someprogress but we are at the point in the cycle where the gains oninflation are just not going to come as easily as they did earlier.My own sense is that we have a way to go in terms of secular gains,and I think we could continue to get inflation down on a secularbasis. But we ought not to deceive ourselves: The gains are going tobe very tough as this cycle wears on.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Activity in ourDistrict continues not unlike what it was the last time I reported.Farm income remains good within our District, helped by continuedstrong cattle and livestock prices; and our wheat harvest should bereasonably good. Construction activity is being led importantly byresidential construction in the Denver and Omaha areas; nonresidentialbuilding remains brisk through the second quarter. Oil and gasdrilling has picked up ever so slightly; thus that industry isremaining stable after some period of pretty significant decline.Manufacturing for us, as you've heard from others, remains sluggish.Some companies are hesitating; in a couple of conversations I've had,particularly with those in food processing and the nondurable goodsareas, my contacts said they had just put off some additionalexpansion. And one company's chairman said that they do not hirewithout his permission. These are companies with several hundredemployees. So, the uncertainty is having an effect, I think, on someof these activities in the manufacturing sector.Looking ahead for the District, I think farm income shouldcontinue strong, with good harvests and continued good prices in thecattle area. In construction the flow of new contracts is good, so wethink activity there will remain good for our District. With someweakening in the prices in the oil and gas area, it appears that thisslight improvement that we've seen may not be long-lasting; we justdon't know at this time. Manufacturing, until we get some of theuncertainty out, I think is going to remain a little more sluggishthan it might otherwise be.I have talked with individuals about credit and credit accessin our region. That has improved although we do still get somefeedback that it's hard to get loans; that is much less the case thanit was a few months ago. And the evidence, in terms of increases incredit outstanding, would suggest that that area is improving.At the national level we, like others, continue to see modestgrowth. Our forecast is also somewhat stronger than the Greenbook,led not by consumption but by somewhat stronger projections inresidential activity, business fixed investment, and not quite asnegative a change on the government spending side. What that suggeststo us, though, is that in this world of uncertainty--and especially asit relates to inflation--without some change in policy over the-30-7/6-7/93forecast period we could see inflation at a somewhat higher level thanis projected in the Greenbook. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, with regard tothe outlook for the national economy, just like about everybody elsewho has already spoken, I think the very modest recovery that we'vehad is likely to continue. So I have no real disagreements with thecentral tendency [of the members' forecasts] or the Greenbookforecast. That, in my judgment at least, is how things seem likely toplay out. I don't see a lot of vulnerability to [such a forecast] atthe moment. As far as inflation is concerned, I also agree with thosewho said that it doesn't look as if there's going to be a lot offurther progress in bringing down the rate of inflation at least overthis forecast horizon. And that is my greatest concern. I don't havea sense that expectations are working for us. My sense is thatexpectations are that if inflation hasn't hit its low for this cycle,it's close to it. So, that's not a favorable factor. I have a sensethat the general thrust of government policy is, if anything, going toadd to inflation. That just says that our job is not going to be madeany easier by a variety of other things that I can contemplate overthe next 18 months or so. That's my greatest concern about theoutlook at the national level. I think progress on the inflation sidewill be tough.With regard to the District, again, there's not a lot of newsto report. The regional economy has been in good shape for anextended period. That largely continues. There have been more broad-based and frequent reports of banks becoming somewhat more aggressivein trying to meet their loan targets and finding some frustration intheir inability to do so. Of course we, too, have been affected bythe floods. And although that's [concentrated] in a rather narrowband, it has affected or probably will affect corn and soybean outputin the District and will have some spillover effects for tourism aswell. Finally, there is ongoing concern about the fate of NorthwestAirlines and their potential Chapter 11 filing. I was told that theydid reach agreement with the pilots today, but I haven't been able toconfirm that. The pilots are undoubtedly the key, but they're not theonly union involved. So that situation remains iffy at the moment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Looking at our economic projections, we're atthe high end of the central tendency for 1993 and we are clearly anoutlier on the high end with respect to 1994. I wouldn't make policybased on these projections, but basically how we look at it is thatwe've had a very stimulative thrust of policy for a couple of yearsrunning here and that's showing through to the real side a little in1993 and more of that would show through in prices in 1994. If thatwere to happen, though it's quite possible it's just an inflationarybubble, the question would be this expectations issue that we've beentalking about. Even if we thought our policies were on a course thatwould gradually bring that back down, how do we deal with expectationsin the meantime? So, I see that as a potentially tough issue for usto deal with. The other issue I see is one that Ed Boehne, GaryStern, and others have touched on, which is this longer-term question7/6-7/93as to how we approach some concept of price stability and over whattime frame.With respect to the District, we're still showing strongnumbers. I've heard a number of people say that they see less gapbetween their Districts and some of the stronger Districts. I guesswe see that too, but I would be more inclined to view it as [anindication] that the rest of the nation may be catching up as opposedto our losing steam. We're still, in the latest three-month periodfor which we have figures, getting strong growth in both manufacturingand non-manufacturing employment, basically in the area of 2-1/2percent at an annual rate. In the manufacturing area that's acrossmost sectors except chemicals and transportation. Interestinglyenough, despite this strong pattern on the real side, we're not seeingmuch growth in bank credit demand. For large reporting banks we'llsee the numbers up one week and down the next week; and C&I loans onan annual basis are still down about a percent from the prior year.Recently, we had a group of homebuilders in and they said they arelooking ahead to a very strong third quarter--that's already built in--and they expect to see significant follow-through in consumerdurables. On the other hand, some people in the commercial area--andthis is just anecdotal information from a group we talked to--seecapacity basically being disassembled. They see the entrepreneurialdeveloper really not being able to get financing and that is beginningto spill back to the contractors and general contractors. Some ofthose contractors can hang on for a while, but even the stronger ones--looking ahead a year or two--are wondering how they're going to keepgoing. In that conversation I heard the comment--[mentioned] beforeby Gary, I believe--about the impacts of certain government policiesand the concern about that. When I asked about inflation, thesepeople mentioned the price of cement, which has gone up about 50percent in St. Louis. That has to do with the plants that produce itjust being unwilling or unable to spend the money to put on theenvironmental controls. So, it's a short-term supply problem. Ithink the people at that luncheon and generally the people I talk toview things like that as aberrational. They don't seem to begenerally concerned about a build-up of broad inflationary pressures;I think they are more concerned about real growth. That about wrapsit up.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. First Vice President Oltman.MR. OLTMAN. Our projections are pretty close to theGreenbook projections, a little higher on GDP for 1993 but well withinthe [Committee members' central] tendency. I must say I have torepeat the theme of uncertainty. Among those we've talked to withinthe District, that theme is repeated often. It seems sometimes onlyto be a [matter of] what is in fashion to cite as the focus of theuncertainty: the health care reform or the fiscal package or thestate of overseas economies affecting exports. Overall economicactivity in the District seems to be slowing somewhat but stillgrowing at a modest rate. There's almost a reluctance to concede thison the part of some of the people we talk to; they seem to want tomake sure that we don't misunderstand that, yes, things are a littlebetter but they're not as much better as they ought to be [so] don'tget the wrong idea.-32-7/6-7/93As far as inflation is concerned, Gary Stern's observationholds for much of what we've been hearing as well. There does notseem to be too much concern about inflation but there is somesuggestion that [this view] results from the feeling that [the currentlevel of inflation] is probably about as well as we can do and it's somuch better than it has been, so let us not worry too much about that.Some of our manufacturing contacts, for example, have experienced somemild increase in activity but without expectations that priceincreases are going to occur over the next year, or the next sixmonths at any rate. Credit demand, to hear the bankers, is not there;to hear the small businessmen the demand is at least a lot strongerthan the bankers would have you believe. When you begin to dig alittle into that, you hear the familiar story of demand for highercollateral and a lot more paperwork, all of which is read by thepotential borrowers as efforts to discourage them. The bankers on theother hand insist, as some others here have said, that they are goingout and beating the bushes and mounting serious campaigns to bring inborrowers. How to square that is difficult to say; there probably issome truth on both sides. To the extent that the borrowers areprepared to put up more collateral--in the case of small borrowers,for example--very often it is personal collateral, mortgages onpersonal residences and things of that kind. That means an uncertainatmosphere generally for economic activity and a little more than alot of uncertainty for the small business borrowers. So I would saythe overall mood is reluctantly positive.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, the theme all afternoon here hasbeen about expectations and perceptions, and I'd like to make a fewcomments in a couple of areas along that same line. First, it seemsto me that fiscal policy may be coming back into our dialogue a bitmore strongly, assuming the dominant role that it may have had inearlier eras. Recently I think the economy has been working on itsown dynamics, and monetary policy has been key while fiscal policy hashad its effect largely by its absence. I think it's coming back.Like monetary policy and the course of inflation, I think fiscalpolicy has two facets to it. One relates to how the numbers actuallyflow and the other is this matter of expectations and perceptions.And right now expectations and perceptions in the form of uncertaintyare very, very dominant. No doubt the numbers are going to begin tohave an effect as time goes on and, as the Greenbook says, [that willhappen] as tax policy gets settled and some of these other issues suchas health care begin to have their own numerical impact, whichundoubtedly is going to be contractive. But I have an idea that overtime sentiment may just start to flow the other way because I thinkthis uncertainty has a life of its own. So to some extent, maybe alarge extent, when clarity begins to emerge--almost regardless of whatthat clarity tells us--it's going to help. We may get more help fromthe clarity side than a contractive impact from the actual effect ofthe numbers. I have some fear in saying that because the realitycould be so negative! [Laughter]Secondly, on the outlook for growth, we all look for anengine for growth in the various components of GDP and we can't findone. It's just not there. But there may be another, if you will,off-balance sheet engine that's at work and has been at work allalong. And that is just the basic restless, nervous energy of the-33-7/6-7/93American people and the inherent optimism we undoubtedly have. I askmyself how, in the face of all the very severe shocks we've had in thelast several years in this economy, we've been able to experience amild recession followed by eight straight quarters--this will be theninth--of recovery from the recession. And all of this has occurredin the face of these famous head winds we've been talking about for along time. I think the answer may lie in this very positiveunderlying attitude toward progress, this restless energy to improvethings that is still in my opinion very much the dominant ethic of theAmerican people and the American economy. Our nation's basicorientation in that direction may prove to be the engine that isn'tthere in any specific quantitative component of GDP. Right thisminute I think that's being repressed by these uncertainties, just tokind of close the circle. But as these uncertainties begin to clarifyand take on identifiable characteristics, we quite likely will get abreakout on the up side from that inherent dynamism.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.MR. MULLINS. With respect to the real economy, I don't knowthat I have a lot to add. I still see moderate growth--others mightcall it slow growth--at a rate of perhaps 2-1/2 to 3 percent. Onconsumer spending, I as yet see no compelling evidence that we'refalling off the path of sustained moderate growth. Auto salescontinue to be quite strong. Nothing else continues to be verystrong, but at least auto sales seem to be holding up. The way I readconsumer confidence is that the Michigan current index is near itsrecent high; the most recent month at least is only a bit below Marchand April, the recent peaks, and is above every other month beforethat. The expected index has fallen off--there is this uncertaintyabout the outlook that Mike was talking about--but it's still abovewhere it was in October. I also remain hopeful that the housingrecovery, despite some fits and starts, will pick up steam. We havethe lowest mortgage rates in 21 years. And I do believe, when I hearit around the table and wherever I go, that we may be beginning to seeevidence that this could affect business spending. Now businessspending has been quite strong. The uncertainty affects businessspending and it could decelerate a bit due to concern about the taxproposals. I find that hard to see convincingly in the data yet; evenin the survey data on capital spending, which have come downmarginally, we haven't seen a big drop-off. Presumably, there isconcern about taxes in the budget proposal. I agree with Ed Boehne inthat the bigger concern I keep hearing about is the health careproposal. That is unfortunate because the tax uncertainty presumablywill be resolved soon, though it may be a close vote; but the healthcare uncertainty is not likely to be resolved soon, even if theproposals are presented in late summer or early fall.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. September.MR. MULLINS. Yes, September. The Administration has shownthat it is willing to alter firmly held beliefs as things move throughCongress. This could mean next year. Now, capital spending is not ahuge part of the economy [but] it has been the most reliable componentof the recovery; it's that little engine we've had going. And theGreenbook has it decelerating only a bit. Loan demand seems to bepicking up nonetheless, so I think even here it's a mixed picture.The positive thing I see is that employment has shown steady growth-34-7/6-7/93despite the weak June numbers. We've seen more jobs created in thefirst half of 1993 than in all of 1992, roughly a million jobs in eachcase. Despite the talk about the reduced propensity to hire, monthlyjob growth in the second quarter is 161,000 jobs a month on average,virtually the same as in the first quarter. The hours and overtimestill suggest that continued slow growth is likely to spill over intomore moderate growth in employment. The pattern of job growth in thelast several quarters, the gradual improvement, I think willcontribute to the durability and sustainability of the recovery as aself-reinforcing process, and in my view that reduces the downsiderisks.So, when I total it up I still see 2-1/2 to 3 percent realGDP growth where perhaps before I saw 3 to 3-1/2 percent. With anormal quarterly variation around that mean--and the variation hasbeen, if anything, smaller than normal in this period--it's inevitablethat we will see quarters below 1 percent and up near 5 percent. Ilook forward to seeing the latter soon. Now, it is true this isthought of, at least in immediate terms, as a weak or fragile economy.And, of course, I remember a weak economy. My first three quarters onthe Board were all negative quarters. As Mike mentioned, we've hadnine consecutive quarters of growth and, I suspect, six quarters or1-1/2 years with growth averaging between 2-1/2 and 3 percent. We cancontinue to hold our breath with each quarterly draw from thedistribution. Instead, I think it's useful to try to detectsignificant changes, deterioration in the underlying forces which havebeen gradually and steadily pushing the economy forward for a year anda half now; and I don't see the hard evidence of that deteriorationyet, though I must admit the anecdotal pessimism is a bit high. But,again, I think some of the uncertainty will be resolved.On the inflation front, it's nice to get some good news for achange even if it's only one month's number, as Bob Parry mentioned.I think the positive way of viewing it is that in two out of the pastthree months we've had favorable inflation data. Unfortunately, in myview, it will take a while to extinguish the trend. The negative wayto view it is that for eight months now, since the end of the thirdquarter, core CPI has averaged roughly 4 percent versus about 2-1/2percent for the previous six months. That's the most negative way onecan carve it. The seasonal adjustment problems may have exaggeratedthe trend, but it bothers me that the CPI hasn't been the onlytroublesome index. Both the implicit price deflator and the fixedweight index have accelerated over the last couple of quarters--theformer from 1.8 percent to 3.5 percent. The fixed weight index, whichis perhaps the more traditional measure of inflation, bottomed in thethird quarter of last year at 2.2 percent and the recently revisedfirst-quarter number is 4.3 percent. The employment cost index fortotal compensation bottomed in the second quarter of last year at 2.9percent and accelerated to 4.2 percent in the first quarter. ThePurchasing Managers' diffusion index has registered five consecutivequarters of increases after a few months of negatives before that.The trend, if one projects these numbers, is not encouraging, ofcourse. So in my view it has been a long blip and one reflected in anumber of broadly based inflation measures. And it's one that haspersisted for six to eight months in an environment of slack and slowgrowth. However, the immediacy of the inflation concern, the forcingnature of the argument, has to do with the developing path of future-35-7/6-7/93inflation and not really the past six or eight months and importantlythe extent to which inflation concerns infect the market.In my view so far this year we've had two episodes whereinflation fears have affected the bond market. The long bond rate hasbacked up by 25 basis points, not all due to the inflation concernsbut at least its coincidence with the release of inflation numberswould suggest to me that it was a major contributor. The first was inMarch and early April when the long rate advanced to 7 percentfollowing the poor January and February and fourth-quarter inflationnumbers. That was doused by the favorable March numbers. And thenfollowing the poor April numbers the long bond again flirted with 7percent; the good inflation numbers for May revived the prospect thatthe upturn in inflation might give way under the weight of economicfundamentals and the market returned to a wait-and-see attitude; thelong rates retrenched to new record lows aided by the success of thePresident's program in Congress. While the inflation fears in thebond market have receded, obviously some commodity prices continue tobe a bit troublesome. On balance, when I look at the data I think therecent evidence weakens the case for an immediate action on thefederal funds rate. Nonetheless, the concern about inflation, atleast my concern, was not created by poor performance in a singlemonth's data nor is it likely to be extinguished by a single month'sbetter performance. Importantly, in the upcoming intermeeting periodwe shall be receiving a significant quantity of new information oninflation, not only the CPI and the PPI but also the two GDP quarterlymeasures and the ECI measure as well. And I think that should providesome important input into the developing trend going forward. I mightadd that the average hourly earnings for the second quarter, which wegot the other day, had decelerated to essentially the bottom reachedlast year, and that's a hopeful sign. Still, we are particularlyvulnerable to negative surprises in the bulk of the data coming out.One thing that is already apparent from the numbers in Chart16 is that the FOMC has changed its view of '93 inflation and so hasthe staff. The central tendency is up by about a half percentagepoint; the staff's estimate is up by 0.7 percent. It's also true thatwe've marked down our real growth perceptions as well. But eventhough our view of '93 inflation has changed significantly, thefederal funds rate has not changed. As to why all this is happening,I found the staff's presentation very interesting. The speed effect--and I have no really fresh insights--does suggest that we can affectinflation over this period. It's not a very pleasant prospect tosuggest that growth of 2-1/2 percent is a lot more favorable than3-1/2 percent; one hates to punish growth as a way to achieve it.When I review the past six months or so and look across the differentmeasures, I tend to attach more weight to the simple expectationshypothesis, although it is also related to Mike's speed argument. Ithink we recognized last year that even though actual inflation fell,long-term expectations didn't seem to change very much. And some ofus even talked about a period of testing to resolve the dissonancebetween expectations and inflation fundamentals. I suggest thatthat's exactly what we've been experiencing over the past fewquarters. Businesses restrained price increases during the couple ofvery weak years we had. In the second half of 1992 the economy grew alittle over 4 percent and I think they returned to the norm of tryingto pass through 4 percent inflation. In an environment of slack andslow growth of money and credit, this should not be sustainable. But-36-7/6-7/93it has persisted for a couple of quarters and I would notunderestimate the staying power of firmly held expectations becausemany economists and business people simply do not see inflation as aproblem at 3-1/2 or 4 percent; they see it as the norm. I might alsoadd that we had an interesting experience last week in the Board roomwhen we had in the American Bankers Association panel of bankeconomists. Their view is very similar to the Blue Chip forecast,which we've talked about before, and also I think to the [view citedin the] Wall Street Journal this morning. None of them sees a problemwith inflation. It's going to continue to rise gradually up throughthe 3 percent range even though they're projecting large, ample slackcontinuing. There just seems to be enormous gravitational pull toexpectations, and I suspect we're in the midst of an extended battlebetween expectations and fundamentals. This battle is at the core ofany attempt to achieve lasting reductions in inflation, which is goingto require reduced inflationary expectations. And I feel our stanceand our actions, including how we respond to higher-than-expectedinflation, are also quite important to the ultimate outcome of thatbattle.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple of pointsbecause it's late and we've gone over a lot of things. As far as theregion goes, there is not much change. What there is has involvedsome deterioration and a slightly softening mood. There has been adeterioration in the business mood from uncertainty to somewherebetween resignation and fear. I would tell the same story thateveryone tells; it's virtually universal among almost everyone I talkto. We're not two sentences into the conversation when they raisehealth care, taxes, and all of these other subjects. I think MikeKelley is right that some clarity would help, but I'm not sure we aregoing to get it in a hurry.Very quickly, retailers have seen some softening mostrecently. Manufacturing is more mixed but the really strong spotwe've seen in manufacturing in our District has been related to autos.Everything else seems to have softened a bit, including aerospace, asone might expect. Loan demand shows some slight improvement but isstill soft. Ed Boehne talked about an unexpected shock[unintelligible] would get here. Actually, we try to keep in touchwith financial people and it's interesting that they have expressedsome concern about all this money flowing into mutual funds and aboutwhat will happen when we get a little market correction and peoplefind these funds are not really CD-like in a nominal term sense. Iwould say the mood of these people and the fund managers is perhapsunderstandable; it's fairly sensitive. They're really quite concernedabout this and think we might be in a fragile situation.Talking to the same general group of people about pricesdemonstrates the rather tough position we're in [because] it's alittle like what David Mullins said. They say inflation is not reallya problem. We ask what they have factored into their forecast ortheir budget when they buy things and they answer 3 to 3-1/2 percentinflation or something like that. They say they don't really seeinflation going anywhere. One of our directors did a survey and foundvery low expectations about solving the inflation problem. But whenwe talk to people about what they think about monetary policy, what-37-7/6-7/93comes out is that they see this as not a monetary policy driveninflation, though they're not saying it can't be influenced [bymonetary policy]. But in terms of their expectations, they have adeeply held conviction that the American economy has some inflationarybias built in of around 3 percent whether it comes from steelprotection, workers comp, or other kinds of things. Essentially, alot of people I've talked to think that it's so expensive to getinflation below what they see as an asymptote of 2-1/2 to 3 percentthat it's not likely to happen.As far as the real economy goes, I have little disagreementwith what the Greenbook says. Our own forecast is slightly stronger.I think the Greenbook is probably more correct, to tell the truth.[Laughter] One place that I do have some concern is Europe; the newsI hear from talking to people just seems to keep getting worse,whether it's American manufacturers with facilities there or peopleselling into that market or European bankers coming here. Now, maybewe're coming to a trough on all that as well. The long and the shortis that I think the risks to the economy are probably centered, butthey could easily go on the down side as well as the up side; I [can]see this going [either] way. And I think the probability of anotherdecline is certainly greater than zero.In terms of what we do about all this with policy, it's hardto think about much change but I would be heavily influenced by howthe Chairman wants to convey things in his Humphrey-Hawkins testimony.When we get to the very fine minutia of how we word things, that wouldbe a significant factor in deciding.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to identifymyself very closely with Bob Forrestal's analysis expressed earlier.I, too, feel that the primary risks are on the down side at themoment. People are anxious about jobs, and they don't see anydevelopments either in terms of government action or in private sectoractions that will generate new job opportunities. And that makes fora very cautious attitude on the part of consumers, which then getsreflected in the willingness of manufacturers to make long-termcommitments. I think auto sales are an aberration caused by theadvanced age of the auto inventory in the hands of consumers. [Theage of the auto stock] is at about the highest point it has been insome time and there's a lot of replacement buying that is seen byconsumers as necessary. It's not that they get overwhelmed with thedesire for a new car; it's a necessity kind of move.Underlying all of that, I'm worried that we're beginning tosee a disillusion on the part of the public with the political processin this country. With that disillusion is a lack of any confidencethat either the Administration or the Congress is going to find anacceptable way out of this problem. I don't know what the technicaldefinition of stagflation is, but if we continue to make revisions inour forecast that go along the lines that we have recently done herefor 1993 looking into 1994, it tends to look more and more likestagflation. And stagflation is a nightmare for monetary policybecause the very solutions that solve the inflation problems arelikely to tank the economy in terms of growth. That's a condition-38-7/6-7/93that we don't want to get into, but I don't see what we can do aboutit at the moment. So, I'm somewhat dejected at the moment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I sort of picked that up. GovernorAngell.MR. ANGELL. Well, I don't think I've heard such pessimism ina long, long time. I'm not sure what has changed. I don't know whatit is that's getting worse. I don't know what business profits aredeclining. I do not know that nominal GDP is really going to come infor the entire year as the staff suggests at 4.8 percent when in thatlousy first quarter nominal GDP was 4.4 percent. But maybe I'm seeingthings somewhat differently.I would like to focus just a minute on the lag in monetarypolicy. Even though we don't have an M2 that works the way we wantand we don't think M2+ would suffice either, there is a concept of akind of pure M out there. That is, there are transaction balancesthat we've created over the last 10 to 12 years. Investment money hasbeen mixed up with our [measure of] deposit money, so we don't knowwhat that pure M has been doing. If we did know what it was doing, wewould have some sense of being forward-looking. Since we don't knowwhat it's doing, it's almost as if we're faced with looking at lastmonth's CPI or last quarter's CPI. And, frankly, it's very, veryscary to me to think about our trying to run monetary policy basedupon last quarter's GDP or last quarter's rate of change in the CPI.Certainly no one, I presume, expects that there's much we can do aboutthe CPI rate of change in 1993. Can monetary policy now alter whathappens in 1993? It seems to me we're working on monetary policy withregard to the rate of inflation for 1994 and, indeed, even into 1995.I don't have the ability to see 1995 clearly enough to do monetarypolicy based upon that fact. And since there's no M2 or othermonetary aggregate out there to guide us, I think we have to look atsome other matters.Now, a bit contrary to Ed Boehne's view that we're at theplace in the cycle where we're not going to get much more inflationimprovement, it seems to me that we have several factors working inour favor in terms of [moving to] a lower inflation rate. We have nothad any minimum wage increase in 1993; that's not in the numbers. Wehaven't had any major supply shocks throughout the world, no oilshocks, no [unintelligible]. We haven't had in the United States anysignificant impact of employment cost conditions that would in a sensebe a driving force for inflation. We've existed in a world in 1993 inwhich use of resources is way down. This ought to be a very desirabletime to be getting inflation rates down. We're in a period where wehave some real productivity gains, as has been noted; and thoseproductivity gains ought to be helping us to get more than cyclicalimprovement in inflation numbers. Now, inflation in my view is not amicro-economic deal; it is a monetary policy deal. The rest of theworld, the other six countries in the G-7, are running a rate ofinflation a full percentage point below what they were running eventhough only Japan has more flexibility in wages and prices than we do.We're the most favored country in the world to get the inflation ratedown and yet the outlook is that it's not there.It seems to me that the conclusion one can draw from this isthat monetary policy in 1992 was really not as stringent as we thought-39-7/6-7/93it was. A year ago I was in the camp that thought 2-1/2 percent[inflation] was possible and by February I'd given up and had goneback above the 3 percent level. But my inflation forecast isn't anoutlier at all. It's just exactly the same as the staff forecast of3.3 percent. But I consider this 3.3 percent in a period of suchfavorable opportunity to mean that monetary policy has really missedits restraining force, and I don't know what's going to happen tocause that to change. It seems to me that monetary policy is indeedgetting easier and easier as inflation expectations rise.I don't get letters too often, but here's a letter: "My wifeand I have been married 51 years. We worked very hard for every pennywe earned and have been extremely frugal, saved for old age. I can'ttell you how much I hate inflation for what it does to those savings.Our circumstances dictate that they be invested conservatively and allof the interest we've been getting from our investments is lower thanthe rate of inflation. It is taxed as income, which is not taxationbut confiscation of capital." Now, they go ahead and give me a littlebit of praise regarding my position on inflation, but they finish itoff and say "Although I'm not optimistic that you will be successful,I can't thank you enough for your efforts." Well, I guess that'sabout it! [Laughter]You know, there's a lot of loose talk around. Everybody hasan opinion about gold prices. There's a lot of gold going into Indiaand it flows into India because clearly people there want to hold goldrather than rupees, a paper currency that goes down in value. Andclearly gold is going into Indonesia and into China as people therechoose to hold a more reliable safeguard against these crazy papercurrencies that have terrible inflation rates. But the price of goldisn't being affected by a little increase in the number of Chinese whoare buying gold. The price of gold is pretty well determined by us.For many things, like land prices, long-term interest rates can have asignificant impact. But the major impact upon the price of gold isthe opportunity cost of holding the U.S. dollar. No other currencyhas a reserve base that causes someone to be able to say: "Well, Idon't like holding my own currency." If you don't like holding yourown currency, you always have the option of holding dollars instead.But we set the stage. We have a low interest rate that causes thissaver out here to say he and his wife have been had. And I understandhow they've been had. We're in a period in which we're going toincrease some income taxes; but I'm not one who believes that peoplewho are making more than $250,000 a year are going to cut back theirconsumption because their income tax rates go up. I think theirsaving rate is going to come down. We're in a period of beingimpacted by inflation expectations, and it shows up in the price ofgold. We've had a 20 percent increase in the price of gold since lastFebruary's Humphrey-Hawkins meeting. Now, [yearly] world productionof gold only runs 2.3 percent of world stocks. I thought it ratherdramatic--I had not thought about that with the price of gold at $390an ounce--that the value of the world's stock of gold is a measly $1.4trillion. Now, a lot of that is held by central banks. But we wereat one time in a restraining mode, making it unprofitable for centralbanks to hold gold. But I think this year those who have held goldhave said they've got the best deal going as the [value of the]world's gold stock has appreciated $234 billion since our Februarymeeting. We can hold the price of gold very easily; all we have to dois to cause the opportunity cost in terms of interest rates and U.S.-40-7/6-7/93Treasury bills to make it unprofitable to own gold. I don't know howmuch change in the fed funds rate and the Treasury bill rate it takesto do that, but I'd sure like to find out.I'd like to have some education here. I certainly understandthe feeling [of those] on the Committee who would say: Is this a timeto increase rates? I would tell you that I don't think this is a verygood time to increase interest rates. But, unfortunately, ourinterest rates are way too low, and there won't be a good time toincrease interest rates. If we drive every household that savesconservatively to buy stocks they don't feel they are knowledgeableenough to buy or to buy junk bonds or whatever else--they ought not tobe trying to do radical things but if we drive them, and it's up tous--then it seems to me that if we then ever have to catch up oninterest rates, those investments in common stocks and junk bondscould really fall off the table. Talk about a mess you don't want tobe in! I don't want to be in that mess. If we had been very, verylucky and the rate of inflation had gone down to 2 percent, we mighthave gotten by with a 3 percent fed funds rate. But we didn't getthat lucky and, consequently, we now have a fed funds rate that isjust clearly out of sight in regard to world reasonableness. And itseems to me that there ought to be some real thought on our part as towhether our job is to decide which way to change rates or where ratesshould be to provide stability for people like this man who have theirsavings all there together. I better stop.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. Let me say first of all that it's clear thatthis first-quarter slowdown we've had seems to be a return to apattern of slower growth--you could call it moderate growth if youlike--[near the] 2-1/2 percent rate that we've averaged over the last18 months. I don't have the same sense that I might have had a yearago that we're going to lapse back into negative real growth. Therehas been considerable job creation; we have had enough job creation tolower the unemployment rate over the last year, but we're just barelykeeping up with the demographics, so the unemployment rate hasn't gonedown. There are some real areas of strength or potential strength:autos, housing, durables, capital equipment. But, again, I'm reallyquite struck, as I listen to everybody talk, by the big differencesfrom region to region. And the uncertainties that remain are reallyquite considerable: the continued layoffs; the deficits of federal,state, and local governments; the whole restructuring process; and theinternational weaknesses. The uncertainty is casting a pall overspending and the expansion of investment. We are getting investmentfor capital equipment, but the focus is on productivity andefficiency; it's not as much on expansion [of capacity].I think it's quite appropriate that we've spent as much timeas we have this afternoon on inflation--the increased emphasis in theGreenbook and the increased emphasis and analysis in the Chart Showpresentation on inflation. It is feasible that we could have someadditional progress but I think it's quite right--and I've forgottenwho said it--that any additional gains in inflation are going to beextremely hard to come by. As the recovery continues, manufacturersand distributors are going to continue to try to make those priceincreases stick. It's going to be incumbent upon us to try to discernwhether or not some of these short-term supply distortions that we-41-7/6-7/93have seen are short term, as Tom described in the case of cement orlumber, or whether [the suppliers] are going to be able to increaseprices and make them stick generally. I don't think we know thebottom line yet of how the weather situation is going to affect ourinflationary situation. The deceleration in labor costs appears to beleveling and we've not seen much break in this inflation psychologythat has been discussed as we look forward and move away from tryingto look back at where we've been on inflation. We've seen aratcheting up in inflationary expectations in the consumer confidenceindexes and also in the steepness of the yield curve. David describeda couple of bouts that we've had recently on inflation expectations.I find this very anomalous. If people really expected inflation tostart rampaging, we would start to see consistent shifting into realassets. We're not seeing that so much in this country. We've notseen it in housing. We've seen it some in durables, but one couldprobably explain that as the replacement of old cars or on thebusiness side as firms trying to deal with improved productivity. Wehave a ways to go in terms of dealing with inflation, and we need tokeep working on the analysis of inflation because I don't think wehave a full handle on it.I also hope that we will continue to work on the monetaryaggregates. I agree with Governor Angell: There is a concept ofmoney that should be our guidepost. Our problem is that we don't haveit well measured. We don't really know how to measure it, in partbecause of this [admixture] of capital and money accounts. So, Icontinue to hope that we will focus on that; maybe M2+ isn't the rightmeasure, but I do think we need to keep working on that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey will round it up.MR. LINDSEY. See, you weren't last!MS. PHILLIPS. I wasn't last!MR. LINDSEY. I thought the Chart Show was very, veryinteresting, particularly on why inflation has picked up. It remindedme a bit of the story of a tenth here or a tenth there and that prettymuch explains it. Interestingly, Charlie Schultz when he wasexplaining what happened in the Carter Administration describedsomething very similar. He said suppose we raise the minimum wage,what's that going to cost us? He estimated about a tenth. And thenext idea to come down the track will cost about a tenth. So a tenthhere and a tenth there sounds pretty much like what happened in 1978.It adds up, though. The staff has raised its forecast for 1993inflation by seven-tenths. On average at this table we've raised oursfive-tenths. And the Michigan survey is up six-tenths. This is allfrom the beginning of the year. I think we also should look a littlebit at other prices. Jerry Jordan mentioned that farm land prices aregoing up. I also sense that--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I must say that the Chicago Bank'ssurvey did not show that.MR. KEEHN. That's right. Jerry Jordan is saying they'vegone up in his District; they have not gone up to that extent in ourDistrict.-42-7/6-7/93MR. LINDSEY. Yes, but you are all under water!MR. KEEHN. It's highly liquid!MR. LINDSEY. I worked to register wetlands. The definitionof a wetland is something that has pooled water on it for 14 days outof the year or is spongy for 21. And that's the entire state of Iowaat this point.MS. PHILLIPS. Switch to rice!MR. LINDSEY. Yes, switch to rice. Well, enough of that. Onthe inflation side, [our central tendency] is 3.1 percent. I thinkwe're going to be lucky to hit that. To get 3.1 percent for a year wecan have 30 tenths over the 12 months. We've had 17 of those tenthsin the first five months, which means we've got to go from an averageof 3.4 percent to an average of 1.8 percent, or cut our inflation inhalf for the next seven months, to hit our forecast. So, if you askwhere the risks are, I think they're on [the side of] higherinflation. Let me also say that I agree with John LaWare and othersthat the risks are on the down side for the economy. Why? Well, thestaff has estimated that the budget will be a $37 billion drag on theeconomy in '94. Is that fiscal 1994?MR. PRELL. Yes, but that's not total budget, that's--MR. LINDSEY. That's an incremental fiscal drag.MR. PRELL. Right, those programs--MR. LINDSEY. Yes, it's an incremental fiscal drag of six-tenths of a percent of GDP. Roughly the first year multiplier onfiscal drag is close to one; it probably goes up a little after that.So, that means we're going to knock off six-tenths of a percent fromwhatever [rate the economy] would have grown--I don't know what thatrate would have been but we're talking about a number between 2-1/2and 3 percent--just from normal old fiscal drag. If I knock six-tenths off, I don't get our median forecast; I get something belowthat. So, again, I think the risks are on the down side. Nor do Ithink that this is your run-of-the-mill fiscal drag. I think this isputting the economy in chains; in fact everyone around the tablementioned it. This is not a normal tax increase; it's a tax increaseon small business in addition to which we're shutting down the defensesector and the health care sector. When you have a targeted fiscaldrag, the capacity for individuals who lose their jobs to find jobs inother sectors quickly is reduced relative to an across the boardfiscal drag where, say, it takes $100 out of everyone's pocket. So, Ithink the downside risks for next year are substantially more thanwhat we are talking about here. At the same time, the risks ofinflation are also more than what we have here. That adds up to JohnLaWare's forecast of stagflation. I would [agree with] his predictionthat the deficit will not go down by as much as is being predicted bythe Administration and I'm willing to take bets with anyone around thetable on that one.MS. PHILLIPS. You're not going to get any takers.-43-7/6-7/93MR. LINDSEY. I'm not going to get any takers! What do we doif we have stagflation? Well, how did we get out of the problem thelast time we had stagflation? The first point is that the basicsolution is not monetary policy; it is fiscal policy. It is not to dothe things that everyone around the table mentioned are going to bethe problems. The 19 of us don't have any votes on that, so we may aswell forget that. What else does monetary policy do? I would againcommend the way we got out of the last stagflation. While we do theright thing on fiscal policy we also hold the line on prices becauseif we don't, then the easy path out is more obvious. So, I don't likethe situation we're in any better than anyone else. It is only goingto be worse next year; it is not going to get any better. And on thatcheery note, I will commend exactly what President Syron said, Mr.Chairman: Given that we don't have any easy way out and you're theone who has to go up there and wheedle your way through the[Congressional] Committee, I will defer to your sense of logic on whatwill appeal to them to get you through it. But I do think that weshould also have to face the fact that for us to make the tough callit is only going to become more difficult as time goes on.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you all. I trust you all rememberthat we have a 7:30 engagement at the British Embassy and it is now6:16 p.m. I will properly adjourn and we will continue the meetingtomorrow morning at 9:00 a.m.[Meeting recessed]-44-7/6-7/93July 7, 1993--Morning SessionCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [I want to wait until] lunch to discussthe question of how we handle the issue of leaks. Since it has verylittle, if anything, to do with Bill [Wiles's] luncheon agenda, itstrikes me that we probably could get more done by having a generalopen discussion on how we want to handle this sort of thing. So ifyou wouldn't mind, I think we will just will stay in [session] throughlunch rather than [adjourn]. I'd like to call on Don Kohn to startour discussion on the longer-run ranges.MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. After my recentexperience I'm tempted to say that the hour exam will cover both thelecture material and the texts, Bluebook and Greenbook!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you grade on a curve?MR. KOHN. Actually a few aides will be grading this, HenryGonzalez and Don Riegle.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One thing that's sure about it is thatit's not a normal curve!MR. KOHN. The first lesson will be on IS-LM and Phillipscurves, starting on page 8 of the Bluebook. [Statement--seeAppendix.]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Questions for Don?MR. ANGELL. Don, suppose we ended up adopting alternative IIor alternative III for 1993 and 1994 and there was a surprisinglystrong resumption of disinflation and the CPI numbers moved down morelike they are projected in the tighter scenario II on page 8 of theBluebook. In that circumstance if the Committee decided to [move]against too rapid a pace of disinflation and lowered the fed fundsrate, is it likely that we would have a problem of getting monetarygrowth above those ranges in alternative II or alternative III?MR. KOHN. I doubt it. The question here is if short-termrates went down whether long-term rates also would be going downbecause of disinflation.MR. ANGELL. Yes, I would think long-term rates would comedown even more.MR. KOHN. Right. That could give a pretty good push tomoney. I agree with the thrust of what you're saying. It's hard todetermine; we don't have much experience with yield curve-typevariables. On the one hand, we could see the decline in long-termrates; there would be [unintelligible] capital gains and that mightdamp M2 for a while. But I think a flatter yield curve would help.Now, depending on how much short-term rates went down at the sametime, I think such a [structure] would tend to push up M2; whether itwould violate a 3 or 4 percent upper limit [I don't know]. You mighthave trouble on the 4 percent upper end of alternative III. It'spossible it could be pushed up there, but it would take a lot moreinterest [rate] response than we've seen from M2 recently. But yourgeneral presumption that having long-term rates go down and short-term-45-7/6-7/93rates go down would push in that direction I think is correct. It'sjust a question of how fast and how hard it would push.MR. ANGELL. So what interest rate or what possible shape ofthe yield curve might likely result in getting outside the range onthe top side on alternative III?MR. KOHN. I guess it would have to be a sharp decline inboth long- and short-term rates. It would depend on the size of that[decline], with the yield curve effect pushing money out of M2 but theshort-term interest rate effect pulling money in. I'm sorry, butpartly because I don't have much confidence in our projections ofthese elasticities I don't have a good notion of how far interestrates would have to drop to do that. My guess is that both long- andshort-term rates would have to drop quite a distance to push M2 growthbeyond 4 percent.MR. ANGELL. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. I'd like to go a little further out in time ifI could. This would be in a world where the transitional effects ofnew financial products have disappeared and we have a stable interestrate environment and we have discovered a new M2, which may turn outto be the same M2 or M2+ or M2- or the square root of M2 or somethinglike that! What is your sense of the relationship that that moneyaggregate would have with respect to nominal GNP?MR. KOHN. Our presumption, Governor Lindsey, was that as wegot out into the years '96, '97, '98, that is "after a while"--MR. LINDSEY. "After a while."MR. KOHN. --that some of these shifts would be over, thatpeople would have adjusted and that something like an M2 aggregatewould reemerge with the old relationship to nominal GDP. That is, itwould react somewhat the same way with respect to interest rates andincome. Obviously, we can't know in advance what that would be like.The other point I'd like to make is that I think we sometimes riskidealizing the way M2 used to be. This Committee violateddeliberately or ran very high in its M2 ranges frequently in the '80sand ran low sometimes as it moved interest rates against the thrust ofchanges in spending. It did a pretty good job moving M2 around andstabilizing nominal GDP. So M2 velocities from year to year alwayswere highly variable; one could make an argument that stabilizingnominal GDP, given shifts in spending, forced the Committee to havevariable M2s and variable velocities. The notion of M2 we came totoward the end of the '80s was that even if there were questionsraised about it year to year, the Committee should at least examinewhat it was doing if M2 seemed to deviate a lot up or a lot down,cumulated over long periods of time--the old P* notion. And theinnovations of the last two years have called even long-term stabilityinto question. I think it's quite possible that over time long-termstability will reemerge to a certain extent, but I don't think we'llever have a short-run relationship such that the Committee could counton setting a tight M2 target for a given year and assume it would get-46-7/6-7/93a particular nominal GDP for that year. M2 is just one of a number ofindicators of what is going on in the financial system.MR. LINDSEY. Right. Given that we're talking about theperiod after 1994, would you bet any money one way or the other onwhether the velocity trend would be positive or negative or zero?MR. KOHN. Well, the logic of what I was saying is that it'llreturn to something around zero.MR. LINDSEY. Right, okay.MR. KOHN. I think the chances are, though, that there willbe continuing innovations. A lot depends on what happens todepository institutions [and whether] they continue to shrink as aproportion of total intermediation. It depends on whether you thinkwe're in a sort of stock adjustment period in terms of depositorycredit or in a continuing decline. I lean toward the former ratherthan the latter, but I certainly don't rule out the latter. That is,I think there will be a nub of credit [extensions] that depositoriesare well suited to making and will continue to make. Now, if theystart securitizing small business loans and that sort of thing,depository institutions may just continue to fade as importantintermediaries, in which case the upward trend in M2 velocity wouldcontinue for quite some time.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.MR. SYRON. Don, I have a question which is a bit pedagogicin nature; it has to do with how we communicate. The place I start isthat regardless of which of these alternatives we choose, I don'tthink it's going to have much effect, at least in the shorter term orin what one might call the intermediate term through '94 and '95 andmaybe '96, just given where we are on all of these things. Therefore,I think the question is how in this terribly difficult period weconvey to Congress and the markets and the public as a whole what weare trying to do here. The question I had is: Given the increaseddifficulty we've had, because of unstable velocity, in setting a rangefor any aggregate, has that in your mind been associated with anincrease in the expected variance of velocities? What I'm coming tois whether there is an intellectual case here for a wider range.MR. KOHN. I think there is an intellectual case in thefollowing sense: In my response to Governor Lindsey I said there arequestions about the underlying trends in the economy and thedepository sector; we're not tied down to something like a V* that wethought was constant. On the other hand, as I noted in my remarks, wehaven't been that far off in our predictions of velocity and M2. Ourannual predictions have been remarkably close though some of that isoffsetting errors, which I'd be the first to admit. But even thevelocity predictions since the middle of last year, when we sort ofcaught on to what was going on, have been off by maybe a percentagepoint or less on a half-yearly basis. So, my guess is that it is nomore and may be even less than we had in the '80s when we thought wehad a stable range over the long term. So, in theory, you're right.If you don't know where things are going to go, where the equilibriumis, you're more uncertain about where you are in every year. On theother hand, we do understand something about these processes; we think-47-7/6-7/93we do anyhow. And I'm not sure we're much more uncertain about thesecond half of 1993 than we were about the second half of 1986 or1985.MR. SYRON. My concern isn't from a policy perspective orwhat you've done here; it's a concern I have from a communicationsperspective.MR. KOHN. Well, I think the Chairman has done a very goodjob communicating.MR. SYRON. I agree with that. But I think the difficulty wehave is that if we keep changing the ranges and we don't think we canhit [them] where we [want to] change them and we change them part ofthe way, what does it get us in an absolute sense?MR. KOHN. Right. Well, in some sense, that's what drove meto put in those very low ranges, 0 to 4 percent or whatever.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I must say I think this issue issignificantly diffused from where it was six months ago. I think ourbig fight was six months ago and, frankly, the behavior of velocity atthis stage has so undercut those who are arguing that M2 is ameaningful notion that it's very hard for the pressure to be anywherenear what it was. One can make the case that if velocity were what itused to be and the relationships were what they used to be, real GDPwould have been going straight down for a long period of time. So,[given] the lower number we [set in February] on technical grounds, Ithink we can basically do that [again] this time. I must say I happento agree with Don that we might as well lower it so that they can usethat joke about the dart being thrown--MR. SYRON. Draw the circle after it's thrown!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Draw the circle after you've thrown thedart. I don't think this is a big issue. We may get attacked on itfor other reasons, but it's a very easy reed to knock down because[our critics were] just so obviously wrong. If we stay where we are,we then have the problem of a slight element of hypocrisy. Butfrankly it's not a big deal either way and I don't think we'll havetrouble defending whatever we do.MR. ANGELL. Are you arguing for alternative III rather thanII?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I'm arguing for II.MR. ANGELL. Do you have any concern if we go to II and thenstill undershoot?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure, and then we go to III.MR. ANGELL. Okay.MR. FORRESTAL. Are you talking about 1993 or 1994?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I was talking about both.-48-7/6-7/93MR. SYRON. But you think it's still desirable to maintainthe current width of the range?MR. ANGELL. Sure.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, because we cannot simultaneouslyargue that the M2 data clearly are deficient for the moment and forthe interim period. Once we start to get sophisticated about that andtry to make it better than it is, presuming there's more there thanwe're trying to say--MR. SYRON. But any change presumes that we know something.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, we know something, namely that thetechnical reasons for the deviations in velocity have, if anything,been somewhat stronger than we would have expected. And that clearlywould require this type of adjustment. I would also argue, and Ithink it's probably desirable [to do so] in testimony, that when thebalance sheet strain is removed and we're getting more normal fundingof GDP from credit markets as distinct from cash flow, one wouldpresume we'll get a more normal relationship at that point. I thinkwe have to be very sensitive to [when we expect] that. It surelyisn't '93 or '94. And the one thing we can't do is to say that M2 isbasically worthless, that we don't think there's any other new trackthat we can [unintelligible]. That gets us into unnecessarydiscussions. We can talk about M2, or M2+, or the square root of M2,which I like--that has some real pizzazz to it. But I think we'vejust got to stay with the technical problem at present and battle itthrough, because I think it's going to be easier this time. PresidentBroaddus.MR. BROADDUS. Don, I'd like to go back to page 8 of theBluebook. In developing the tighter scenario did you take any accountof credibility effects? And if not, would it be fair to say that theoutcomes for real GDP and the unemployment rate, especially in theearly years, were on the more pessimistic side of the range ofpossible outcomes?MR. KOHN. No, President Broaddus, we did not take account ofcredibility effects, as I think we put in a footnote on the next page.The tighter and easier scenarios were keyed off of the baseline. Andsince the baseline is like the Greenbook forecast, as you discussedyesterday it is a little more pessimistic on inflation relative tooutput. That carried through in a sense to the tighter and easieralternatives. You're right that if we had some credibility effects wecould get inflation down faster for the same output or we could gethigher output for the same inflation gain. I think the evidence onthat in the past has been mixed. We may be on the verge of gettingsome [credibility effects] beyond what we've gotten so far. But wedid not assume changes in credibility [in the tighter scenario] nordid we assume that losses in credibility on the easier side wouldadversely affect the numbers.MR. PRELL. It's hard to look at the recent period, which hasbeen concerning all of us, and [say that] if strong credibility hadbeen established--if there were absolute credibility that we wouldbring things back quickly into line--people would have discounted therecent signs of inflationary pressure. So, despite a long period now,-49-7/6-7/93the evidence of our having gained a lot [of credibility] in affectingthis tradeoff is pretty limited.MR. BROADDUS. We'll have to take another step, I guess.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. You stated that you'd be emphasizing thetechnical nature of the adjustments if we adopted alternative II.Would there also be an attempt to talk a little about the longer termand the fact that these ranges could well be consistent with longer-term expectations or do you think that would be premature?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it's premature because once westart to do that, we're conveying a level of insight which I don'tthink we have. We're not even sure that the definition of M2 willhold into 1995. So, I think we ought to fudge on that; the reason isthat I see very little advantage in doing that because it's notcredible. We can't on the one hand say that M2 is a highly deficientindicator and then put any substance on the potential meaning of theranges.MR. PARRY. Except that if one talks about the long term,that certainly wouldn't indicate that one thinks there is a short-termapplicability. And if we are, in effect, unwilling to talk about thelong term and we think this is a problem that is going to persistforever, why are we doing what we're doing?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the reason why I think we have tosuggest that, in our judgment, when the balance sheet adjustments cometo an end there's every expectation--presuming that the depositoryinstitutions are not in a severe downward contraction--M2 or somethingclose to it will again be restored to the more normal velocityrelationship with the economy and that at that point we will have farmore confidence in the usefulness of this proxy for monetary policy.MR. PARRY. It may be constructive then to say: By the way,this range is probably pretty much consistent with that and reasonableprice stability as well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That presupposes where the M2 is goingto come out.MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, I think the tighter M2 path, whichas I was discussing with Governor Lindsey had underlying it the notionthat things would come back to more normal alignment, suggests thedifficulty of doing that. We have 4 and 4-3/4 percent M2 growthpartly because the yield curve is flattening. I think that's theother factor, as you mentioned before. If the yield curve isflattening from its highly unusual alignment right now, then thatprocess--it's sort of what Governor Angell has been saying--will pushup the M2 growth at least for a time. So, it's hard to know what'sconsistent with price stability.MR. KEEHN. Would you be uncomfortable going into thetestimony simply saying that we continue to move through this periodof extreme uncertainty. We will obviously continue to follow theaggregates very, very closely, but in an interim period to make a-50-7/6-7/93change to reduce the ranges implies some level of certainty that wejust simply don't have. And then leave it as it is now. I guess myquestions are: (a) Would you be uncomfortable in taking that kind ofposition; and (b) What are the risks?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. First of all, I don't think it'snecessary to do it. I would feel uncomfortable because we are tryingto forecast M2. We're basically forecasting it by ad hoc adjustmentsto velocity, but we are forecasting it. If the Congress insists onour focusing on this issue and we have been committed statutorily toactually making these projections, I would feel uncomfortablebasically saying that all this stuff is nonsense and why are we doingit. That's because the next argument, if we leave the rangesunchanged and are saying they're not worth anything, [relates to] whyare we publishing them. Are we not deluding the public? But whatwe're doing is that we're trying to forecast M2. What we are sayingis that the old relationship of M2 to the economy has broken down butwe're still forecasting M2 and it's better to try to forecast it andimprove the chances to get actual growth in the range than basicallyto say we're not even trying. I think the crucial question is notthis at all. The crucial question is the relationship between M2 andthe economy. And if we argue wholly on technical grounds that we areforecasting M2 as required and our best estimate is 1 or 2 percent[growth] and the range we're setting is 1 to 5 percent, for example,then at least we're forecasting the M2. We're not saying it means allthat much and we've argued that it doesn't mean very much, but atleast we're not saying it means nothing. It's not a big deal but ifyou ask me if I would feel more comfortable going up there with 1 to 5percent than no change and saying the thing doesn't matter, I must sayI'd feel a little more comfortable with the 1 to 5 percent range. Ifit's the Committee's view that we should do nothing, then I wouldn'tfind that I'm unable to make that case; it's just that I've got tothink it's a weaker case. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, it's my opinion that many outthere view the M2 target as similar to or actually in lieu of anominal GNP target because we are not asked for the nominal GNPtarget. And this would be across the spectrum, say, from MiltonFriedman to Paul Sarbanes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You've just disturbed your colleague toyour left!MR. LINDSEY. In that case, and I do think that's awidespread view--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry, what is a widespread view?MR. LINDSEY. That our announced M2 target range is a proxyfor our nominal GNP target range because there is a continuingperception, based on history, that over the long run the trendvelocity is zero.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That would be true if we didn't sayotherwise.MR. LINDSEY. Also, when the trend reasserts itself--while noone is betting any money for sure--our best guess of the trend in the7/6-7/93long-term future is zero. Lowering the target range now, therefore,invites one or possibly two charges. The first is that we havelowered our nominal GNP target now to a midpoint of 3 percent and nota midpoint of 4 percent. And I think 3 percent is probably a lowtarget for nominal GNP. Or, even if we can get around that problem--and I'm sure you can in the testimony--when we finally get to the longrun, it will be necessary for this Committee, I think, to raise the M2target in order to hit the nominal GNP target. I don't know in whatyear that will come, but I'm very much worried that it would send thesignal that we are backing off on inflation. So I would prefer tokeep the 2 to 6 percent range--though I understand what you're saying--to avoid the short-run charge that we're cutting our nominal GNPtarget and to avoid a long-term risk of re-raising the target rangeand, therefore, looking weak on inflation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm not sure I agree with that. I thinkwe're talking about 1995; that's the period. At that point we willeither be credible on the inflation issue or we will have failed. AndI'm not sure that what we're doing on this range will make all thatmuch difference.MR. LINDSEY. Credibility on inflation? Let's take thebaseline CPI projection in the Bluebook. Assuming that comes true, wewill have had 3.3, 3.1, and 2.9 percent. What are we credible on?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Look, you're raising an issue of what wewill be doing with respect to the ranges two years from now. I don'teven know whether or not the M2 we'll be using is the right [measure].I would not want to say, because I'm not sure we really know, that thebest estimate of velocity change is zero. I would say it's a guess.I wouldn't even dignify it with the concept of a forecast at thispoint. It's a very loose sequence of events. And the [point] is topreserve a position of the type that we want to preserve. I don'tdisagree with the obvious logic you're raising, but it presupposes anumber of possibilities which I think [involve] very wide ranges oferror. If you took the present value of being in that position twoyears from now, I'm not sure that I'd give it very much value. Ithink it [has to be viewed as] a very highly discounted position. Ifyou're asking me if the events turn out the way you suggest would theproposition you're making now be the wise one, the answer is yes. Iwould agree with that. The trouble I have is that it's much toodubious a forecast to rest on. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I understand where you're comingfrom with regard to moving these targets now. I have some concernbecause we have spent a lot of time talking about the uncertainty ofthese M numbers and where they're going and trying to discount them ina sense as targets. If we now go in and lower the targets, I think weare risking a great deal in the sense that if we change the targets,[the implication is that] we must know something; that will be thepresumption if we bring it down. If we aren't sure at this point,aren't we better to say we aren't sure and that, therefore, we'releaving the range unchanged until we know more, rather than raisingsuspicions?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would basically say that the staff'sbest estimate is that the rise in velocity will continue. If that isin fact the case, our best shot at this point is to lower [the range].-52-7/6-7/93That is not [intended] to create a view that this is all thatimportant. All we're doing is forecasting M2. So long as we maintainthe position that the relationship between M2 and everything else isunattached, then this argument is an academic argument that doesn'thave legs.MR. HOENIG. But what we are then doing is changing theconcept from one of targeting to one of forecasting where M2 might begiven [emerging] circumstances--some of which are out of our control--in terms of its velocity.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we have to emphasize up frontwhat we have done. And, indeed, the staff's velocity forecasts havenot been bad. Basically, what we have to do is to argue that thisassociation has occurred and it would be more [prudent] policy to[base] our judgments on this. But we continue monitoring the moneysupply; indeed, we should. And in our judgment, or basically thestaff's judgment since we want to make it a technical issue, we wouldbe more likely to be right with a somewhat lower cone.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. I have a lot of sympathy for what Larry Lindseysaid. I could live with what you're proposing, Alan, and I think itcan be explained that way. I think the other way can be explained aswell. I have trouble with the concept that all this is useful; in asense M2 ranges for the next 12 or 18 months were really never allthat helpful in that velocity over those periods of time could bequite volatile. Probably where it was useful, in my mind, was in avery long-term perspective with zero trend velocity over those periodsof time and [an expectation that] gradually we'd get down to somerange that was consistent with price stability. In that context,then, as Larry explained, we open ourselves up to the arguments aboutwhat sort of nominal GDP we are in effect projecting. And possibly weget into this problem of eventually having this bounce around. Thenwhat does that mean? Up until recently my own view has always been towork the range down gradually to where we think we ought to be in alonger-term context and then leave it there; and if we're going tomiss, we explain the misses. So, my preference would be to leave itand explain that we're going to miss. I can live with what you'reproposing but it raises a question as to how we convey our longer-termintentions to the public and what they can look at as some sort ofindicator. Right now, of course, there isn't any. If they want toknow, there isn't any.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, Tom, as I said, that is a validargument. It's not one that can be readily undercut. It's a judgmentas to what particular strategy we wish to work our way toward.MR. MELZER. Right.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ultimately, if money gets back [ontrack] and becomes viable again, we're going to have to make ajudgment as to what particular level we want to maintain for the longterm. We can basically say that. And if the question comes up, Iwill not argue that this is a long-term projection. I'd say, indeed,that when we have a much better fix on M2 or whatever the money supply-53-7/6-7/93variable will be, we then have to view the question of what theappropriate ranges are. I don't see what else we can do.MR. MELZER. Given that this is essentially a forecast forthis horizon--if I heard you correctly, you sort of detach it from thepolicy debate by saying it's purely technical and it's a forecast--then even if we miss this lower range, that doesn't imply any policyresponse.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In fact, if you argue--as I would intendto if the Committee wishes me to--that this is a wholly technicalquestion and is disassociated from the economy, I would becontinuously emphasizing the fact that policy has to be based onlooking at a broader set of underlying financial and economicconditions and that we are bereft of this proxy at this particularstage. We hope it will come back; in fact, one form of it or anotheralmost surely will come back after the [ongoing] balance sheetadjustments are completed. But it's premature to make a judgment asto when that might be. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. Well, I just want to support Larry's and Tom'sposition. They really made the points I want to make. From mystandpoint, the real purpose of this longer-term range is to signalour continuing commitment to our longer-term objective and, at leastas importantly, the steadiness with which we [plan to] pursue it.With that in mind, if we lower the range in the middle of the year tochase an unexpected shortfall in M2, I think we risk muddying thewaters and muddling that message.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How would you argue on keeping it [thesame for] this year and lowering it next year?MR. BROADDUS. I would support that. I'd like to see us keepit [the same] this year and lower it perhaps a half point further nextyear. That would seem to me to be consistent with the steady approachwe have taken and tried to sell.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. In general I support the notion of putting thisin the realm of a technical adjustment. But I would like to pursue acouple of aspects of that. As I understand it, what you're going tosay is--and these are my words, not yours--that the relationshipbetween M2 and the economy has broken down. We know that it hasbroken down in the direction of higher velocity; that is, we knowsomething, but we don't know a lot. Point one is that it seems to meone has to know more to make a change than to keep something the same,so it's a matter of judgment as to whether we know enough to make thatchange. The second point is that you say that we're forecasting M2but we're not targeting M2. So, how do you then answer the question:You know enough to lower [the range for] it and you know enough toforecast it, but it is a monetary aggregate and, as a central bank,can't you influence it at all? And if you can influence it at all,why don't you try? So why doesn't this forecast have some element oftarget to it? I think what you're really saying is that we're justforecasting it; we're not trying to target it. But it seems to mewe're in a grey area here where we know enough to do what we're doingbut we don't know enough to influence it.-54-7/6-7/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's the other side of theargument; that is a legitimate argument. And the question basicallyis whether we want to be wholly agnostic on the potential pattern ofM2 or whether we want to make some judgments about it. As I said, Iwould lean to saying something about it if we want to and indicatingthat we haven't completely abandoned any view of monetary targeting.But it's a close argument.MR. BOEHNE. Well, it seems to me you're going to have to domore explaining and answer more questions--there's nothing wrong withthat--if we make a change, especially for this year, than if we don't.I agree it's a close call and you're the one who has to [testify].And it's a close enough call--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me ask Don: What are the prosand cons of staying where we are this year and lowering it tentativelyfor next year?MR. KOHN. I'm fairly confident, which isn't very confident Iagree, that we are going to come in under the range this year. Youcould always say that. When we wrote our Humphrey-Hawkins report lastyear, the experience of writing it was that it was difficult to saywe've got this range but we're ignoring it. Well, why do you have therange? You changed it in February; you thought you knew enough inFebruary to change it. It conveys something about our longer-runintentions, but it doesn't convey anything about what we want to dothis year or what we think will happen this year. We can write that;we can do that, but it's a little more awkward than saying: Well,given the velocity developments in the first part of the year, wethink this is going to happen. I think there's an additionalvulnerability this time--and I don't know which way it cuts--which isthat M2 growth is 1 percentage point below the range and you haverevised down your nominal GDP forecast. So, Senator Sarbanes can getreligion again and say: See, you missed that and you missed nominalGDP at the same time. I'm not sure which way that cuts. I think ifwe don't lower the range and we miss it, then we are vulnerable. Ifwe do lower the range, we're vulnerable to the question that GovernorLindsey talked about: That is, does the lowering mean you've loweredyour nominal GDP? Well, we have a little. But even if we don't lowerthe range--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not now.MR. KOHN. --and start falling short, we're vulnerable to thecontinuing flow of letters over this half of the year. So, it reallyis somewhat of a tossup.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I must say that I don't feel stronglyabout this issue because, frankly, I think we had our fiercest battlesix months ago and I think we came out on the right side of that. Idon't think the pressure is there. Either way it's a club to beat onus and they like to beat on us. The question is where do we want ourhead to be when they take a swing at us! [Laughter]MR. BOEHNE. Well, it's your head, so where do you want it?MR. MELZER. Well, just picking up on Ed's point, rather than[talking about] our ability to forecast lower growth a better defense-55-7/6-7/93may be that we're not at all convinced at this point in time that inthe long run trend velocity won't return to zero. I'm not saying itwill. We don't know that it will, but we don't know that it won'teither. And on that basis that's why we continue to set a range.MR. ANGELL. But, Tom, it may very well be that when velocitygoes back to zero, it will go back to zero at a different level. Thatis, when the rate of change of velocity goes to zero does it go backto zero at that higher level or does the level go back? It seems tome that one might make a very good case here that it will go to zeroat that higher level, and I think that's what Don is suggesting. Iguess I don't understand why those who want to pursue a gradualreduction of inflation that gets these numbers down--1 to 5 percentcertainly encompasses that picture--[object to a lower range]. Thereis not a money projection out here that gets above 5 percent with thatkind of projection.MR. MELZER. I think where we end up may be for the wrongreason.MR. ANGELL. Now, if this Committee doesn't want to proceedtoward getting inflation down to zero, I think we ought to shut ourmouths and quit talking about price stability. I just don'tunderstand how we can talk about price stability as being desirableand then not want to take the money range down [to where] with,velocity returning to zero, it is consistent with price stability.And it seems to me that 1 to 5 percent does that. Doesn't 1 to 5percent permit us a midpoint of 3--or even of 2 percent and then avelocity of 3--and a nominal GDP of 5 percent? It seems to me thatthe velocity we're predicting is almost like targeting nominal GDP at5 percent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, most of what I wanted to say hasalready been said. I think you're quite right that the arguments arevery finely balanced here. Let me say first of all that it seems tome we've been talking for a long time about the difficulties with M2and the uncertainties surrounding it and that if we were to change therange in midyear we would be drawing more attention to M2 than I thinkit deserves. It really reflects more precision than we agree we have.I think it would be desirable to lower the ranges for 1994, but Ithink it would be better to let this year run and not change theranges for 1993. We'll be accused of chasing M2. And moreimportantly, in my mind that would just draw more attention to theaggregate than it really deserves. Now, 1994 is a different question;and I think we ought to announce that in February and not now.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Don, let me ask you a question ofprobability. What is the probability, in your judgment, that M2 couldall of a sudden accelerate from here in the context, say, of theeconomy continuing to move up modestly? In other words, basically,what is the probability that velocity will fall?MR. KOHN. My judgment is that the probability would besmall, given the current shape of the yield curve.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How small?-56-7/6-7/93MR. KOHN. A major acceleration in M2 growth?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, there's another issue that nobodyhere has raised that is implicit in what Governor Lindsey was talkingabout. Suppose we were to lower the range and all of a sudden we geta surge in M2; that would put us in a position where velocity is goingin the wrong direction and it was an awful forecast. M2 would stillbe disassociated, but that's a different type of disassociation.MR. KOHN. I guess I don't see those forces [that areaffecting M2] abating. As I've said, I think the risks on ourforecast are balanced. I think there's some possibility that M2 couldcome out around 2 percent, but to have a big surge would be highlyunlikely given what we know is happening with mutual funds, sales inbank offices, and--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I understand that. And then if thestock market--MR. KOHN. If the trend of the stock market--MS. PHILLIPS. If there were a stock market correction--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Then everybody would rush out of mutualfunds.MR. KOHN. That's possible. And that would be a good exampleof an M2 surge which you'd certainly want to accommodate. If thestock market were dropping, you'd have trouble explaining why youweren't reacting.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's one of the reasons onewould want 2 to 6 percent instead of 1 to 5 percent. President Stern.MR. STERN. Well, I have some considerable sympathy for theposition you described initially, especially for 1994, for the reasonsthat have been discussed. In addition, if the staff is right andwe're going to get M2 growth this year of about 1 percent, it seems tome that next year's range at least ought to embody that or we'remaking a rather strange commentary on the way things are turning outthis year. For 1993, I don't have a strong view about what to do withthe ranges. We've done it both ways in history; that is, we've eitherundershot or overshot kind of knowingly and haven't reacted--haven'tchanged the ranges. But I wouldn't be troubled in this case if wedid. There probably is a pretty good case for changing the range.Beyond those two years, 1993 and 1994, I must say at the moment thatI'm not very confident about making any presumptions about M2 or itsvelocity. In thinking about some of the work that was done withregard to M2+, if you believe that the stock and bond mutual fundsreally are good substitutes for some of those components in M2--and Iguess I do--and we came to the conclusion that we didn't want toconstruct an aggregate at least at the moment that included those[funds], the logic of that is that M2 itself perhaps was not a verygood aggregate in the first place. It may be that in the long runthis all will wash out; that is, all the substitution will have beendone and we will get a cleaner, improved, or better M2. But I'm notin a position to reach that conclusion and I have a suspicion thatwherever we end up three or four years down the road, it may be with-57-7/6-7/93something very different from the concepts we are currently talkingabout. So, I'm not terribly troubled by the long-run implications ofwhatever ranges we select at the moment.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.MR. MULLINS. I doubt that M2 is worth this much time.[Laughter] I think the fundamental problem is a conflict between theconcept of mortal M2 and Governor Angell's hypothetical money [whichhe talked about] yesterday and which we probably ought to callimaginary money and explain as involving the square root of negative1. But the discussion of where we should be long term and of nominalGDP targets and the like all relate to that conceptual, hypotheticalmoney. The people who have shown up in town and argued that thatmidpoint is a nominal GDP target can be shown to have beendemonstrably wrong empirically over last year. We've won that battleand that's why we don't hear that anymore. We could have made adecision early on either to keep the range long term, based upon thishypothetical money case, or to make these technical adjustments. Inmy view we made the decision in February to go with the technicaladjustments; and to the extent that we move back and forth or havedouble elements in the message, we muddle the message. I think we'vebeen very successful in diffusing this whole argument this way. Wehave had success in understanding and forecasting velocity shifts.Our forecasts are much better than those of the critics. We starteddown this path of adjustment and if we adjusted it in February, giventhese sorts of forecasts, it's not clear why we wouldn't be adjustingit this year unless maybe we're even tighter with these technicaladjustments. So, my view is that we ought to be consistent and stickwith the battle we've won on this. Again, there's a lot ofuncertainty about the future. I don't think we know enough to bindourselves by the potential constraints out there. I might add thatother central banks who do have credibility, like the Bundesbank, willraise the ranges and lower them for technical reasons; they go bothways. But it seems to me that we fought this battle on the technicalnature of this and won, and the safest thing to do is to stick withit. So, I'm way back with your initial proposal.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. If we were to lower the range and if yourtestimony could refer to the staff's expectation of an increase invelocity and in addition an implied increase in velocity from theeconomic projections, it seems to me it would go a long way inanswering Governor Lindsey's concerns.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry, I didn't quite get what yousaid. Could you repeat that?MR. PARRY. If you were to note that the staff is expectingan increase in velocity and at the same time that our projections seemto imply an increase in velocity as well, that would go a long waytoward alleviating the concerns that Governor Lindsey has that we ineffect have a lower nominal GDP target [when] we don't have a lowerGDP target.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Syron.-58-7/6-7/93MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I think this discussion indicatesthat we can talk ourselves into or out of anything and, therefore, wecould probably talk anyone else into or out of anything. [Laughter]So, we've probably made too much out of it. After hearing all this, Ihave some substantial sympathy for leaving things alone right now anddoing next year whatever is going to be done for the followingreasons: If we do make a change now, it's difficult to change it asfar as we need to and have a great deal of confidence that growthwould come in within the range this year. If we change to a range of1 to 5 percent, the center of that being 3 percent, the GDP forecast--and I agree the forecast looks pretty good in this difficult world--the point forecast sets us up for the criticism that while we knowthis is only a technical matter, we can neither control nor forecastit. Maybe we could explain it given all those things we've talkedabout. So, in my mind if we were going to change the range, thatwould [lead] us to Governor Angell's suggestion of going to where wecenter-weighted it to alternative III. But then I think we would havea problem: What do we do next year from that? So, that in my mindargues for leaving things where they are right now and--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What do you do for '94?MR. SYRON. For '94 I would probably go to 1 to 5 percent.MR. MULLINS. How do you explain the fact that the forecastis out of your range for 1993?MR. SYRON. This, I admit, is a Hobson's choice; there is nogood answer here. I would say that there are uncertainties whichcontinue to evolve and that in our communications with the Americanpeople and the Congress we don't want to come forward with a technicalforecast. We don't want to imply a degree of expertise in forecastingthis from a basis [akin to shifting] sands that is not accurate.MR. MULLINS. Our best guess is outside the range!MR. SYRON. Our best guess is but we don't have sufficientconfidence in that best guess to imply that it could be interpreted[as the basis for] controlling policy.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. I would prefer to go with your originalproposal, which was to change the 1994 range to alternative II. Icould live with alternative III, but alternative II is certainly acompromise I'm willing to make. If we're changing the tentative 1994range in July of this year to 1 to 5 percent, it seems to me quitereasonable to change this year's range to 1 to 5 percent because weknow there's just zero chance that it is going to be exceeded on thetop side for the rest of this year. It seems to me there will be lessof an impact to do '93 just like we're going to do '94.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I perceive very little differenceamong us on substance. This is a matter of perception, and I thinkDavid is right that we've already spent more time on this than weshould. I certainly would be comfortable for you to argue in the way-59-7/6-7/93you are most comfortable with on this matter of perceptions. However,for my part, if we change in the middle of the year for the succeedingsix months only, that would be the riskier course in the sense that Ithink it runs the risk of changing the nature of the message thatwe're sending. When we send a message out at the first of the yearabout the succeeding year, it's the best forecast we can make. Itsets a benchmark similar to budgeting for the year; it gives abenchmark against which to evaluate and analyze performance, analyzeevents, and make comparisons. But when we change in the middle of theyear for the remaining six months based on six months' experience, Ithink that changes the range into becoming a target. Ed made thatpoint a while ago. And that sets up a whole different set ofdynamics. We're indicating that we're determined to hit that targetand that we think we know how to do it. That puts pressure on us todo it. And particularly given the dynamics of velocity that we'vediscussed here, that is not something that I think we want to allowourselves to get into. Once again, I think it's a matter of whichargument you are most comfortable making, and I'll certainly supportyou either way. But if I were the one who was going to go up andpresent this testimony, I'd be more comfortable supporting no changefor this year and then changing over to alternative II for 1994.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. You raised a question a few minutes ago aboutwhat the chances were of a sharp velocity decline. I had looked atthe Bluebook table on page 8 and noted that the numbers implysignificant velocity declines in 1998. I was trying to think my waythrough what set of circumstances could produce that result even outthen, let alone this year and next year. We may not know much aboutwhat should or shouldn't be in M2 or what's going on with itsvelocity, but we do know that debits still equal credits--the twosides of the balance sheet are still equal--and that will help guideus a little. In order to have negative velocity, given that there islittle further potential for running off non-deposit liabilities ofthe banking system and there is substantial potential for running offsecurity portfolios in order to accommodate loan demand, we somehowhave to imagine that total intermediation through the commercialbanking system--the total assets of the banking system correspondingto those liabilities--have to rise relative to total spending in theeconomy the way we measure things. I'm having a terrible timeimagining that circumstance coming about no matter what the yieldcurve is doing. So, I think that we could put aside the idea of avelocity decline even out in 1998. I [unintelligible] something tofill that case.As for the ranges for this year and next year, very early inthis discussion Al Broaddus asked a question about credibility andMike and Don referred to that footnote on page 9. A part of what weare trying to do is establish some credibility of a regime in whichpeople believe that any increases in inflation and interest rates aretemporary and they'll go back down so that the central bank[unintelligible] them to do that. I don't see how it helps us tostart building on that credibility if we are below our target rangeand are not trying--or claiming that we're trying--to do anything tobe within the range. So, whether we call this a target or a forecastof what money is going to do, it's just arithmetic at this point for1993. We have to lower the range and be willing to make these-60-7/6-7/93[unintelligible] as they may be, just as a step to get our owncredibility up. When the focus is on this ratio of GDP to M we callvelocity, a lot of the discussion is about the denominator; in earlierremarks, especially Larry Lindsey's remarks, it was that we were usingthe denominator as a handle to try to hit the numerator. Well, Idon't think that we should be targeting nominal GDP, [unintelligible]total spending. I have enough trouble with what's in the numerator inmeasuring economic activity in today's world to think that we shouldfiddle with the denominator to hit the numerator. A lot of thisdiscussion about velocity gets us off track. Instead we ought to getout [the message] more clearly that [our goal] is price levelstability--that we're going to stabilize the price level at some pointin the future. Whether we're fiddling with the fed funds rate orfiddling with various reserve or money measures, [the message shouldbe] that we haven't lost our focus on stabilizing the price level.And all of these other discussions about where we are on the Ms ortheir velocities are sort of distractions.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. Well, this is much ado about little. I came tothe meeting with a slight preference for keeping the ranges unchangedon the grounds that we have to know more to change something than toleave it alone. But it's only a slight preference and I can easily gowith II or I. However, if we're going to change one, it would bebetter to change both. If we're going to draw attention to it andexplain it on technical grounds, presumably we know more about thenext six months than we know about next year, particularly since wethink we're going to have more M2 growth next year than this year.So, I would prefer either to stay the same or make the change for bothyears.MR. ANGELL. That's a good point.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, for some reason this discussionreminds me of the Aggie who failed to show up at home one night. Hecame in the next morning and his wife asked him where he'd been. Hesaid: Well, honey, I did actually come in last night but you werealready asleep and I didn't want to disturb you. So I slept in thehammock on the back porch so I wouldn't wake you up, but I was hereall night. She said: You know, I sold that hammock two weeks ago.And he said: Well, that's my story and I'm sticking to it.[Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm waiting for the policy implication!MR. MCTEER. My story in the past year has been that M2 hasbeen sluggish because money has been spilling out of the bankingsystem, primarily into stock and bond funds. I think that's a storywe ought to keep alive because it's the only story we have. I thinkwe were a little hasty yesterday in dismissing this. It may be thatM2+ doesn't make an ideal substitute for M2 for the future, but eventhough it's not satisfying econometrically, as Yogi Berra would say:"You can observe a lot just by looking." Just looking at what ishappening [tells us that] the banking system is shrinking; it'sbecoming less important as an intermediary. When we talk about this-61-7/6-7/93to the general public they understand it; they're all out thereseeking higher yields than they're getting at their banks. I calledhome last night and learned that my wife had just bought her firstlottery ticket. That's how far it's going right now! So, I think weought to keep that [story]--MS. PHILLIPS. Do we put that in M2?MR. KOHN. That's M2++!MR. MCTEER. We should put the kitchen sink in there if itwould stabilize velocity. So, my suggestion would be this: We havean opportunity now to lower the M2 target range to 1 to 5 percent,let's say, for technical or arithmetic reasons. We can explain it;we're going to miss any range that's higher than that anyway. Then,having lowered it for 1993, we go ahead and lower it for 1994 at thesame time and we'll have it where we want it for the future. So, wehave an opportunity to lower it for technical reasons and have itthere for more fundamental policy reasons later. So, I would suggest1 to 5 percent for 1993 and 1994.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. Like others, I think, I certainly don't feelstrongly about this either. If I hear you correctly, you would bereasonably comfortable either way on this; you don't feel verystrongly about it. I must say I have a preference not to change therange either for this year or next year. If we did reduce the rangethis year and made a technical adjustment, in the cool light ofhindsight, frankly, it seems to me that will be viewed as a mistake.I think we simply ought to leave the range where it is, make the casein the testimony that there's an awful lot of uncertainty, we're doinga lot of work, and we will report back to the Congress as we developmore information to shed some light on this issue.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The only difference I would take onthat, Si, is that I feel a little uncomfortable about complete know-nothingness on the issue. It's one thing to make a forecast which wedon't think has significant policy significance. It's another thingto say we're absolutely at sea. If you listen to this discussion,there's literally zero policy question here. It's all a perception ofhow people are going to react to what we say. We're not talking aboutreal stuff. What we're talking about basically is whether we wish toposition ourselves into a know-nothing position. I personally feeluncomfortable with that. If you told me I had to argue [the case], Icould argue it. I would not feel as though it's a policy issue. Butit's strictly a style question. And knowing who we're dealing with upon the Hill, I think it's a little better argument, frankly, to--MR. KEEHN. You get the political reaction by not making achange. We'll be worse off than--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't think so. I sensed when I wentup there in February to make the technical argument that we had themat a major disadvantage. The reason is that it's a really differentdialectic when somebody says this isn't working and somebody else istrying to say it is. If somebody says to me that M2 is really-62-7/6-7/93important and I'm trying to say they're [wrong], from a dialecticposition [my argument] is much more plausible.MR. KEEHN. Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. Well, I can certainly support the 1 to 5 percentrange for both the balance of this year and next year. I would have aslight personal preference, if I were the one doing it, for leavingthe 1993 range where it is and then in my testimony going to somelength to discuss [our broad policy objectives] and simply say we'retrying to foreshadow the projected change for 1994 and if we confirmthis trend in velocity, then it would be appropriate to reduce therange for 1994.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know, that is one technical way ofcoming at it; it's a good [point]. First Vice President Oltman.MR. OLTMAN. I would go to 1 to 5 percent both for 1993 and1994. That was not my first instinct here. I started with a feelingthat changing the range at this point would imply that we know moreabout the process than we do. But I've been convinced by the argumentthat this offers an opportunity to emphasize the technical nature ofthis and to further the divestiture of the policy component.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. I'd go ahead and lower the range to 1 to 5percent for both 1993 and 1994. We have a half a year of informationfor 1993 and it seems to me that we'd look pretty foolish if we didn'trecognize that. And I'd vote for that [lower range] for 1994 becauseI think it may in fact put us where we'd like to be for [substantive]reasons. I would urge, along the lines of President McTeer'scomments, that we have some discussion in the written testimonysomewhere on M2+ because I do think that helps in terms of theexplanation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I agree. I think that's absolutelyright. In discussing what it is we know about M2, it's not zero; wedo know that something is there.MS. PHILLIPS. We know something, yes.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We're going to make an argument thateventually it's more than likely to be restored but one has to be ableto understand the process involved. I think it's very important forus to be very analytically sharp on what we think is happeningconcurrent with our judgment that the relationship to the economy hasveered off for a protracted period. Look, we're the central bank. Ifno one in the central bank understands what is happening to money, weare in really serious trouble. What we have to say, basically, isthat we understand what's going on. Our presumption is that astructural relationship shift has occurred for reasons x,y, and z.Therefore, to target M2 as a monetary policy vehicle is temporarilyinappropriate.-63-7/6-7/93MS. PHILLIPS. And from all of this analysis that we havedone this last year we have learned a lot more.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Exactly. And I think we've basicallyimproved our status in that respect.MR. LAWARE. Can we call one of them real M2 and the otherone nominal M2? [Laughter]MR. KELLEY. How about unreal M2!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I like Governor Mullins' view of M2-ibecause they are imaginary numbers. I'm sorry, Gary Stern, I didn'tget down what your preference was.MR. STERN. My preference was your initial suggestion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I realize that we can play this in anumber of different ways. I would argue two things. One is that theargument for going to 1 to 5 percent is persuasive, but I think theargument to do it for both years is very persuasive. In other words,whatever we do, we ought to do for two years. And while we aretechnically voting separately on each, I would urge us to consider theimplications of making this a highly technical issue. And in myjudgment we do it best by staying where we are [next year]. Can wevote, separate votes?MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, why don't we vote on 1994 and thenafter you announce that vote on 1993.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a very good point. I wouldpropose 1 to 5 percent for M2 and the equivalent for M3 and debt for1994.MR. BERNARD. I guess we'd be using the wording in Option A,which refers to retaining the '93 ranges as revised at this meeting.The first sentence of the paragraph would remain the same: "TheFederal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditionsthat will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth inoutput." And then [we'd use the language under] Option B starting atthe bottom of page 24 in the Bluebook: "For 1994 the Committee agreedon tentative ranges for monetary growth measured from the fourthquarter of 1993 to the fourth quarter of 1994 of 1 to 5 percent for M2and 0 to 4 percent for M3. The Committee provisionally set themonitoring range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt at 4to 8 percent for 1994. The behavior of the monetary aggregates willcontinue to be evaluated in the light of progress toward price levelstability, movements in their velocities, and developments in theeconomy and financial markets."MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, as I understand it, we're votingon 1994 now, aren't we--just the bottom of page 24 as Norm read it?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is correct. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesActing Vice Chairman Mullins Yes-64-7/6-7/93Governor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Lindsey YesPresident McTeer YesFirst Vice President Oltman YesGovernor Phillips YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And I'd like to propose the same for1993. Would somebody move--MR. MULLINS. What do you mean "the same"?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The same 1 to 5 percent on M2.MR. ANGELL. The 1 to 5 percent.BERNARD. Do you want me to read [the language] or just callthe roll?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't you read it again.MR. BERNARD. Again from page 24 at the top, entitled Option2--Reduce Ranges: "In furtherance of these objectives the Committee atthis meeting lowered the ranges it had established in February forgrowth of M2 and M3 to 1 to 5 percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively,measured from the fourth quarter of 1992 to the fourth quarter of1993. The Committee anticipated that developments contributing tounusual velocity increases would persist over the balance of the yearand that money growth within these lower ranges would be consistentwith its broad policy objectives. The monitoring range for growth oftotal domestic nonfinancial debt also was lowered to 4 to 8 percentfor the year."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD. For 1993 then,Chairman Greenspan YesActing Vice Chairman Mullins YesGovernor Angell YesPresident Boehne YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Lindsey YesPresident McTeer YesFirst Vice President Oltman YesGovernor Phillips YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. [Don.]MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--seeAppendix.]-65-7/6-7/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don? If not, let me justraise a few issues that I think are relevant to this outlook. Itstrikes me that we clearly have been quite successful in diagnosingthe underlying causes of the problems that have been associated withthis economy. I think we picked up the question of strain on balancesheets very early on. We've tracked the forces that have engenderedmild disinflation and economic growth on a path somewhat above 2 to2-1/2 percent. The general view which has been implicit in ouractions--essentially the stability of policy over this very long, Iguess almost historically long, period--is a view of the way theeconomic system is functioning. That view presupposes that it isstill going to take a while for the strain on balance sheets to workits way out and that eventually the economy should be on a new andstronger upward path. For us to take the position at this point thatthere is cumulative weakness in the economy of a nature which mightrequire our next move to be down rather than up would require that weessentially alter our view. Now, obviously, if events occur that makethat required, we will have no alternative. But there is little or noevidence to suggest that the underlying basis as to what is causingthe system to function requires a change in policy at this point. Ithink we had a significant indication yesterday with those auto andlight truck sales figures. If this economy were undergoing a processof contraction, it's very difficult to imagine where those numberswere coming from.Nonetheless, we do have a very odd combination of effectshere in that the fiscal package is creating a lot of uncertainties sofar as the forecast is concerned. If we look at the extent of thatfiscal restraint in the context that the Greenbook did, by any measureit is a relatively modest degree of restraint and one cannot readilyargue that there's much in the way of ex post receipts andexpenditures that is significantly altering the economic environment.What is quite interesting, and I think apparent, as one looks at thisprocess as it develops is that the psychological or anticipatoryaspects involved in this fiscal package really are of an order ofmagnitude that seems to be almost larger than the actual impact. I'mnot saying that's true; I'm not saying that is an incredibleperception. I don't know how much of the long-term interest ratereduction is attributable to the expectation that there will be acredible reduction in the deficit somewhere out there. I suspect mostof it is, rightly or wrongly. [Lower interest rates] haveunquestionably been a major factor in the improvement of balancesheets and increasing consumer incomes as a consequence of thereduction in the fairly substantial debt service burdens. It's ratherobvious at this point, however, that the offsetting impact on thenegative side--on the contraction in the real variables--is on the taxside and, at least based on the anecdotal discussions around thistable yesterday, on the capital goods markets with respect to a numberof projects being put on hold. It's very tough to see that in thedata as yet. The only place it actually materializes is in thenondefense durable goods numbers. Surely, it doesn't get picked up inany of the broader measures or in any of the actual measures ofcapital expenditures concurrently.So, if there's anything out there, we'll learn about it intwo or three months; but at the moment it's hard to find any hardstatistics which demonstrate that. I think we're getting something ofa slowdown in the rate of growth in medical employment, which I-66-7/6-7/93suspect may be a reflection of the expectation that something ishappening on the fiscal side relating to medical care and the like.So, what we are looking at is an economy which arguably is beingaffected both positively and negatively by the deficit issue well inadvance of any actual changes in either receipts or expenditures. AndI don't think we have very much in the way of history to know how toplay this. If this economy is going to start to weaken far more thanwe expect, it's not credible that it will occur as a consequence ofthe actual hard numbers that are out there in the budget proposal, allof which are out sufficiently in [the future]. One can't really saythat in econometric terms we've had any real response. But to theextent that anticipations [are having an effect]--for example, to theextent that the [proposed] individual income tax rates are having animpact on the behavior of small business and subchapter Scorporations, which almost surely is happening--it is a negativeeffect. So, it's hard to measure how this is moving.I would conclude, unless and until we have some very hardevidence that the psychological impact of the budget package is ofsuch an order of magnitude to upset the balance of this economy, thatwe almost surely are best positioned to maintain [conditionsconsistent with] our general view [of the outlook], which is largelyreflected in the Greenbook. It's reflected in the views of prettymuch everyone around the table. The outside economists hold about thesame [view]; their number for growth is 3 percent, plus or minus. Therange [of forecasts] is incredibly narrow in the private sector, whichproves absolutely nothing except that they all feel warm from beingclose to each other. It doesn't have anything to do with the accuracyof their forecasts.So, I do think that we're all looking at the same process.And unless and until we see clear evidence that things are notmaterializing in that way, I can't see any basic purpose for us tochange [our policy stance]. In looking at the data, I suppose one canargue in principle for symmetry or for just staying where we were thelast time. My own preference is to stay with asymmetry but with [theunderstanding that] a Committee discussion would be indicated in theevent that anything emerges that requires a change. We havemaintained this particular monetary stance for so long, and I thinkvery successfully, that I don't think we should move until theCommittee has a chance to evaluate and discuss the incoming data thatcould make a move necessary. As I look at the data [scheduled] tocome out before the next meeting, we will have two sets of price dataand two [months] of retail sales. And I think we're going to get afairly clean view, hopefully, of the way this system is emerging. Andwhile I would like to stay asymmetric, I don't think it's appropriatein this type of environment to move at the discretion of the Deskwithout fairly extensive further discussions on the part of theCommittee. So, my inclination at this stage is to stay pretty muchwhere we were and leave it at that, although I can't say that I canargue strenuously against symmetry because obviously in this contextthat is also a credible position. So, that's what I've got to say.And President Syron is [next] on the ticket.MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I would strongly support what youwant to do. I had questions the last time as to whether we shouldhave gone to asymmetry, given that we weren't there. I think actuallyit worked out pretty well.-67-7/6-7/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think in retrospect it was the rightmove.MR. SYRON. In retrospect it was. But now that we're there,I think we want to continue to give the signal that we'd reactrelatively quickly--I'm trying to recall Norm's exact phrasing--werewe to get [clear signs of an emergence of higher inflation]. And Ihave some concern about the market reaction we might get were we toswitch back [to symmetry]. I also have some concern about what aswitch back might signal in terms of people saying: Well, does theFed really see the economy being much softer than they saw it earlier?Also, I think your suggestion was particularly appropriate that, givenhow long it has been since we have made a change, there should be someCommittee discussion. That would be in my view the optimal approachto take.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.MR. BROADDUS. I strongly support your position also, Mr.Chairman. We all deplore the leak at the time of the last meeting,but the fact of the matter is that I think the markets and the publicreacted very favorably to the news that we had moved to asymmetry lasttime. I think Dick is right; if now or later on they learned that atthis meeting we switched back to symmetric language in the face ofonly one month's disappointing data--not all of which incidentally isdisappointing, as you pointed out--I think that would do us somedamage. So, I support your position.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Forrestal.MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, when I read thoseforecasts in the Wall Street Journal yesterday I became very concernedbecause everybody seemed to be warm and cuddly together! [Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know, they really were remarkablyclose.MR. FORRESTAL. They are clustered. Well, I would certainlysupport your prescription with respect to no change in policy. Ithink everything that's going on in the real economy, the uncertainty,and the fact that we've lowered our GDP forecasts a little, all arguevery strongly for a stable monetary policy, particularly in view ofthe fact that the inflation numbers have improved somewhat. So, Ithink no change in policy is clearly the right prescription. I have apreference for symmetry, if only on a theoretical basis, in the sensethat it seems probable to me that we will not move in eitherdirection, and that in my mind calls for a symmetric directive.However, having just had an asymmetric directive, I can understandthat there may be some problems in moving to symmetry. So, I wouldcertainly not object to asymmetry, particularly in view of yourstatement that it wouldn't presuppose any policy action.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I would support yourrecommendation. I think a case could be made for symmetry but, givenwhere we are today and also given my own utility function with regardto inflation, I would just as soon [retain] the asymmetry.-68-7/6-7/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.MR. BOEHNE. I think the case for a steady policy is a strongone, and you've laid it out. On the issue of symmetry or asymmetry,if one looked just to the decision today without regard to whathappened in the current [intermeeting] period, I think one could makean intellectual case for symmetry. But having moved to asymmetry, Ithink the balance of the evidence says we ought to stay where we arewith the asymmetry.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Keehn.MR. KEEHN. While I might have had a slight preference forsymmetry, I very much support your recommendation primarily for thereason Al Broaddus mentioned. If there were another leak reflecting achange from asymmetry to symmetry this time, it would be very awkwardin the marketplace. And, therefore, I think what you recommend isappropriate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare.MR. LAWARE. I support your proposal.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.MS. PHILLIPS. I also support it. I was swayed last time bythe argument that we needed to be on record as being concerned aboutinflation. It seems to me that we have less reason to ease or tightennow. I do think that at some point we're going to have to addressnegative real rates. But it doesn't appear to me that at this timethey are causing particular harm to the economy. And it seems to methat we're best staying the course and best staying with an asymmetrictoward tightening directive. I think a change would signal a lack ofconcern about inflation, and that would not be a good thing to do.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.MR. HOENIG. I would support no change at this time. I wouldhave a slight preference for symmetry; but having heard the argumentsfor having already made one change, changing back may be awkward now.But on the merits of it, I think symmetry would be appropriate.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.MR. MCTEER. I support your recommendation including theasymmetry for the reasons that everybody else has given. However, Ido think there are some serious downside risks that we have to bealert to. I was struck by Bob Parry's recounting yesterday of thestate budget problems that are leading to conservative fiscal actionsand pushing those problems down to the local governments. At thenational level we're about to have a huge tax increase. State andlocal governments all over the country are [also raising taxes] andare cutting back spending. Businesses are able to shrink their way toprosperity, but I think the country may be engaged in a fallacy ofcomposition--and Keynes must be spinning in his grave right now--because we're all trying to save and tax our way to prosperity. So,that is a concern. I support your recommendation.-69-7/6-7/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey.MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I fully support yourrecommendation. I think the interesting debate that we're going tohave is how to respond to a supply shock; we're not going to have thatdebate today. But if, unfortunately, the supply shock continues, thefair question would be: Can you cure an adverse supply shock witheasy money? And I look forward to the intellectual discourse thatsolving that problem will produce.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.MR. STERN. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.MR. MELZER. Alan, I support what you say. I think I heardimplicitly in [your comments] that we really need to be watchingthings pretty carefully here and that we need to be prepared to movepromptly. I suspect that market participants and probably a lot ofpeople in this room breathed a big sigh of relief when we got the PPIand CPI numbers; and in my view that's probably not justified. As Isee things, we've had a very stimulative policy in train for someperiod of time--when you look at the narrower aggregates or when youlook at the level of short-term rates--and we're going to have to getthat rope back in at some point in time. And it's not going to be anyeasier down the road, as I view it. In fact, it will probably gettougher. Your analysis of the budget may well be exactly right. Thefacts may be worse than the expectations but politically my guess is--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The other way around.MR. MELZER. Yes, that would be the other way around--oncethey enacted something. In terms of market expectations, once itbecomes absolutely clear that we must move and we're looking at astructure of rates that anticipates the Fed is going to move x basispoints within the next month or two months or whatever, it justbecomes harder and harder to catch up. In other words, we've beenfortunate in a way that we've had a few signals here, a few warningshots, and we haven't been compelled to move. But eventually the timewill come when it's no longer a warning shot and we will be trying tochase a train that already left the station. Other people have saidthat over time at these meetings. I think what you've suggested forthis meeting is quite appropriate. But I just hope we will beattentive in the direction that I'm expressing here as we moveforward.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, we're talking about a very narrowrange of differences here and, regardless of whether one's personalpreference is asymmetry or symmetry, the overriding point right nowwith this narrow range of differences is that we not change. And as aconsequence, I will support your recommendation.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. First Vice President Oltman.-70-7/6-7/93MR. OLTMAN. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.Perhaps if we were starting from scratch, I would have some preferencefor symmetry but I don't think we ought to change [from asymmetry].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.MR. MULLINS. I support your proposal, Mr. Chairman, and Ialso agree with Tom Melzer's arguments as well.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell.MR. ANGELL. Well, I'm clearly not in tune with the othermembers of the FOMC. I don't see any need to wait for anyinformation. The markets provide indications every day as to whetheror not we've provided more liquidity than is called for. And when welowered the fed funds rate from 4 percent to 3 percent, my guess isthat made very, very little difference in the rate of real GDP growth.The destabilizing factors that have led people to hold, shift, or usetheir balances as much as they have was, I think, a drag against thestimulus that was already in place. A 4 percent fed funds ratealready was providing a lot of stimulus. We already had pegged thefed funds rate well below the natural rate of interest. We now haveevidence, and we see it in our own staff's forecast, that the expectedrate of inflation has moved up 0.6 or 0.7 percent just [since the MayFOMC] meeting. Now, in that environment, policy is not stable. We donot have the same policy that we had at the last meeting because thereal rate of interest by our best estimate has fallen to even moresharply negative territory. We clearly see in the price of gold thatpeople are making bets out there. And we continue to lock in to a fedfunds rate that will only aggravate that kind of speculation and itonly detracts from the role of the U.S. currency as the stablecurrency for the world. The cost to the world of the United Statespursuing inflationary policies in the late 1960s and the 1970s isunbelievable. We're still paying the cost because many other centralbanks with no confidence in us think they have to be Rambo-like inbeating their chests because in some sense they've got a track for theinflation-induced environment that the Federal Reserve as the world'sreserve currency provides. This is the time for us to move realinterest rates back at least to zero. I would be satisfied to do ameasly 1/4 percentage point, which would not get us back to zero, butthere would be intervention value in that. There wouldn't be any harmin it. Is there anyone who really believes the U.S. economy,regardless of what is done on the fiscal [side], is going to sufferbecause the funds rate goes up from 3 to 3-1/4 percent? Now, I readHenry Kauffman, as many of you must have, and it's just absurd. Well,I must be the one that's absurd! Thank you.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.MR. JORDAN. I also am not happy about the fact thatinflation this year is not going to come in where we talked about lastFebruary, and the judgment has to be that our policies are not at themoment moving us in the direction of our long-term objective. Weought to correct that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The general consensus appears to be "B,"asymmetric.-71-7/6-7/93MR. BERNARD. [The directive would read:] "In theimplementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeksto maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. Inthe context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stabilityand sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration toeconomic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly greaterreserve restraint would or slightly lesser reserve restraint might beacceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserveconditions are expected to be consistent with modest growth in thebroader monetary aggregates over the third quarter."CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.MR. BERNARD.Chairman Greenspan YesActing Vice Chairman Mullins YesGovernor Angell NoPresident Boehne YesPresident Keehn YesGovernor Kelley YesGovernor LaWare YesGovernor Lindsey YesPresident McTeer YesFirst Vice President Oltman YesGovernor Phillips YesPresident Stern YesCHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Norm wants me to remind you that anychanges in your forecasts should be submitted to Mike by middayFriday, July 9. Also, of course, the next meeting is August 17th.Now, why don't we just take a short recess and then come back.MR. KELLEY. Let's just press on.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Well, unfortunately, we're goingto finish before lunch! [Laughter]MR. BERNARD. Someone is going to get Don Winn.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The subject matter, as you know, is howthis Committee wants to handle the problem of stories or leaks and thelike. I've asked Don Winn to join us. We got an extended letter fromHenry B. Gonzalez on this leak question; I got it late yesterday. Ithink it would be useful to read it. I was planning to raise thesequestions, as I indicated yesterday, before we got this letter; andclearly we have problems we're dealing with up [on the Hill], so it'suseful to read this.MR. SYRON. Are we into triple digits in counting his lettersthis year?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's close! I think the productivity ofMr. Auerbach is extraordinary. He must have been Fed trained! Don,would you circulate those letters. Why don't we all just take aminute or two to read this and then we can have a substantivediscussion.-72-7/6-7/93This actually is the most thoughtful letter I've everreceived from Mr. Gonzalez. It is a very credible letter and strikesme as very much to the point. He's not pounding on the table; he'smaking a very serious point. The basic notion is that leaks andpublic statements about FOMC meetings are a very serious matter thatcalls into question the credibility of the Federal Reserve to manageits own operations. That's an argument that is very difficult to getat. The issue about leaks is really part of a much broader problem,and I think we've got to give it some thought. Clearly, with thedemise of fiscal policy there has been an extraordinary point of focuson the fact that this organization is a powerful element within thegovernment and, indeed, considering some of the other aspects of theway policy is implemented, I don't think there is any question aboutthat. Secondly, in large part as a result of the extraordinaryelevation of the press as a consequence of the Watergate episode,we've created a very large increase in investigative reportingcapacity. There is a much larger number of very competent,economically educated press people working in the world of financethan at any time in my memory. When I was at the CEA--that was only1975-76--there was nothing like the technical capability that a lot ofthese reporters have. You could just feed them pabulum and theypretty much accepted it. That clearly has changed quite dramatically.Now, I thought about it yesterday when I was sitting herelistening to the economic discussion, and listening to each one of youtalk about the way the economy is functioning through economicactivity, inflation, the outlook, and all in words that most of youwill use in public. And I sat there and wrote down what the monetarypolicy [stance of] each individual in this group was. Let me tellyou: If I can do it, so can they. The presumption that you can goout there and talk about the economy without conveying something[about your own policy views] strikes me as really off the mark. Ipersonally do not think that the Wall Street Journal leak came out ofthis room. [David Wessel] almost invariably will say that thisinformation came from Fed officials, senior Fed officials,Administration officials, or government officials. I don't know ifyou remember his article but he said "people familiar with how theFederal Reserve functions," which to me is a code word for about halfthe people out there and was probably meant to mean somebody who usedto work here and knows how the System works, of which there arelegion. Had he direct information, I suspect he would have said so.But the point is that he didn't need direct information. One caninfer quite reasonably what the policy outcome of the last meeting wasif one just sits by the telerate screen and reads what each one of usis saying. Now, I'm not saying that's either good or bad. Indeed,part of our job is to communicate to our various constituents. But itwould be naive in the extreme to believe that we can do that the waywe do it without communicating very significantly to the outside as towhat this organization is essentially all about.We all have to remember that the press is interested in usbecause we all have access to FOMC deliberations. The generalpresumption of any intelligent reporter is that whatever we say willreflect that. The probability that we are not conditioned by what isgoing on here is zero. In fact, even if it is not zero, that is thegeneral presumption. We have an extraordinary amount of informationin this group; we talk to each other. There is a sense in which thereis an information system which exists in the Federal Open Market-73-7/6-7/93Committee; there is a combined knowledge of what everybody thinks andwhat, therefore, policy is going to be. There is a property rightthat the Committee has, and those of us who work off the data systemand talk in great generalities about what is going on are on the edgeof infringing that property right. It is a right which essentiallybelongs to all of us collectively. I think we all ought to rememberthat if we were private citizens, the phone would not be ringing offthe hook. We are called to talk to the press because we are membersof this organization. We get invitations to speak all over the placebecause we are members of this organization. And it's terriblyimportant for us to remember that we cannot talk with impunity.Indeed, what constitutes the leaks that occur on occasion, in myjudgment, are not the result of purposeful actions on the part of anymember in this room. I think what happens is that in conversationswith people on the outside, we forget that there's an IQ on the otherside of that phone. And I will tell you that if I were a reporter andgot into a long conversation with any member of this organization andif that person was at all open or honest in any way, I would bet witha high degree of probability that I could forecast not only yourposition but also a lot about what other people in this room thoughtbecause one tends to [convey] that. It's not something people areaware of sometimes, but I've observed it time and time again, and I'vebeen around this town for a very long period of time. It's really anissue that this Committee has to confront [and decide] what it is wewant to do. We can acquiesce in this type of request, whichessentially means we issue something [like a statement]; as Don Kohnhas indicated to me, he doesn't seriously believe that will alter theconfiguration very much. Rather than my repeating Don's words whydon't I just turn the floor over to him so he can tell you what he hastold me about this question and get it on the table.MR. BOEHNE. Before you do, may I ask a question? I thinkthat your analysis of the Wall Street Journal article is conceivableand believable. But when I read on the screen and when CNBC says thatwe had a unanimous vote and then an hour and a half later it says noit was not unanimous but 10 to 2, I'd say they need to have more thanIQ to get that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The CNBC thing was a pure, unadulteratedleak. It was not inferable except with a probability outside thesignificant limits that anyone of us would use in our statisticalanalyses. That was as pure a leak as you can get. The reason I saythat is that they had the correct vote. The probability of thathappening by chance approaches zero.MR. BOEHNE. Right.MR. SYRON. And they got it shortly after they had [announcedsomething that was] an error; clearly, someone called them or theytalked to someone in that interim period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is correct. I must say to you thatI have a suspicion that I know how that all occurred; that is not agreat secret to me. All I'm saying is that the initial issue thatemerges here is the Wessel article, and my best guess is that Wesselpicked up the asymmetry without a leak.-74-7/6-7/93MR. SYRON. Can I pursue this? Your guess is that he wrotethe article based on [his analysis of various comments]. You'reright, I think, that if you look at what people have said intestimonies and a number of situations, [a reporter] can put ittogether. But did he then in your scenario, if I can call it that,call around to people to get what he thought was confirmation of it?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, and I think he failed to get it.MR. SYRON. So, you think he wrote the article before themeeting and he could have written a similar article before thismeeting, unconfirmed by information post-meeting in time?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Now, let me tell you that my soleevidence rests with my knowledge of how the Wall Street Journalreporters write about their sources, which is not accidental. Itcomes as official policy. He would never have used the choice ofwords he used had he either Federal Reserve or Administration sources.MR. SYRON. I don't remember the exact words, but I thoughthe effectively eliminated Federal Reserve sources but did noteliminate Administration sources.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, he said sources familiar with theway the Federal Reserve works.MR. KOHN. It's on page 2 of Mr. Gonzalez's letter.MR. LINDSEY. "Familiar with the Fed's deliberations," that'sdifferent.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is a phraseology that he does notuse if he has actual sources. As I read in the paper, some WallStreet wag--I've forgotten what firm he's with--said: "Well, thiscould easily be me. I'm familiar with the deliberations of the Fed."MR. BOEHNE. Are you saying that you believe somebody likeDavid Wessel can write that article and not talk to anybody in thisroom after the FOMC meeting or a week before?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think he talked to a lot of people whoformerly worked here: former governors, former staff people, and thelike. Look, I'm telling you, my sole evidence is my knowledge of howthey designate their sources.MR. BOEHNE. I have a feeling that if everybody in this roomfollowed the basic rule of not talking to a reporter one week beforeor after an FOMC meeting--or in the case of the Humphrey-Hawkinsmeetings until after the testimony--we'd make it pretty tough onpeople like David Wessel to write a story like that. And I know wewouldn't have a CNBC problem.MR. SYRON. And if you expanded that to what I thought ourrule was--that we not only don't talk to anyone but that we give nospeeches--. I thought we were to say we weren't available for anycomments X days before or X days after; I thought it was 10 daysbefore or 10 days after.-75-7/6-7/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In fact, we do have a listing of thetypes of things which over the years have provided guidance. Let meread it to you; I'd be curious to get reactions on it. This is titled"Guidelines for Public Speeches and Talks with Journalists and Othersabout Monetary Policy and the Economy." Under the "Do Not Discuss"section are:(1) Future movements in interest and exchange rates.(2) Recent decisions or discussions at FOMC meetings; theminutes speak for themselves. The prohibition includescomments on what positions people took at the meeting.(3) Anything about the economy or policy one week before orone week after an FOMC meeting. The blackout period inFebruary and July extends to the day of the Humphrey-Hawkinstestimony.(4) The detailed outlook for the economy, which can beconstrued as [having] implications for near-term policy.(5) The performance of other government officials.Under "Issues Available for Discussion" are:(1) Broad trends in the economy, provided the discussion issufficiently vague and balanced to make drawing implicationsfor future policy impossible.(2) Broad policy objectives and the mechanism and techniquesof implementing policy.(3) Any matters on the public record, such as recenttestimony.(4) Economic conditions in your region.(5) Background economic research already publicly released.Needless to say, in the areas of bank regulation, communitydevelopment, and a whole variety of other things which are in theFederal Reserve's bailiwick, discussions are perfectly appropriate anddesirable and in that respect there's an awful lot to talk about.Does anyone have any basic objections to this set of guidelines?MR. MULLINS. I think it should be distributed.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The only problem I have distributing itis that it may leak!MR. MULLINS. You don't think they are a good set?MR. ANGELL. Well, I guess I had only one question on thenext to the last one. Would you read that again about the outlook?MR. MULLINS. The detailed outlook for the economy?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The detailed outlook for the economy,which can be construed as [having] implications for near-term policy.Let me just say that it is a very tricky issue; I think we all areaware of where the line is. It may well be that the safest thing wecan do at this particular stage is for none of us even to answer apress request or go off the record until after the Humphrey-Hawkinstestimony because we're opening ourselves up to trouble. And what dowe need it for? In other words, why do we have to do it?-76-7/6-7/93MR. ANGELL. I strongly believe that in a democracy publicofficials have a responsibility. And one responsibility we don't haveis to engage in chicanery with the press and to give any background oroff-the-record information. If everyone who talked to [a reporter]said "I only talked to you because you're using my name," then thatembarrassment will discipline each person. I do not believe thatanyone from this organization should ever talk to any reporter onbackground or off the record. That's what constitutes the problem.In a democracy public officials do have a responsibility tocommunicate. There is an educational program. The Federal Reserve ifit is to be successful in regard to accomplishing our primaryobjectives must be able to say clearly what our objectives are. And[education] becomes a very, very important part of that. And for usto react by saying no speeches, I'd say no. I agree with the nospeeches 7 days before and 7 days after [an FOMC meeting].CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the important period.MR. ANGELL. That's the important period. But if anyonetalks to any reporter, I think we should keep a log of who we talk toand make that log available to each other. That is, any time we talkwe ought to make a log. We'd say I talked to so-and-so on this dayand put it down. And we ought to share it with each other. Now, Idon't understand this CNBC thing. It seems to me you're dismissingthat a little too lightly, if someone from this organizationabsolutely told someone what they had no business telling them inregard to that vote. No one had the right to correct the mistakenvote that CNBC reported. No one had the right to do that. No one hasthe right ever to say what they think my view is; I am the only onewho has the right to say what my view is. I don't have the right tosay what David Mullins' view is or what anybody else's view is. Idon't have the right to say what the Board might do; I don't have theright to say what the FOMC might do. I want a different distinctionthan is being made. I think the obligation in a democracy is very,very strong. And I [don't] think the best thing for us to do is notto talk and never to give our views.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't think that's what this says.MR. LAWARE. The only reason we have to have this elaboratelist of do's and don'ts is because we insist on preserving this sixweeks of secrecy with regard to what goes on in this room. If we madea prompt announcement of what went on in this room, we wouldn't haveto concern ourselves with this; and we might throw a few undeservingreporters out of work. I'm surprised that you feel that this is athoughtful letter [from Chairman Gonzalez]. This is part of the sameattack on this institution that has been coming from Henry B. Gonzalezfor some time. Just listen to the way this reads: "I believe thatmost objective observers would agree that the above examples indicatethe Federal Reserve on occasion disseminates information"--that soundslike deliberate disseminations--"through leaks and random publicstatements by Federal Reserve officials." He seems to regard this asan accepted practice of this institution!CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I accept your amendment. I didn'tmean to imply that the letter was without---77-7/6-7/93MR. ANGELL. But unfortunately there are some instances inwhich that is the case.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I was going to ask Don for a few remarksrelative to this question because I think we have to make a statement.Do we want to issue something? I think, substantively, it's bound toinhibit somewhat this organization's function. Don.MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, I perhaps just ought to remind theCommittee very briefly that on several occasions over the last six oreight months it did consider this question of whether it shouldrelease information immediately. We had a Mullins' subcommittee onthis and a full and open discussion on the issue. While a few membersof the Committee tended to favor immediate release, they were, Ithink, a minority; certainly, no one moved to change the situation.The concerns of the Committee at the time were the questions offlexibility in policymaking, whether an immediate announcement of adirective, say, like the asymmetric directive in May, would constrainthe Committee from going to asymmetry because they wouldn't want theannouncement effect. In fact, the effect was that it did have marketsraising interest rates; if they weren't sure, they were going to raiserates. By constraining [the ability of] the Committee to take actionsto go to an asymmetric directive or off asymmetry to symmetry, itwould in some sense remove by very small amounts some of theflexibility of the Committee. That was the concern the Committee had.The other issue that you need to think about if you'reconsidering going to an immediate release is what to release. If inMay, for example, right after its meeting the Committee had releasedthe fact that it had gone to an asymmetric directive would that havesignificantly called off the reporters? One has to wonder. At leastI would have to wonder whether the reporters wouldn't be all over theCommittee members wondering why you had done it and under whatcircumstances a change would be made. [But] it would help [to releasesuch information] and in most meetings it would stop right there, Ithink, once the Committee announced its decision. But then you dohave the question of what you release along with that and how far togo. So, there are a couple of issues that were raised when theCommittee last discussed this.MR. LAWARE. I didn't intend to make a brief for immediaterelease. In any case, even if I believed that was the right way togo--and I'm not sure I do--I wouldn't do it in light of this becausethis Congressman would declare victory and say "Now I've got them." Iwouldn't sit still for that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I must humbly retract my statement withrespect to the quality of the letter because I'm more inclined in yourdirection than not. To be exact, there are a few sentences in it thatI think are reasonable.MR. KELLEY. I think what you said, Mr. Chairman, was thatthe letter is the best you have seen of those he has sent to us.[Laughter]CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think Governor LaWare moreappropriately characterized it.-78-7/6-7/93MR. PARRY. I have two questions. This prohibition of 7 daysbefore and 7 days after a meeting is something that Joe Coyne hasrepeated quite often in the 7 years I've been here. But there are anumber of people who obviously disregard this completely. Very oftenwhen I get back the next day I'll see three or four people have givena speech the day after [the FOMC meeting]. I assume they think forsome reason that that [prohibition] is a mistake. If that's the case,I'd like to hear what their objections are. It may be legitimate thatwe shouldn't have it. I frankly think it has been a wise thing, butthere obviously are some people who feel as though we should not havesuch a prohibition because they violate it all the time. So, if theyviolate it all the time, I assume they would not be unhappy talkingabout why.MR. ANGELL. Bob, I'm not as concerned about the people whoviolate it with their names as I am about those who violate it withouttheir names.MR. PARRY. I'm not talking about talking to the press. I'msaying that speeches are scheduled; they get on the wires, etc. Yet,I thought there was a consensus that we would not give speechesdealing with the economy 7 days before and 7 days after [an FOMCmeeting]. Obviously, some people don't know that or, knowing it,don't think it should be respected. It would be interesting to knowwhat it is.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anybody have a speech scheduledbetween now and Humphrey-Hawkins?MR. PARRY. Well, I can go back and look at--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I'm not denying the truth in thiscase. You're talking historically; I'm talking from here on.MR. PARRY. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I will say this: If none of us answersa press call, then the only way anything can leak is if we tellsomebody else who then tells the press.MR. ANGELL. Well, telling someone else is every bit as bad,if not worse than telling the press.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Of course.MR. LAWARE. Sure.MR. ANGELL. Telling somebody else is even more suspicious.MR. PARRY. I had a second question. I'm not sure I fullyunderstand the point made about talking about the economy in such away that has policy implications. If one has concerns aboutinflation, for example, are you saying that that view should never bearticulated in public?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I'm saying, for example, if you getout in public and say that inflation is a very serious problem and wehave to do something quickly, that is a statement of where our-79-7/6-7/93position is on monetary policy. If you say it's the role of a centralbank to maintain stable prices, that's a philosophical judgment withrespect to the nature of our institution, which hopefully we allsubscribe to. The broad principles are something we should enunciatewhenever we can.MR. ANGELL. You're [able to] read [people's views on policy]better than I. I hear people saying that inflation is a problem and Idon't know how they're going to vote after I've seen them make astatement about inflation being a problem. There have been four orfive people who have made statements about inflation being a problemand, frankly, I don't know how they're going to vote based upon whatthey say. I don't understand how you think the reporters know howthey're going to vote.MR. LAWARE. We don't make that mistake about you, though!MR. SYRON. Consistency.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Remember what the problem is; we are allon the record six weeks after the fact. So, it's a question, really,of how one characterizes things. My main concern, frankly, is lessabout what we each are saying about our own views but what we areinadvertently conveying about the nature of the position of theCommittee overall. There are times, and I can cite innumerableinstances, where sentences of members who are sitting around thistable have slipped out in Q&As and the like--[sentences that] havecharacterized [the view of] this organization as a whole. And I thinkthat is something we have to be very careful about.MR. FORRESTAL. This business about talking to other peopleraises a question in my mind that I've had for quite a long time. Thequestion is whether or not the Administration might be leaking some ofthis information. Is there any kind of arrangement we have in whichwe talk to the Administration?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it this way. Up until abouttwo years ago, I would say, it was the conventional thing for theChairman of the Fed to convey to the chairman of the CEA what ourpolicy was; it was part of the discussion. But it became apparent tome that that was a hole as large as one can imagine. I have nottalked to either the Bush Administration or the Clinton Administrationon any policy matters initiated in this Committee room. And I mustsay that one does not see Administration officials--MR. ANGELL. As much as one used to.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's right.MR. FORRESTAL. That has been beneficial in one sense, but itmakes the problem even more acute because we have two issues here.One is: Are these leaks deliberate? The CNBC report certainlypointed to a deliberate leak. First, to go back to John LaWare'sremark about the letter, I agree that it's an attack; but that doesn'tin any way diminish the seriousness of what he is pointing to. Ithink the credibility of this institution is really on the line withdeliberate leaks. And if we know that there are deliberate leaks, Ithink we have an obligation to track them down and do something about-80-7/6-7/93them. The inadvertent leaks through talking to reporters I think canbe corrected to a very large extent by following those guidelines.And I think we all have to follow them very religiously and keep themin mind. The third point I'd make is that if David Wessel did getthis information from sources outside the Fed, there's really nothingwe can do about that, it seems to me.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Frankly, I didn't particularly mind theDavid Wessel piece if in fact what he was picking up was a guess or ajudgment of how this organization might function.MR. FORRESTAL. Yes, he's guessing and talking to otherpeople.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And the reason it appears [that way] isthat he didn't do something which is usually done, namely, quote a lotof people. It is conceivable that I am not characterizing thissituation correctly. As I said before, my sole piece of evidence ismy historic knowledge of the policy of the Wall Street Journal withrespect to designating sources.MR. FORRESTAL. Yes, I think that's a logical conclusion.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And if that is true, then I'd say--Well, before Wessel we had a long period where we were quite secure.MR. SYRON. But the difficulty is that it comes back to whatJohn LaWare said about disclosure. This Committee did have adiscussion about that. But at the time of that discussion I think wehad a somewhat better recent history on leaks. Regardless of how oneinterprets the Wessel situation, the CNBC matter was clearly a leak ofsome sort or another. On the face of it, unless we can demonstrate ina relatively short period of time that this leak problem can beeliminated, over the course of time we will have no choice but to goto disclosure. It's that simple. We have not demonstrated as anorganization a capacity to [prevent leaks] and [as a result] we'redestroying the credibility of this organization and all the thingsthat we're trying to do in terms of our objectives. So, unless we canreally get to that point very, very quickly, then we better startthinking very seriously about what we want to release.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I couldn't agree with you more.MR. ANGELL. I think that's correct.MR. KEEHN. I think that's exactly right, but I just questionwhether we have the time to make it happen.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, we have two possibilities comingfrom right here. We can decide now that we want to change ourdisclosure [practices]; we could ask the Mullins subcommittee toreview the previous [material on this] and come back with arecommendation. Or we can say that we don't wish to change; we thinkthat the procedures we're using are most appropriate for the effectiveworkings of this organization. Then, in the event there is a leak, wewill request the General Counsel to ask for sworn statementsvoluntarily of all individuals in this room that they did notcommunicate with a particular press person. It gets down to the point-81-7/6-7/93where we would ask for voluntary sworn statements. If that doesn'twork, then I'd say we have no choice but to--MR. SYRON. Because of the time constraints, I'd prefer youdo the latter, too.MR. KEEHN. Why would the statements be voluntary?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Because there is no legal means by whichone can enforce a sworn statement of members of the Board ofGovernors.MR. KEEHN. Well, I think you ought to find a way of getting[rid of] anybody not willing to give a statement.MR. ANGELL. How would you suggest doing it?MR. KEEHN. I think if the Chairman of the Board puts thefreeze on anybody at this table, he's gone.MR. ANGELL. Wait a minute. What are you talking about?MR. KEEHN. If the Chairman puts the freeze on somebody, theyare in effect gone.MR. ANGELL. Members of the Board of Governors are notappointed by the Chairman. Did you have the impression that we were?MR. KEEHN. I understand that.MR. ANGELL. Now, there's no question that we have a pactthat we should enter into, one with another. As the Chairman says,there is information that doesn't belong to each of us [asindividuals.] But I certainly can't understand your comment, Si. Itjust blows my mind that one of seven--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, why don't you just chalk it up tounderstandable frustration.MR. JORDAN. Part of what I was thinking Bob Forrestalalready referred to. When I read the Wessel piece I thought of theAdministration. I think you're being generous to Wessel's IQ. If hehad said people familiar with the way the Fed deliberates, I wouldhave come to the conclusion you did. But he said "familiar with theFed's deliberations" in both of these articles. I interpret that tomean somebody who claimed to be in a position of knowing what happenedat that meeting [unintelligible]--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. He's done it so often before and neverused that phrase. It's much more credible to say: "A Fed officialsaid that..."MR. JORDAN. Yes, but if it's not a Fed official--if it's anAdministration official--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it to you this way. I havebeen extraordinarily scrupulous in not indicating to the Secretary ofthe Treasury, the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors, or-82-7/6-7/93anybody, what it is we did in that meeting. I never even acknowledgedafter the leaks were out that they were true.MR. JORDAN. Well, whether it was a Fed official or not, Iassociate myself with Wayne's point about "for the record forbackground." Having worked in this town in '81 and '82, I took theposition then that one just does not do off-the-record statements.You either do it on the record or you don't say it. But the troublewith this town is that not many people agree with me. And people inthe Washington press know that, and people who work--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I must say I don't agree with that. Ithink the issue is not whether it's on the record or off the record orwhat it is you say because there are occasions when you want to convey[some] information without your name being known but [unintelligible]of this organization and to disabuse certain people of certain viewswithout ending up with a confrontation or quarrel. So, I don't agreewith that. Wayne knows that I disagree with him on that.MR. ANGELL. Sure.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But where I don't disagree with him ison the content of what it is he's saying.MR. MCTEER. As a practical matter, isn't the main argumentagainst immediate release of the directive the problem of asymmetricdirectives?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the crucial thing.MR. MCTEER. Why don't we just go ahead and stop havingasymmetric directives and start releasing the directive before weleave the room with the understanding that we can have telephoneconferences at a moment's notice for intermeeting decisions?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Because that is a much less efficientmeans of working than the way we're working.MR. MCTEER. It would eliminate all the problems aboutspeech-making and times before and after the meeting and all that.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I doubt that.MR. MCTEER. Well, at least after.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No. David, you had a committee thatconcluded after looking at the possibilities--MR. MULLINS. Yes. And basically I'm one of the people whobelieve that not releasing asymmetric directives measurably increasesour flexibility and efficiency in monetary policymaking. I think ithas served us well. That argument falls if it's released. I thinkone can't rebut the argument that we should accelerate the release.So, we may have no choice but to formalize the process and acceleratethe release. Looking back on it, we've had a number of these episodesinterspersed with relatively long periods of success. I personallywould be a bit hesitant about making the move to early release of thedirective in the heat of one of these episodes because I do view that-83-7/6-7/93move as irreversible; and it will forever alter the opportunitiesavailable for the Committee. Again, I think [delayed release] hasserved us relatively well but we may have no choice. And I wouldagree that if we have another episode, it will be hard to rebut theargument. But my preference is to redouble our efforts at maintainingconfidentiality with full knowledge that we're on the brink of losingthis flexibility. Our subcommittee, when we talked about it, thoughtthere was quite a bit of flexibility in the asymmetric directive. Andthere is inefficiency of essentially having the Committee in meetingcontinuously, which is pretty close to what we'd have if we requiredeveryone to get together. We thought it was worth it but I don't knowhow much it's worth. It's certainly not worth losing our credibilityover; and as a practical matter our credibility degenerates with theleaks. But our subcommittee, and I guess the Committee in itsdiscussion as well, generally supported that notion although therewere some people who disagreed. We have blackout periods of plus orminus one week, but then on the directive we have a longer period.Actually, it's that longer period in which I think we may have hadsome problems as well. So, another argument is to line up theblackout with the release of the directive.MR. MCTEER. If we did release the directive immediately, itwould possibly ease the pressure on us to reveal or release theconversations that take place.MR. MULLINS. I think people would want to know why, though,wouldn't they?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, they will always want to know why.I think we'd heighten the interest in that. Does anyone else want to[comment]?MR. MELZER. Well, I worked with David on that subcommitteeand I was not in favor of immediate release either; but I must saysubsequent developments put it in a different light, and I wouldn't beagainst taking another look.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me suggest the following: That wemake this effectively our last stand and that if we fail, the firstthing is that I will request the General Counsel to ask for swornstatements so that we will at least have that on the record. Forthose who choose not to make such a statement, that's theirprerogative. But Governor Angell is right. Members of the Board ofGovernors are appointed by the President of the United States with theconsent of the Senate and are independent agents for good or bad.Some of that is both! [Laughter]MR. KEEHN. Not to split a hair on that, but I thought at onepoint we had an opinion that this was confidential information and torelease it was in fact breaking the law.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's not a statute that I'm aware of;it's the rules of the Committee.MR. MATTINGLY. It's part of the FOMC's Regulations.MR. KEEHN. And that's not a law?-84-7/6-7/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's not a felony.MR. MATTINGLY. Some of the information the FOMC has doviolate those statues, but the directive does not; it violates theFOMC's rules.MR. KEEHN. Okay. But if you violate a law, it seems to methat's a different set of circumstances.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We are not a legislative body that canpromulgate laws.MR. MCTEER. Well, I like Governor Angell's objection. [I'dhave it] cover the presidents, not just limit it to the governors.MR. ANGELL. Well, [unintelligible] the statute is somewhatdifferent. I don't think we want to have a huge difference inpractice, but the statute is quite different in that the dismissal ofa member of the Board of Governors falls under an impeachment clause.It's very specified. But the presidents serve at the pleasure of theBoard of Governors. In practice, we certainly wouldn't want it to bethat way; we'd look pretty silly if we ever--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's a legal distinction which wecannot--MR. SYRON. What are those five-year terms anyway? I thinkyou're right; that's a separate issue.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I understand that's what the statutesays. But as a practical matter we couldn't function as a Committeewith a different status for different members of the Committee becauseit won't work. The most important thing I'd say at this particularstage is that when you get a press call, irrespective of from whom,until the end of the Humphrey-Hawkins hearings--on the 22nd of July Ibelieve--you have laryngitis or something. If you think you can pickup the phone and tell somebody nothing, don't believe it. Believe me,it's a mirage; and all you have to do is miss once. I think we justcan't afford it. Jerry Corrigan, as you may recall, said at theluncheon that we gave him on his farewell immediately following thelast meeting of the FOMC that the one thing that could do thisinstitution in is the leak question and the whole issue of thecredibility of our operations. And I must tell you that Jerry isalmost surely right on this. We have an organization that in myjudgment has been extraordinarily effective through a very difficultperiod. The wisdom of this group has really been quite extraordinary.My impression, looking back at the history of our deliberations in thelast two or three years, is that we look extraordinarily perceptiveand effective. But that can all be undercut by a perception that wecan't function in an effective manner with respect to this issue. So,let me just say in closing: Please be very careful. And if we canmaintain confidentiality and carry through, I think we willeffectively be able to secure the position of our deliberations andthe status of the organization.MR. LAWARE. What are you going to say to Henry?-85-7/6-7/93CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I haven't decided yet. Well, that's adifferent question.MR. LAWARE. Okay.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We are not going to tell him we're doingsomething. That's about as much as I can say. Unless anybody hasanything further to add to this very difficult problem, I wouldsuggest we adjourn for lunch.MR. MELZER. Alan, the guidelines you read--are we followingthose?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. My understanding is that we have notbeen following the guidelines with respect to blackouts a week before,a week after and up to the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony; we have notbeen doing that.MR. SYRON. Are we agreeing that we are going to do that?MR. MELZER. That's what I'm asking.MR. SYRON. Should we do it?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I assume that the answer is yes. UnlessI hear an objection from the Committee, that's the rule of thisCommittee.MR. MCTEER. Does that apply to any speeches? Or are wetalking about the press?CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. In other words, if you want totalk about the history of the American economy or the history of theold West--. [Laughter] But if you're going to talk about anythingwith respect to the immediate future, I would say to you that's [notappropriate].MR. SYRON. It's important because we can't even talk aboutour region. Or we shouldn't even talk about our regions because if wedo, it gets into--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me say this: One of the things thatwe ought to talk about is our regions outside of the blackout area.MR. SYRON. Oh, yes, absolutely.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it's important that each of thepresidents be viewed as the representative of an area and the chiefgovernment spokesman on the economy in his region. One way to do thatis to get out there and talk about the characteristics of the region,what it's all about, what it's doing, what makes it different from therest of the country, and why it's better. But if you start talkingabout the short-term outlook for the region, you can't get around theissue of talking about the overall economy.MR. SYRON. Exactly.-86-7/6-7/93MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I'm under the impression that thefact that we have this one-week blackout on either side of FOMCmeetings is in the public realm now, that it is well known.MR. SYRON. It is?MR. COYNE. Yes.MR. KELLEY. It's obviously not accepted by the press, butthey are aware of the fact that that policy does exist in the FOMC.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Joe Coyne, is that a fact?MR. COYNE. That's right; they are aware. They call it[unintelligible].MR. KELLEY. That being the case, there is no reason why weshould not simply decline openly to accept a question and answer timewherein mistakes can so very easily be made. Just say no.MR. MULLINS. Just say no to questions on the--MR. BROADDUS. One mechanical problem here just occurred tome, and that is that a reporter can print something that he's gottenfrom you much earlier and--MR. MULLINS. They do that with me, too.MR. BROADDUS. John Berry interviewed me about two weeks agoand he hasn't printed anything yet, so he may--CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. John Berry is one of the moreresponsible [reporters].MR. BROADDUS. But that is a problem.MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that we need to disciplineourselves with a little more reporting. That is, if anyone does havea speech scheduled, we ought to notify the Chairman's office or someoffice. We ought to go through a process of saying I have scheduled[a speech]. The Committee ought to be notified when we're going tospeak in the blackout period.MR. SYRON. In the blackout period, okay, but not for anyspeech to be given outside the blackout period.CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Just remember that there was anorganization called the Plumbers, and the last thing we need in theFederal Reserve is a 1993 version of same. Look, we can carry thisthing too far. The basic purpose is solely to preserve the integrityof these deliberations, not to inhibit people in any way from talking.The [point] is that [talk] has been too loose. Anyone who has beenobserving this phenomenon can tell. Okay, shall we adjourn for lunch?END OF MEETING-87-